
A FAIR PENITENT


Charles Pineau Duclos was a French writer of biographies and novels,
who lived and worked during the first half of the eighteenth century. He
prospered sufficiently well, as a literary man, to be made secretary to
the French Academy, and to be allowed to succeed Voltaire in the
office of historiographer of France. He has left behind him, in his
own country, the reputation of a lively writer of the second class, who
addressed the public of his day with fair success, and who, since his
death, has not troubled posterity to take any particular notice of him.

Among the papers left by Duclos, two manuscripts were found, which he
probably intended to turn to some literary account. The first was a
brief Memoir, written by himself, of a Frenchwoman, named Mademoiselle
Gautier, who began life as an actress and who ended it as a Carmelite
nun. The second manuscript was the lady's own account of the process
of her conversion, and of the circumstances which attended her moral
passage from the state of a sinner to the state of a saint. There are
certain national peculiarities in the character of Mademoiselle Gautier
and in the narrative of her conversion, which are perhaps interesting
enough to be reproduced with some chance of pleasing the present day.

It appears, from the account given of her by Duclos, that Mademoiselle
Gautier made her appearance on the stage of the Théâtre François in
the year seventeen hundred and sixteen. She is described as a handsome
woman, with a fine figure, a fresh complexion, a lively disposition, and
a violent temper. Besides possessing capacity as an actress, she could
write very good verses, she was clever at painting in miniature, and,
most remarkable quality of all, she was possessed of prodigious muscular
strength. It is recorded of Mademoiselle, that she could roll up
a silver plate with her hands, and that she covered herself with
distinction in a trial of strength with no less a person than the famous
soldier, Marshal Saxe.

Nobody who is at all acquainted with the social history of the
eighteenth century in France, need be told that Mademoiselle Gautier had
a long list of lovers,--for the most part, persons of quality, marshals,
counts, and so forth. The only man, however, who really attached her to
him, was an actor at the Théâtre François, a famous player in his day,
named Quinault Dufresne. Mademoiselle Gautier seems to have loved him
with all the ardour of her naturally passionate disposition. At first,
he returned her affection; but, as soon as she ventured to test the
sincerity of his attachment by speaking of marriage, he cooled towards
her immediately, and the connection between them was broken off. In all
her former love-affairs, she had been noted for the high tone which she
adopted towards her admirers, and for the despotic authority which she
exercised over them even in her gayest moments. But the severance of
her connection with Quinault Dufresne wounded her to her heart. She
had loved the man so dearly, had made so many sacrifices for him, had
counted so fondly on the devotion of her whole future life to him, that
the first discovery of his coldness towards her broke her spirit at once
and for ever. She fell into a condition of hopeless melancholy, looked
back with remorse and horror at her past life, and abandoned the stage
and the society in which she had lived, to end her days repentantly in
the character of a Carmelite nun.

So far, her history is the history of hundreds of other women before her
time and after it. The prominent interest of her life, for the student
of human nature, lies in the story of her conversion, as told by
herself. The greater part of the narrative--every page of which is more
or less characteristic of the Frenchwoman of the eighteenth century--may
be given, with certain suppressions and abridgments, in her own words.
The reader will observe, at the outset, one curious fact. Mademoiselle
Gautier does not so much as hint at the influence which the loss of
her lover had in disposing her mind to reflect on serious subjects.
She describes her conversion as if it had taken its rise in a sudden
inspiration from Heaven. Even the name of Quinault Dufresne is not once
mentioned from one end of her narrative to the other.


On the twenty-fifth of April, seventeen hundred and twenty-two
(writes Mademoiselle Gautier), while I was still leading a life of
pleasure--according to the pernicious ideas of pleasure which pass
current in the world--I happen to awake, contrary to my usual custom,
between eight and nine o'clock in the morning. I remember that it is my
birthday; I ring for my people; and my maid answers the bell, alarmed by
the idea that I am ill. I tell her to dress me that I may go to mass. I
go to the Church of the Cordeliers, followed by my footman, and taking
with me a little orphan whom I had adopted. The first part of the mass
is celebrated without attracting my attention; but, at the second part
the accusing voice of my conscience suddenly begins to speak. "What
brings you here?" it says. "Do you come to reward God for making you the
attractive person that you are, by mortally transgressing His laws
every day of your life?" I hear that question, and I am unspeakably
overwhelmed by it. I quit the chair on which I have hitherto been
leaning carelessly, and I prostrate myself in an agony of remorse on the
pavement of the church.

The mass over, I send home the footman and the orphan, remaining behind
myself, plunged in inconceivable perplexity. At last I rouse myself on
a sudden; I go to the sacristy; I demand a mass for my own proper
advantage every day; I determine to attend it regularly; and, after
three hours of agitation, I return home, resolved to enter on the path
that leads to justification.

Six months passed. Every morning I went to my mass: every evening I
spent in my customary dissipations.

Some of my friends indulged in considerable merriment at my expense when
they found out my constant attendance at mass. Accordingly, I disguised
myself as a boy, when I went to church, to escape observation. My
disguise was found out, and the jokes against me were redoubled. Upon
this, I began to think of the words of the Gospel, which declare the
impossibility of serving two masters. I determined to abandon the
service of Mammon.

The first vanity I gave up was the vanity of keeping a maid. By way of
further accustoming myself to the retreat from the world which I now
began to meditate, I declined all invitations to parties under the
pretext of indisposition. But the nearer the Easter time approached at
which I had settled in my own mind definitely to turn my back on worldly
temptations and pleasures, the more violent became my internal struggles
with myself. My health suffered under them to such an extent that I
was troubled with perpetual attacks of retching and sickness, which,
however, did not prevent me from writing my general confession,
addressed to the vicar of Saint Sulpice, the parish in which I lived.

Just Heaven! what did I not suffer some days afterwards, when I united
around me at dinner, for the last time, all the friends who had been
dearest to me in the days of my worldly life! What words can describe
the tumult of my heart when one of my guests said to me, "You are giving
us too good a dinner for a Wednesday in Passion Week;" and when another
answered, jestingly, "You forget that this is her farewell dinner to her
friends!" I felt ready to faint while they were talking, and rose
from table pretexting as an excuse, that I had a payment to make that
evening, which I could not in honour defer any longer. The company rose
with me, and saw me to the door. I got into my carriage, and the company
returned to table. My nerves were in such a state that I shrieked at the
first crack of the coachman's whip; and the company came running down
again to know what was the matter. One of my servants cleverly stopped
them from all hurrying out to the carriage together, by declaring that
the scream proceeded from my adopted orphan. Upon this they returned
quietly enough to their wine, and I drove off with my general confession
to the vicar of Saint Sulpice.

My interview with the vicar lasted three hours. His joy at discovering
that I was in a state of grace was extreme. My own emotions were quite
indescribable. Late at night I returned to my own house, and found my
guests all gone. I employed myself in writing farewell letters to
the manager and company of the theatre, and in making the necessary
arrangements for sending back my adopted orphan to his friends, with
twenty pistoles. Finally, I directed the servants to say, if anybody
enquired after me the next day, that I had gone out of town for some
time; and after that, at five o'clock in the morning, I left my home in
Paris never to return to it again.

By this time I had thoroughly recovered my tranquillity. I was as easy
in my mind at leaving my house as I am now when I quit my cell to sing
in the choir. Such already was the happy result of my perpetual masses,
my general confession, and my three hours' interview with the vicar of
Saint Sulpice.

Before taking leave of the world, I went to Versailles to say good-bye
to my worthy patrons, Cardinal Fleury and the Duke de Gesvres. From
them, I went to mass in the King's Chapel; and after that, I called on
a lady of Versailles whom I had mortally offended, for the purpose of
making my peace with her. She received me angrily enough. I told her I
had not come to justify myself, but to ask her pardon. If she granted
it, she would send me away happy. If she declined to be reconciled,
Providence would probably be satisfied with my submission, but certainly
not with her refusal. She felt the force of this argument; and we made
it up on the spot.

I left Versailles immediately afterwards, without taking anything to
eat; the act of humility which I had just performed being as good as a
meal to me.

Towards evening, I entered the house of the Community of Saint Perpetua
at Paris. I had ordered a little room to be furnished there for me,
until the inventory of my worldly effects was completed, and until
I could conclude my arrangements for entering a convent. On first
installing myself, I began to feel hungry at last, and begged the
Superior of the Community to give me for supper anything that remained
from the dinner of the house. They had nothing but a little stewed
carp, of which I eat with an excellent appetite. Marvellous to relate,
although I had been able to keep nothing on my stomach for the past
three months, although I had been dreadfully sick after a little rice
soup on the evening before, the stewed carp of the sisterhood of
Saint Perpetua, with some nuts afterwards for dessert, agreed with me
charmingly, and I slept all through the night afterwards as peacefully
as a child!

When the news of my retirement became public, it occasioned great talk
in Paris. Various people assigned various reasons for the strange course
that I had taken. Nobody, however, believed that I had quitted the world
in the prime of my life (I was then thirty-one years old), never to
return to it again. Meanwhile, my inventory was finished and my goods
were sold. One of my friends sent a letter, entreating me to reconsider
my determination. My mind was made up, and I wrote to say so. When my
goods had been all sold, I left Paris to go and live incognito as a
parlour-boarder in the Convent of the Ursuline nuns of Pondevaux. Here
I wished to try the mode of life for a little while before I assumed the
serious responsibility of taking the veil. I knew my own character--I
remembered my early horror of total seclusion, and my inveterate dislike
to the company of women only; and, moved by these considerations, I
resolved, now that I had taken the first important step, to proceed in
the future with caution.

The nuns of Pondevaux received me among them with great kindness. They
gave me a large room, which I partitioned off into three small ones.
I assisted at all the pious exercises of the place. Deceived by my
fashionable appearance and my plump figure, the good nuns treated me
as if I was a person of high distinction. This afflicted me, and I
undeceived them. When they knew who I really was, they only behaved
towards me with still greater kindness. I passed my time in reading and
praying, and led the quietest, sweetest life it is possible to conceive.

After ten months' sojourn at Pondevaux, I went to Lyons, and entered
(still as parlour-boarder only) the House of Anticaille, occupied by the
nuns of the Order of Saint Mary. Here, I enjoyed the advantage of having
for director of my conscience that holy man, Father Deveaux. He belonged
to the Order of the Jesuits; and he was good enough, when I first asked
him for advice, to suggest that I should get up at eleven o'clock at
night to say my prayers, and should remain absorbed in devotion until
midnight. In obedience to the directions of this saintly person, I kept
myself awake as well as I could till eleven o'clock. I then got on my
knees with great fervour, and I blush to confess it, immediately fell as
fast asleep as a dormouse. This went on for several nights, when Father
Deveaux finding that my midnight devotions were rather too much for me,
was so obliging as to prescribe another species of pious exercise, in
a letter which he wrote to me with his own hand. The holy father, after
deeply regretting my inability to keep awake, informed me that he had
a new act of penitence to suggest to me by the performance of which I
might still hope to expiate my sins. He then, in the plainest terms,
advised me to have recourse to the discipline of flagellation, every
Friday, using the cat-o'-nine-tails on my bare shoulders for the length
of time that it would take to repeat a Miserere. In conclusion, he
informed me that the nuns of Anticaille would probably lend me the
necessary instrument of flagellation; but, if they made any difficulty
about it, he was benevolently ready to furnish me with a new and special
cat-o'-nine-tails of his own making.

Never was woman more amazed or more angry than I, when I first read this
letter. "What!" cried I to myself, "does this man seriously recommend me
to lash my own shoulders? Just Heaven, what impertinence! And yet, is it
not my duty to put up with it? Does not this apparent insolence proceed
from the pen of a holy man? If he tells me to flog my wickedness out of
me, is it not my bounden duty to lay on the scourge with all my might
immediately? Sinner that I am! I am thinking remorsefully of my plump
shoulders and the dimples on my back, when I ought to be thinking of
nothing but the cat-o'-nine-tails and obedience to Father Deveaux?"

These reflections soon gave me the resolution which I had wanted at
first. I was ashamed to ask the nuns for an instrument of flagellation;
so I made one for myself of stout cord, pitilessly knotted at very short
intervals. This done, I shut myself up while the nuns were at prayer,
uncovered my shoulders, and rained such a shower of lashes on them,
in the first fervour of my newly-awakened zeal, that I fairly flogged
myself down on the ground, flat on my nose, before I had repeated more
of the Miserere than the first two or three lines.

I burst out crying, shedding tears of spite against myself when I ought
to have been shedding tears of devotional gratitude for the kindness of
Father Deveaux. All through the night I never closed my eyes, and in the
morning I found my poor shoulders (once so generally admired for their
whiteness) striped with all the colours of the rainbow. The sight threw
me into a passion, and I profanely said to myself while I was dressing,
"The next time I see Father Deveaux, I will give my tongue full swing,
and make the hair of that holy man stand on end with terror!" A few
hours afterwards, he came to the convent, and all my resolution melted
away at the sight of him. His imposing exterior had such an effect on
me that I could only humbly entreat him to excuse me from indicting a
second flagellation on myself. He smiled, benignantly, and granted my
request with a saintly amiability. "Give me the cat-o'-nine-tails," he
said, in conclusion, "and I will keep it for you till you ask me for it
again. You are sure to ask for it again, dear child--to ask for it on
your bended knees!"

Pious and prophetic man! Before many days had passed his words came
true. If he had persisted severely in ordering me to flog myself, I
might have opposed him for months together; but, as it was, who could
resist the amiable indulgence he showed towards my weakness? The
very next day after my interview, I began to feel ashamed of my own
cowardice; and the day after that I went down on my knees, exactly as
he had predicted, and said, "Father Deveaux, give me back my
cat-o'-nine-tails." From that time I cheerfully underwent the discipline
of flagellation, learning the regular method of practising it from the
sisterhood, and feeling, in a spiritual point of view, immensely the
better for it.

The nuns, finding that I cheerfully devoted myself to every act of
self-sacrifice prescribed by the rules of their convent, wondered very
much that I still hesitated about taking the veil. I begged them not to
mention the subject to me till my mind was quite made up about it. They
respected my wish, and said no more; but they lent me books to read
which assisted in strengthening my wavering resolution. Among these
books was the Life of Madame de Montmorenci, who, after the shocking
death of her husband, entered the Order of St. Mary. The great example
of this lady made me reflect seriously, and I communicated my thoughts,
as a matter of course, to Father Deveaux. He assured me that the one
last greatest sacrifice which remained for me to make was the sacrifice
of my liberty. I had long known that this was my duty, and I now felt,
for the first time, that I had courage and resolution enough boldly to
face the idea of taking the veil.

While I was in this happy frame of mind, I happened to meet with the
history of the famous Rancé, founder, or rather reformer, of the Order
of La Trappe. I found a strange similarity between my own worldly errors
and those of this illustrious penitent. The discovery had such an effect
on me, that I spurned all idea of entering a convent where the rules
were comparatively easy, as was the case at Anticaille, and determined,
when I did take the veil, to enter an Order whose discipline was as
severe as the discipline of La Trappe itself. Father Deveaux informed me
that I should find exactly what I wanted among the Carmelite nuns;
and, by his advice, I immediately put myself in communication with
the Archbishop of Villeroi. I opened my heart to this worthy prelate,
convinced him of my sincerity, and gained from him a promise that he
would get me admitted among the Carmelite nuns of Lyons. One thing I
begged of him at parting, which was, that he would tell the whole truth
about my former life and about the profession that I had exercised in
the world. I was resolved to deceive nobody, and to enter no convent
under false pretences of any sort.

My wishes were scrupulously fulfilled; and the nuns were dreadfully
frightened when they heard that I had been an actress at Paris. But the
Archbishop promising to answer for me, and to take all their scruples
on his own conscience, they consented to receive me. I could not trust
myself to take formal leave of the nuns of Anticaille, who had been
so kind to me, and towards whom I felt so gratefully. So I wrote my
farewell to them after privately leaving their house, telling them
frankly the motives which animated me, and asking their pardon for
separating myself from them in secret.

On the fourteenth of October, seventeen hundred and twenty-four, I
entered the Carmelite convent at Lyons, eighteen months after my flight
from the world, and my abandonment of my profession--to adopt which, I
may say, in my own defence, that I was first led through sheer poverty.
At the age of seventeen years, and possessing (if I may credit report)
remarkable personal charms, I was left perfectly destitute through the
spendthrift habits of my father. I was easily persuaded to go on the
stage, and soon tempted, with my youth and inexperience, to lead an
irregular life. I do not wish to assert that dissipation necessarily
follows the choice of the actress's profession, for I have known many
estimable women on the stage. I, unhappily, was not one of the number. I
confess it to my shame, and, as the chief of sinners, I am only the more
grateful to the mercy of Heaven which accomplished my conversion.

When I entered the convent, I entreated the prioress to let me live in
perfect obscurity, without corresponding with my friends, or even with
my relations. She declined to grant this last request, thinking that
my zeal was leading me too far. On the other hand, she complied with
my wish to be employed at once, without the slightest preparatory
indulgence or consideration, on any menial labour which the discipline
of the convent might require from me. On the first day of my admission a
broom was put into my hands. I was appointed also to wash up the dishes,
to scour the saucepans, to draw water from a deep well, to carry each
sister's pitcher to its proper place, and to scrub the tables in the
refectory. From these occupations I got on in time to making rope
shoes for the sisterhood, and to taking care of the great clock of the
convent; this last employment requiring me to pull up three immensely
heavy weights regularly every day. Seven years of my life passed in this
hard work, and I can honestly say that I never murmured over it.

To return, however, to the period of my admission into the convent.

After three months of probation, I took the veil on the twentieth of
January, seventeen hundred and twenty-five. The Archbishop did me the
honour to preside at the ceremony; and, in spite of the rigour of the
season, all Lyons poured into the church to see me take the vows. I was
deeply affected; but I never faltered in my resolution. I pronounced the
oaths with a firm voice, and with a tranquillity which astonished all
the spectators,--a tranquillity which has never once failed me since
that time.

Such is the story of my conversion. Providence sent me into the
world with an excellent nature, with a true heart, with a remarkable
susceptibility to the influence of estimable sentiments. My parents
neglected my education, and left me in the world, destitute of
everything but youth, beauty, and a lively temperament. I tried hard to
be virtuous; I vowed, before I was out of my teens, and when I happened
to be struck down by a serious illness, to leave the stage, and to keep
my reputation unblemished, if anybody would only give me two hundred
livres a year to live upon. Nobody came forward to help me, and I fell.

Heaven pardon the rich people of Paris who might have preserved my
virtue at so small a cost! Heaven grant me courage to follow the better
path into which its mercy has led me, and to persevere in a life of
penitence and devotion to the end of my days!


So this singular confession ends. Besides the little vanities and
levities which appear here and there on its surface, there is surely a
strong under-current of sincerity and frankness which fit it to appeal
in some degree to the sympathy as well as the curiosity of the reader.
It is impossible to read the narrative without feeling that there must
have been something really genuine and hearty in Mademoiselle Gautier's
nature; and it is a gratifying proof of the honest integrity of her
purpose to know that she persevered to the last in the life of humility
and seclusion which her conscience had convinced her was the best life
that she could lead. Persons who knew her in the Carmelite convent,
report that she lived and died in it, preserving to the last, all the
better part of the youthful liveliness of her character. She always
received visitors with pleasure, always talked to them with surprising
cheerfulness, always assisted the poor, and always willingly wrote
letters to her former patrons in Paris to help the interests of her
needy friends. Towards the end of her life, she was afflicted with
blindness; but she was a trouble to no one in consequence of this
affliction, for she continued, in spite of it, to clean her own cell,
to make her own bed, and to cook her own food just as usual. One little
characteristic vanity--harmless enough, surely?--remained with her to
the last. She never forgot her own handsome face, which all Paris had
admired in the by-gone time; and she contrived to get a dispensation
from the Pope which allowed her to receive visitors in the convent
parlour without a veil.



AFTER DARK.



LEAVES FROM LEAH'S DIARY.

26th February, 1827.--The doctor has just called for the third time to
examine my husband's eyes. Thank God, there is no fear at present of my
poor William losing his sight, provided he can be prevailed on to
attend rigidly to the medical instructions for preserving it. These
instructions, which forbid him to exercise his profession for the next
six months at least, are, in our case, very hard to follow. They will
but too probably sentence us to poverty, perhaps to actual want; but
they must be borne resignedly, and even thankfully, seeing that my
husband's forced cessation from work will save him from the dreadful
affliction of loss of sight. I think I can answer for my own
cheerfulness and endurance, now that we know the worst. Can I answer for
our children also? Surely I can, when there are only two of them. It is
a sad confession to make, but now, for the first time since my marriage,
I feel thankful that we have no more.

17th.--A dread came over me last night, after I had comforted William as
well as I could about the future, and had heard him fall off to sleep,
that the doctor had not told us the worst. Medical men do sometimes
deceive their patients, from what has always seemed to me to be
misdirected kindness of heart. The mere suspicion that I had been
trifled with on the subject of my husband's illness, caused me such
uneasiness, that I made an excuse to get out, and went in secret to the
doctor. Fortunately, I found him at home, and in three words I confessed
to him the object of my visit.

He smiled, and said I might make myself easy; he had told us the worst.

"And that worst," I said, to make certain, "is, that for the next six
months my husband must allow his eyes to have the most perfect repose?"

"Exactly," the doctor answered. "Mind, I don't say that he may not
dispense with his green shade, indoors, for an hour or two at a time, as
the inflammation gets subdued. But I do most positively repeat that he
must not _employ_ his eyes. He must not touch a brush or pencil; he must
not think of taking another likeness, on any consideration whatever, for
the next six months. His persisting in finishing those two portraits,
at the time when his eyes first began to fail, was the real cause of all
the bad symptoms that we have had to combat ever since. I warned him
(if you remember, Mrs. Kerby?) when he first came to practice in our
neighborhood."

"I know you did, sir," I replied. "But what was a poor traveling
portrait-painter like my husband, who lives by taking likenesses first
in one place and then in another, to do? Our bread depended on his using
his eyes, at the very time when you warned him to let them have a rest."

"Have you no other resources? No money but the money Mr. Kerby can get
by portrait-painting?" asked the doctor.

"None," I answered, with a sinking at my heart as I thought of his bill
for medical attendance.

"Will you pardon me?" he said, coloring and looking a little uneasy,
"or, rather, will you ascribe it to the friendly interest I feel in you,
if I ask whether Mr. Kerby realizes a comfortable income by the
practice of his profession? Don't," he went on anxiously, before I
could reply--"pray don't think I make this inquiry from a motive of
impertinent curiosity!"

I felt quite satisfied that he could have no improper motive for asking
the question, and so answered it at once plainly and truly.

"My husband makes but a small income," I said. "Famous London
portrait-painters get great prices from their sitters; but poor unknown
artists, who only travel about the country, are obliged to work hard and
be contented with very small gains. After we have paid all that we owe
here, I am afraid we shall have little enough left to retire on, when we
take refuge in some cheaper place."

"In that case," said the good doctor (I am so glad and proud to remember
that I always liked him from the first!), "in that case, don't make
yourself anxious about my bill when you are thinking of clearing off
your debts here. I can afford to wait till Mr. Kerby's eyes are well
again, and I shall then ask him for a likeness of my little daughter.
By that arrangement we are sure to be both quits, and both perfectly
satisfied."

He considerately shook hands and bade me farewell before I could say
half the grateful words to him that were on my lips. Never, never shall
I forget that he relieved me of my two heaviest anxieties at the most
anxious time of my life. The merciful, warm-hearted man! I could almost
have knelt down and kissed his doorstep, as I crossed it on my way home.

18th.--If I had not resolved, after what happened yesterday, to look
only at the cheerful side of things for the future, the events of
to-day would have robbed me of all my courage, at the very outset of
our troubles. First, there was the casting up of our bills, and the
discovery, when the amount of them was balanced against all the money
we have saved up, that we shall only have between three and four pounds
left in the cash-box, after we have got out of debt. Then there was the
sad necessity of writing letters in my husband's name to the rich people
who were ready to employ him, telling them of the affliction that had
overtaken him, and of the impossibility of his executing their orders
for portraits for the next six months to come. And, lastly, there was
the heart-breaking business for me to go through of giving our landlord
warning, just as we had got comfortably settled in our new abode. If
William could only have gone on with his work, we might have stopped in
this town, and in these clean, comfortable lodgings for at least three
or four months. We have never had the use of a nice empty garret before,
for the children to play in; and I never met with any landlady so
pleasant to deal with in the kitchen as the landlady here. And now we
must leave all this comfort and happiness, and go--I hardly know where.
William, in his bitterness, says to the workhouse; but that shall never
be, if I have to go out to service to prevent it. The darkness is coming
on, and we must save in candles, or I could write much more. Ah, me!
what a day this has been. I have had but one pleasant moment since it
began; and that was in the morning, when I set my little Emily to work
on a bead purse for the kind doctor's daughter. My child, young as
she is, is wonderfully neat-handed at stringing beads; and even a poor
little empty purse as a token of our gratitude, is better than nothing
at all.

19th.--A visit from our best friend--our only friend here--the doctor.
After he had examined William's eyes, and had reported that they were
getting on as well as can be hoped at present, he asked where we thought
of going to live? I said in the cheapest place we could find, and added
that I was about to make inquiries in the by-streets of the town that
very day. "Put off those inquiries," he said, "till you hear from me
again. I am going now to see a patient at a farmhouse five miles
off. (You needn't look at the children, Mrs. Kerby, it's nothing
infectious--only a clumsy lad, who has broken his collarbone by a fall
from a horse.) They receive lodgers occasionally at the farmhouse, and
I know no reason why they should not be willing to receive you. If you
want to be well housed and well fed at a cheap rate, and if you like the
society of honest, hearty people, the farm of Appletreewick is the very
place for you. Don't thank me till you know whether I can get you
these new lodgings or not. And in the meantime settle all your business
affairs here, so as to be able to move at a moment's notice." With those
words the kind-hearted gentleman nodded and went out. Pray heaven he may
succeed at the farmhouse! We may be sure of the children's health, at
least, if we live in the country. Talking of the children, I must not
omit to record that Emily has nearly done one end of the bead purse
already.

20th.--A note from the doctor, who is too busy to call. Such good
news! They will give us two bedrooms, and board us with the family at
Appletreewick for seventeen shillings a week. By my calculations, we
shall have three pounds sixteen shillings left, after paying what we owe
here. That will be enough, at the outset, for four weeks' living at the
farmhouse, with eight shillings to spare besides. By embroidery-work I
can easily make nine shillings more to put to that, and there is a fifth
week provided for. Surely, in five weeks' time--considering the number
of things I can turn my hand to--we may hit on some plan for getting a
little money. This is what I am always telling my husband, and what,
by dint of constantly repeating it, I am getting to believe myself.
William, as is but natural, poor fellow, does not take so lighthearted
view of the future as I do. He says that the prospect of sitting
idle and being kept by his wife for months to come, is something more
wretched and hopeless than words can describe. I try to raise his
spirits by reminding him of his years of honest hard work for me and
the children, and of the doctor's assurance that his eyes will get the
better, in good time, of their present helpless state. But he still
sighs and murmurs--being one of the most independent and high spirited
of men--about living a burden on his wife. I can only answer, what in my
heart of hearts I feel, that I took him for Better and for Worse; that
I have had many years of the Better, and that, even in our present
trouble, the Worse shows no signs of coming yet!

The bead purse is getting on fast. Red and blue, in a pretty striped
pattern.

21st.--A busy day. We go to Appletreewick to-morrow. Paying bills and
packing up. All poor William's new canvases and painting-things huddled
together into a packing-case. He looked so sad, sitting silent with
his green shade on, while his old familiar working materials were
disappearing around him, as if he and they were never to come together
again, that the tears would start into my eyes, though I am sure I
am not one of the crying sort. Luckily, the green shade kept him from
seeing me: and I took good care, though the effort nearly choked me,
that he should not hear I was crying, at any rate.

The bead purse is done. How are we to get the steel rings and tassels
for it? I am not justified now in spending sixpence unnecessarily, even
for the best of purposes.

22d.-----

23d. _The Farm of Appletreewick._--Too tired, after our move yesterday,
to write a word in my diary about our journey to this delightful place.
But now that we are beginning to get settled, I can manage to make up
for past omissions.

My first occupation on the morning of the move had, oddly enough,
nothing to do with our departure for the farmhouse. The moment breakfast
was over I began the day by making Emily as smart and nice-looking as I
could, to go to the doctor's with the purse. She had her best silk frock
on, showing the mending a little in some places, I am afraid, and her
straw hat trimmed with my bonnet ribbon. Her father's neck-scarf, turned
and joined so that nobody could see it, made a nice mantilla for her;
and away she went to the doctor's, with her little, determined step,
and the purse in her hand (such a pretty hand that it is hardly to
be regretted I had no gloves for her). They were delighted with the
purse--which I ought to mention was finished with some white beads; we
found them in rummaging among our boxes, and they made beautiful rings
and tassels, contrasting charmingly with the blue and red of the rest
of the purse. The doctor and his little girl were, as I have said,
delighted with the present; and they gave Emily, in return, a workbox
for herself, and a box of sugar-plums for her baby sister. The child
came back all flushed with the pleasure of the visit, and quite helped
to keep up her father's spirits with talking to him about it. So much
for the highly interesting history of the bead purse.

Toward the afternoon the light cart from the farmhouse came to fetch us
and our things to Appletreewick. It was quite a warm spring day, and
I had another pang to bear as I saw poor William helped into the cart,
looking so sickly and sad, with his miserable green shade, in the
cheerful sunlight. "God only knows, Leah, how this will succeed with
us," he said, as we started; then sighed, and fell silent again.

Just outside the town the doctor met us. "Good luck go with you!" he
cried, swinging his stick in his usual hasty way; "I shall come and see
you as soon as you are all settled at the farmhouse." "Good-by, sir,"
says Emily, struggling up with all her might among the bundles in the
bottom of the cart; "good-by, and thank you again for the work-box and
the sugar-plums." That was my child all over! she never wants telling.
The doctor kissed his hand, and gave another flourish with his stick. So
we parted.

How I should have enjoyed the drive if William could only have looked,
as I did, at the young firs on the heath bending beneath the steady
breeze; at the shadows flying over the smooth fields; at the high
white clouds moving on and on, in their grand airy procession over the
gladsome blue sky! It was a hilly road, and I begged the lad who drove
us not to press the horse; so we were nearly an hour, at our slow rate
of going, before we drew up at the gate of Appletreewick.

24th February to 2d March.--We have now been here long enough to know
something of the place and the people. First, as to the place: Where
the farmhouse now is, there was once a famous priory. The tower is still
standing, and the great room where the monks ate and drank--used at
present as a granary. The house itself seems to have been tacked on to
the ruins anyhow. No two rooms in it are on the same level. The children
do nothing but tumble about the passages, because there always happens
to be a step up or down, just at the darkest part of every one of them.
As for staircases, there seems to me to be one for each bedroom. I do
nothing but lose my way--and the farmer says, drolling, that he must
have sign-posts put up for me in every corner of the house from top to
bottom. On the ground-floor, besides the usual domestic offices, we have
the best parlor--a dark, airless, expensively furnished solitude, never
invaded by anybody; the kitchen, and a kind of hall, with a fireplace as
big as the drawing-room at our town lodgings. Here we live and take our
meals; here the children can racket about to their hearts' content; here
the dogs come lumbering in, whenever they can get loose; here wages are
paid, visitors are received, bacon is cured, cheese is tasted, pipes
are smoked, and naps are taken every evening by the male members of the
family. Never was such a comfortable, friendly dwelling-place devised as
this hall; I feel already as if half my life had been passed in it.

Out-of-doors, looking beyond the flower-garden, lawn, back yards,
pigeon-houses, and kitchen-gardens, we are surrounded by a network of
smooth grazing-fields, each shut off from the other by its neat hedgerow
and its sturdy gate. Beyond the fields the hills seem to flow away
gently from us into the far blue distance, till they are lost in the
bright softness of the sky. At one point, which we can see from our
bedroom windows, they dip suddenly into the plain, and show, over
the rich marshy flat, a strip of distant sea--a strip sometimes
blue, sometimes gray; sometimes, when the sun sets, a streak of fire;
sometimes, on showery days, a flash of silver light.

The inhabitants of the farmhouse have one great and rare merit--they are
people whom you can make friends with at once. Between not knowing them
at all, and knowing them well enough to shake hands at first sight,
there is no ceremonious interval or formal gradation whatever. They
received us, on our arrival, exactly as if we were old friends returned
from some long traveling expedition. Before we had been ten minutes in
the hall, William had the easiest chair and the snuggest corner; the
children were eating bread-and-jam on the window-seat; and I was talking
to the farmer's wife, with the cat on my lap, of the time when Emily had
the measles.

The family numbers seven, exclusive of the indoor servants, of course.
First came the farmer and his wife--he is a tall, sturdy, loud-voiced,
active old man--she the easiest, plumpest and gayest woman of sixty I
ever met with. They have three sons and two daughters. The two eldest
of the young men are employed on the farm; the third is a sailor, and is
making holiday-time of it just now at Appletreewick. The daughters
are pictures of health and freshness. I have but one complaint to make
against them--they are beginning to spoil the children already.

In this tranquil place, and among these genial, natural people, how
happily my time might be passed, were it not for the saddening sight
of William's affliction, and the wearing uncertainty of how we are to
provide for future necessities! It is a hard thing for my husband and
me, after having had the day made pleasant by kind words and friendly
offices, to feel this one anxious thought always forcing itself on us at
night: Shall we have the means of stopping in our new home in a month's
time?

3d.--A rainy day; the children difficult to manage; William miserably
despondent. Perhaps he influenced me, or perhaps I felt my little
troubles with the children more than usual: but, however it was, I have
not been so heavy-hearted since the day when my husband first put on the
green shade. A listless, hopeless sensation would steal over me; but why
write about it? Better to try and forget it. There is always to-morrow
to look to when to-day is at the worst.

4th.--To-morrow has proved worthy of the faith I put in it. Sunshine
again out-of-doors; and as clear and true a reflection of it in my own
heart as I can hope to have just at this time. Oh! that month, that one
poor month of respite! What are we to do at the end of the month?

5th.--I made my short entry for yesterday in the afternoon just before
tea-time, little thinking of events destined to happen with the evening
that would be really worth chronicling, for the sake of the excellent
results to which they are sure to lead. My tendency is to be too
sanguine about everything, I know; but I am, nevertheless, firmly
persuaded that I can see a new way out of our present difficulties--a
way of getting money enough to keep us all in comfort at the farmhouse
until William's eyes are well again.

The new project which is to relieve us from all uncertainties for the
next six months actually originated with _me!_ It has raised me many
inches higher in my own estimation already. If the doctor only agrees
with my view of the case when he comes to-morrow, William will allow
himself to be persuaded, I know; and then let them say what they please,
I will answer for the rest.

This is how the new idea first found its way into my head:

We had just done tea. William, in much better spirits than usual, was
talking with the young sailor, who is jocosely called here by the very
ugly name of "Foul-weather Dick." The farmer and his two eldest sons
were composing themselves on the oaken settles for their usual nap. The
dame was knitting, the two girls were beginning to clear the tea-table,
and I was darning the children's socks. To all appearance, this was not
a very propitious state of things for the creation of new ideas, and yet
my idea grew out of it, for all that. Talking with my husband on various
subjects connected with life in ships, the young sailor began giving us
a description of his hammock; telling us how it was slung; how it was
impossible to get into it any other way than "stern foremost" (whatever
that may mean); how the rolling of the ship made it rock like a cradle;
and how, on rough nights, it sometimes swayed to and fro at such a
rate as to bump bodily against the ship's side and wake him up with the
sensation of having just received a punch on the head from a remarkably
hard fist. Hearing all this, I ventured to suggest that it must be an
immense relief to him to sleep on shore in a good, motionless, solid
four-post bed. But, to my surprise, he scoffed at the idea; said he
never slept comfortably out of his hammock; declared that he quite
missed his occasional punch on the head from the ship's side; and ended
by giving a most comical account of all the uncomfortable sensations
he felt when he slept in a four-post bed. The odd nature of one of the
young sailor's objections to sleeping on shore reminded my husband
(as indeed it did me too) of the terrible story of a bed in a French
gambling-house, which he once heard from a gentleman whose likeness he
took.

"You're laughing at me," says honest Foul-weather Dick, seeing William
turn toward me and smile.--"No, indeed," says my husband; "that last
objection of yours to the four-post beds on shore seems by no means
ridiculous to _me,_ at any rate. I once knew a gentleman, Dick, who
practically realized your objection."

"Excuse me, sir," says Dick, after a pause, and with an appearance
of great bewilderment and curiosity; "but could you put 'practically
realized' into plain English, so that a poor man like me might have a
chance of understanding you?"--"Certainly!" says my husband, laughing.
"I mean that I once knew a gentleman who actually saw and felt what you
say in jest you are afraid of seeing and feeling whenever you sleep in a
four-post bed. Do you understand that?" Foul-weather Dick understood it
perfectly, and begged with great eagerness to hear what the gentleman's
adventure really was. The dame, who had been listening to our talk,
backed her son's petition; the two girls sat down expectant at the
half-cleared tea-table; even the farmer and his drowsy sons roused
themselves lazily on the settle--my husband saw that he stood fairly
committed to the relation of the story, so he told it without more ado.

I have often heard him relate that strange adventure (William is the
best teller of a story I ever met with) to friends of all ranks in many
different parts of England, and I never yet knew it fail of producing an
effect. The farmhouse audience were, I may almost say, petrified by it.
I never before saw people look so long in the same direction, and sit
so long in the same attitude, as they did. Even the servants stole away
from their work in the kitchen, and, unrebuked by master or mistress,
stood quite spell-bound in the doorway to listen. Observing all this in
silence, while my husband was going on with his narrative, the thought
suddenly flashed across me, "Why should William not get a wider audience
for that story, as well as for others which he has heard from time
to time from his sitters, and which he has hitherto only repeated in
private among a few friends? People tell stories in books and get money
for them. What if we told our stories in a book? and what if the book
sold? Why freedom, surely, from the one great anxiety that is now
preying on us! Money enough to stop at the farmhouse till William's eyes
are fit for work again!" I almost jumped up from my chair as my thought
went on shaping itself in this manner. When great men make wonderful
discoveries, do they feel sensations like mine, I wonder? Was Sir Isaac
Newton within an ace of skipping into the air when he first found out
the law of gravitation? Did Friar Bacon long to dance when he lit the
match and heard the first charge of gunpowder in the world go off with a
bang?

I had to put a strong constraint on myself, or I should have
communicated all that was passing in my mind to William before our
friends at the farmhouse. But I knew it was best to wait until we were
alone, and I did wait. What a relief it was when we all got up at last
to say good-night!

The moment we were in our own room, I could not stop to take so much as
a pin out of my dress before I began. "My dear," said I, "I never heard
you tell that gambling-house adventure so well before. What an effect it
had upon our friends! what an effect, indeed, it always has wherever you
tell it!"

So far he did not seem to take much notice. He just nodded, and began to
pour out some of the lotion in which he always bathes his poor eyes the
last thing at night.

"And as for that, William," I went on, "all your stories seem to
interest people. What a number you have picked up, first and last,
from different sitters, in the fifteen years of your practice as a
portrait-painter! Have you any idea how many stories you really do
know?"

No: he could not undertake to say how many just then. He gave this
answer in a very indifferent tone, dabbing away all the time at his eyes
with the sponge and lotion. He did it so awkwardly and roughly, as it
seemed to me, that I took the sponge from him and applied the lotion
tenderly myself.

"Do you think," said I, "if you turned over one of your stories
carefully in your mind beforehand--say the one you told to-night,
for example--that you could repeat it all to me so perfectly and
deliberately that I should be able to take it down in writing from your
lips?"

Yes: of course he could. But why ask that question?

"Because I should like to have all the stories that you have been in the
habit of relating to our friends set down fairly in writing, by way of
preserving them from ever being forgotten."

Would I bathe his left eye now, because that felt the hottest to-night?
I began to forbode that his growing indifference to what I was saying
would soon end in his fairly going to sleep before I had developed
my new idea, unless I took some means forthwith of stimulating his
curiosity, or, in other words, of waking him into a proper state of
astonishment and attention. "William," said I, without another syllable
of preface, "I have got a new plan for finding all the money we want for
our expenses here."

He jerked his head up directly, and looked at me. What plan?

"This: The state of your eyes prevents you for the present from
following your profession as an artist, does it not? Very well. What are
you to do with your idle time, my dear? Turn author! And how are you to
get the money we want? By publishing a book!"

"Good gracious, Leah! are you out of your senses?" he exclaimed.

I put my arm round his neck and sat down on his knee (the course I
always take when I want to persuade him to anything with as few words as
possible).

"Now, William, listen patiently to me," I said. "An artist lies under
this great disadvantage in case of accidents--his talents are of no
service to him unless he can use his eyes and fingers. An author, on
the other hand, can turn his talents to account just as well by means of
other people's eyes and fingers as by means of his own. In your present
situation, therefore, you have nothing for it, as I said before, but
to turn author. Wait! and hear me out. The book I want you to make is a
book of all your stories. You shall repeat them, and I will write them
down from your dictation. Our manuscript shall be printed; we will sell
the book to the public, and so support ourselves honorably in adversity,
by doing the best we can to interest and amuse others."

While I was saying all this--I suppose in a very excitable manner--my
husband looked, as our young sailor-friend would phrase it, quite _taken
aback._ "You were always quick at contriving, Leah," he said; "but how
in the world came you to think of this plan?"

"I thought of it while you were telling them the gambling-house
adventure downstairs," I answered.

"It is an ingenious idea, and a bold idea," he went on, thoughtfully.
"But it is one thing to tell a story to a circle of friends, and another
thing to put it into a printed form for an audience of strangers.
Consider, my dear, that we are neither of us used to what is called
writing for the press."

"Very true," said I, "but nobody is used to it when they first begin,
and yet plenty of people have tried the hazardous literary experiment
successfully. Besides, in our case, we have the materials ready to our
hands; surely we can succeed in shaping them presentably if we aim at
nothing but the simple truth."

"Who is to do the eloquent descriptions and the striking reflections,
and all that part of it?" said William, perplexedly shaking his head.

"Nobody!" I replied. "The eloquent descriptions and the striking
reflections are just the parts of a story-book that people never read.
Whatever we do, let us not, if we can possibly help it, write so much
as a single sentence that can be conveniently skipped. Come! come!"
I continued, seeing him begin to shake his head again; "no more
objections, William, I am too certain of the success of my plan to
endure them. If you still doubt, let us refer the new project to a
competent arbitrator. The doctor is coming to see you to-morrow. I will
tell him all that I have told you; and if you will promise on your side,
I will engage on mine to be guided entirely by his opinion."

William smiled, and readily gave the promise. This was all I wanted to
send me to bed in the best spirits. For, of course, I should never have
thought of mentioning the doctor as an arbitrator, if I had not known
beforehand that he was sure to be on my side.

6th.--The arbitrator has shown that he deserved my confidence in him. He
ranked himself entirely on my side before I had half done explaining
to him what my new project really was. As to my husband's doubts
and difficulties, the dear good man would not so much as hear them
mentioned. "No objections," he cried, gayly; "set to work, Mr. Kerby,
and make your fortune. I always said your wife was worth her weight in
gold--and here she is now, all ready to get into the bookseller's scales
and prove it. Set to work! set to work!"

"With all my heart," said William, beginning at last to catch the
infection of our enthusiasm. "But when my part of the work and my wife's
has been completed, what are we to do with the produce of our labor?"

"Leave that to me," answered the doctor. "Finish your book and send
it to my house; I will show it at once to the editor of our country
newspaper. He has plenty of literary friends in London, and he will be
just the man to help you. By-the-by," added the doctor, addressing me,
"you think of everything, Mrs. Kerby; pray have you thought of a name
yet for the new book?"

At that question it was my turn to be "taken aback." The idea of naming
the book had never once entered my head.

"A good title is of vast importance," said the doctor, knitting his
brows thoughtfully. "We must all think about that. What shall it be? eh,
Mrs. Kerby, what shall it be?"

"Perhaps something may strike us after we have fairly set to work," my
husband suggested. "Talking of work," he continued, turning to me, "how
are you to find time, Leah, with your nursery occupations, for writing
down all the stories as I tell them?"

"I have been thinking of that this morning," said I, "and have come to
the conclusion that I shall have but little leisure to write from your
dictation in the day-time. What with dressing and washing the children,
teaching them, giving them their meals, taking them out to walk, and
keeping them amused at home--to say nothing of sitting sociably at work
with the dame and her two girls in the afternoon--I am afraid I shall
have few opportunities of doing my part of the book between breakfast
and tea-time. But when the children are in bed, and the farmer and his
family are reading or dozing, I should have at least three unoccupied
hours to spare. So, if you don't mind putting off our working-time till
after dark--"

"There's the title!" shouted the doctor, jumping out of his chair as if
he had been shot.

"Where?" cried I, looking all round me in the surprise of the moment,
as if I had expected to see the title magically inscribed for us on the
walls of the room.

"In your last words, to be sure!" rejoined the doctor. "You said just
now that you would not have leisure to write from Mr. Kerby's dictation
till _after dark._ What can we do better than name the book after the
time when the book is written? Call it boldly, _After dark._ Stop!
before anybody says a word for or against it, let us see how the name
looks on paper."

I opened my writing-desk in a great flutter. The doctor selected the
largest sheet of paper and the broadest-nibbed pen he could find, and
wrote in majestic round-text letters, with alternate thin and thick
strokes beautiful to see, the two cabalistic words

                     AFTER DARK.

We all three laid our heads together over the paper, and in breathless
silence studied the effect of the round-text: William raising his green
shade in the excitement of the moment, and actually disobeying the
doctor's orders about not using his eyes, in the doctor's own presence!
After a good long stare, we looked round solemnly in each other's faces
and nodded. There was no doubt whatever on the subject after seeing the
round-text. In one happy moment the doctor had hit on the right name.

"I have written the title-page," said our good friend, taking up his hat
to go. "And now I leave it to you two to write the book."

Since then I have mended four pens and bought a quire of letter-paper
at the village shop. William is to ponder well over his stories in the
daytime, so as to be quite ready for me "after dark." We are to commence
our new occupation this evening. My heart beats fast and my eyes moisten
when I think of it. How many of our dearest interests depend upon the
one little beginning that we are to make to-night!

PROLOGUE TO THE FIRST STORY.

Before I begin, by the aid of my wife's patient attention and ready pen,
to relate any of the stories which I have heard at various times from
persons whose likenesses I have been employed to take, it will not be
amiss if I try to secure the reader's interest in the following pages,
by briefly explaining how I became possessed of the narrative matter
which they contain.

Of myself I have nothing to say, but that I have followed the profession
of a traveling portrait-painter for the last fifteen years. The pursuit
of my calling has not only led me all through England, but has taken
me twice to Scotland, and once to Ireland. In moving from district to
district, I am never guided beforehand by any settled plan. Sometimes
the letters of recommendation which I get from persons who are satisfied
with the work I have done for them determine the direction in which
I travel. Sometimes I hear of a new neighborhood in which there is no
resident artist of ability, and remove thither on speculation. Sometimes
my friends among the picture-dealers say a good word on my behalf to
their rich customers, and so pave the way for me in the large towns.
Sometimes my prosperous and famous brother-artists, hearing of small
commissions which it is not worth their while to accept, mention my
name, and procure me introductions to pleasant country houses. Thus I
get on, now in one way and now in another, not winning a reputation or
making a fortune, but happier, perhaps, on the whole, than many men who
have got both the one and the other. So, at least, I try to think now,
though I started in my youth with as high an ambition as the best of
them. Thank God, it is not my business here to speak of past times and
their disappointments. A twinge of the old hopeless heartache comes over
me sometimes still, when I think of my student days.

One peculiarity of my present way of life is, that it brings me into
contact with all sorts of characters. I almost feel, by this time, as if
I had painted every civilized variety of the human race. Upon the whole,
my experience of the world, rough as it has been, has not taught me to
think unkindly of my fellow-creatures. I have certainly received such
treatment at the hands of some of my sitters as I could not describe
without saddening and shocking any kind-hearted reader; but, taking one
year and one place with another, I have cause to remember with gratitude
and respect--sometimes even with friendship and affection--a very large
proportion of the numerous persons who have employed me.

Some of the results of my experience are curious in a moral point of
view. For example, I have found women almost uniformly less delicate in
asking me about my terms, and less generous in remunerating me for my
services, than men. On the other hand, men, within my knowledge, are
decidedly vainer of their personal attractions, and more vexatiously
anxious to have them done full justice to on canvas, than women. Taking
both sexes together, I have found young people, for the most part, more
gentle, more reasonable, and more considerate than old. And, summing up,
in a general way, my experience of different ranks (which extends, let
me premise, all the way down from peers to publicans), I have met
with most of my formal and ungracious receptions among rich people of
uncertain social standing: the highest classes and the lowest among my
employers almost always contrive--in widely different ways, of course,
to make me feel at home as soon as I enter their houses.

The one great obstacle that I have to contend against in the practice
of my profession is not, as some persons may imagine, the difficulty
of making my sitters keep their heads still while I paint them, but
the difficulty of getting them to preserve the natural look and the
every-day peculiarities of dress and manner. People will assume
an expression, will brush up their hair, will correct any little
characteristic carelessness in their apparel--will, in short, when they
want to have their likenesses taken, look as if they were sitting for
their pictures. If I paint them, under these artificial circumstances,
I fail of course to present them in their habitual aspect; and my
portrait, as a necessary consequence, disappoints everybody, the sitter
always included. When we wish to judge of a man's character by his
handwriting, we want his customary scrawl dashed off with his common
workaday pen, not his best small-text, traced laboriously with the
finest procurable crow-quill point. So it is with portrait-painting,
which is, after all, nothing but a right reading of the externals of
character recognizably presented to the view of others.

Experience, after repeated trials, has proved to me that the only way
of getting sitters who persist in assuming a set look to resume their
habitual expression, is to lead them into talking about some subject
in which they are greatly interested. If I can only beguile them into
speaking earnestly, no matter on what topic, I am sure of recovering
their natural expression; sure of seeing all the little precious
everyday peculiarities of the man or woman peep out, one after another,
quite unawares. The long, maundering stories about nothing, the
wearisome recitals of petty grievances, the local anecdotes unrelieved
by the faintest suspicion of anything like general interest, which I
have been condemned to hear, as a consequence of thawing the ice off
the features of formal sitters by the method just described, would fill
hundreds of volumes, and promote the repose of thousands of readers. On
the other hand, if I have suffered under the tediousness of the many,
I have not been without my compensating gains from the wisdom and
experience of the few. To some of my sitters I have been indebted for
information which has enlarged my mind--to some for advice which has
lightened my heart--to some for narratives of strange adventure which
riveted my attention at the time, which have served to interest and
amuse my fireside circle for many years past, and which are now, I would
fain hope, destined to make kind friends for me among a wider audience
than any that I have yet addressed.

Singularly enough, almost all the best stories that I have heard from my
sitters have been told by accident. I only remember two cases in which
a story was volunteered to me, and, although I have often tried the
experiment, I cannot call to mind even a single instance in which
leading questions (as the lawyers call them) on my part, addressed to a
sitter, ever produced any result worth recording. Over and over again,
I have been disastrously successful in encouraging dull people to weary
me. But the clever people who have something interesting to say, seem,
so far as I have observed them, to acknowledge no other stimulant
than chance. For every story which I propose including in the present
collection, excepting one, I have been indebted, in the first instance,
to the capricious influence of the same chance. Something my sitter has
seen about me, something I have remarked in my sitter, or in the room in
which I take the likeness, or in the neighborhood through which I pass
on my way to work, has suggested the necessary association, or has
started the right train of recollections, and then the story appeared
to begin of its own accord. Occasionally the most casual notice, on
my part, of some very unpromising object has smoothed the way for the
relation of a long and interesting narrative. I first heard one of the
most dramatic of the stories that will be presented in this book, merely
through being carelessly inquisitive to know the history of a stuffed
poodle-dog.

It is thus not without reason that I lay some stress on the
desirableness of prefacing each one of the following narratives by a
brief account of the curious manner in which I became possessed of it.
As to my capacity for repeating these stories correctly, I can answer
for it that my memory may be trusted. I may claim it as a merit, because
it is after all a mechanical one, that I forget nothing, and that I can
call long-passed conversations and events as readily to my recollection
as if they had happened but a few weeks ago. Of two things at least I
feel tolerably certain beforehand, in meditating over the contents of
this book: First, that I can repeat correctly all that I have heard;
and, secondly, that I have never missed anything worth hearing when my
sitters were addressing me on an interesting subject. Although I cannot
take the lead in talking while I am engaged in painting, I can listen
while others speak, and work all the better for it.

So much in the way of general preface to the pages for which I am about
to ask the reader's attention. Let me now advance to particulars, and
describe how I came to hear the first story in the present collection. I
begin with it because it is the story that I have oftenest "rehearsed,"
to borrow a phrase from the stage. Wherever I go, I am sooner or later
sure to tell it. Only last night, I was persuaded into repeating it once
more by the inhabitants of the farmhouse in which I am now staying.



Not many years ago, on returning from a short holiday visit to a friend
settled in Paris, I found professional letters awaiting me at my agent's
in London, which required my immediate presence in Liverpool. Without
stopping to unpack, I proceeded by the first conveyance to my
new destination; and, calling at the picture-dealer's shop, where
portrait-painting engagements were received for me, found to my great
satisfaction that I had remunerative employment in prospect, in and
about Liverpool, for at least two months to come. I was putting up my
letters in high spirits, and was just leaving the picture-dealer's shop
to look out for comfortable lodgings, when I was met at the door by the
landlord of one of the largest hotels in Liverpool--an old acquaintance
whom I had known as manager of a tavern in London in my student days.

"Mr. Kerby!" he exclaimed, in great astonishment. "What an unexpected
meeting! the last man in the world whom I expected to see, and yet the
very man whose services I want to make use of!"

"What, more work for me?" said I; "are all the people in Liverpool going
to have their portraits painted?"

"I only know of one," replied the landlord, "a gentleman staying at my
hotel, who wants a chalk drawing done for him. I was on my way here to
inquire of any artist whom our picture-dealing friend could recommend.
How glad I am that I met you before I had committed myself to employing
a stranger!"

"Is this likeness wanted at once?" I asked, thinking of the number of
engagements that I had already got in my pocket.

"Immediately--to-day--this very hour, if possible," said the landlord.
"Mr. Faulkner, the gentleman I am speaking of, was to have sailed
yesterday for the Brazils from this place; but the wind shifted last
night to the wrong quarter, and he came ashore again this morning. He
may of course be detained here for some time; but he may also be called
on board ship at half an hour's notice, if the wind shifts back again
in the right direction. This uncertainty makes it a matter of importance
that the likeness should be begun immediately. Undertake it if you
possibly can, for Mr. Faulkner's a liberal gentleman, who is sure to
give you your own terms."

I reflected for a minute or two. The portrait was only wanted in chalk,
and would not take long; besides, I might finish it in the evening, if
my other engagements pressed hard upon me in the daytime. Why not leave
my luggage at the picture-dealer's, put off looking for lodgings till
night, and secure the new commission boldly by going back at once with
the landlord to the hotel? I decided on following this course almost as
soon as the idea occurred to me--put my chalks in my pocket, and a sheet
of drawing paper in the first of my portfolios that came to hand--and
so presented myself before Mr. Faulkner, ready to take his likeness,
literally at five minutes' notice.

I found him a very pleasant, intelligent man, young and handsome. He had
been a great traveler; had visited all the wonders of the East; and was
now about to explore the wilds of the vast South American Continent.
Thus much he told me good-humoredly and unconstrainedly while I was
preparing my drawing materials.

As soon as I had put him in the right light and position, and had seated
myself opposite to him, he changed the subject of conversation, and
asked me, a little confusedly as I thought, if it was not a customary
practice among portrait-painters to gloss over the faults in their
sitters' faces, and to make as much as possible of any good points which
their features might possess.

"Certainly," I answered. "You have described the whole art and mystery
of successful portrait-painting in a few words."

"May I beg, then," said he, "that you will depart from the usual
practice in my case, and draw me with all my defects, exactly as I am?
The fact is," he went on, after a moment's pause, "the likeness you are
now preparing to take is intended for my mother. My roving disposition
makes me a great anxiety to her, and she parted from me this last time
very sadly and unwillingly. I don't know how the idea came into my head,
but it struck me this morning that I could not better employ the time,
while I was delayed here on shore, than by getting my likeness done
to send to her as a keepsake. She has no portrait of me since I was a
child, and she is sure to value a drawing of me more than anything else
I could send to her. I only trouble you with this explanation to prove
that I am really sincere in my wish to be drawn unflatteringly, exactly
as I am."

Secretly respecting and admiring him for what he had just said, I
promised that his directions should be implicitly followed, and began
to work immediately. Before I had pursued my occupation for ten minutes,
the conversation began to flag, and the usual obstacle to my success
with a sitter gradually set itself up between us. Quite unconsciously,
of course, Mr. Faulkner stiffened his neck, shut his month, and
contracted his eyebrows--evidently under the impression that he was
facilitating the process of taking his portrait by making his face as
like a lifeless mask as possible. All traces of his natural animated
expression were fast disappearing, and he was beginning to change into a
heavy and rather melancholy-looking man.

This complete alteration was of no great consequence so long as I was
only engaged in drawing the outline of his face and the general form
of his features. I accordingly worked on doggedly for more than an
hour--then left off to point my chalks again, and to give my sitter a
few minutes' rest. Thus far the likeness had not suffered through
Mr. Faulkner's unfortunate notion of the right way of sitting for his
portrait; but the time of difficulty, as I well knew, was to come.
It was impossible for me to think of putting any expression into the
drawing unless I could contrive some means, when he resumed his chair,
of making him look like himself again. "I will talk to him about foreign
parts," thought I, "and try if I can't make him forget that he is
sitting for his picture in that way."

While I was pointing my chalks Mr. Faulkner was walking up and down
the room. He chanced to see the portfolio I had brought with me leaning
against the wall, and asked if there were any sketches in it. I told him
there were a few which I had made during my recent stay in Paris; "In
Paris?" he repeated, with a look of interest; "may I see them?"

I gave him the permission he asked as a matter of course. Sitting down,
he took the portfolio on his knee, and began to look through it. He
turned over the first five sketches rapidly enough; but when he came to
the sixth, I saw his face flush directly, and observed that he took the
drawing out of the portfolio, carried it to the window, and remained
silently absorbed in the contemplation of it for full five minutes.
After that, he turned round to me, and asked very anxiously if I had any
objection to part with that sketch.

It was the least interesting drawing of the collection--merely a view
in one of the streets running by the backs of the houses in the Palais
Royal. Some four or five of these houses were comprised in the view,
which was of no particular use to me in any way; and which was too
valueless, as a work of art, for me to think of selling it. I begged his
acceptance of it at once. He thanked me quite warmly; and then, seeing
that I looked a little surprised at the odd selection he had made from
my sketches, laughingly asked me if I could guess why he had been so
anxious to become possessed of the view which I had given him?

"Probably," I answered, "there is some remarkable historical association
connected with that street at the back of the Palais Royal, of which I
am ignorant."

"No," said Mr. Faulkner; "at least none that _I_ know of. The only
association connected with the place in _my_ mind is a purely personal
association. Look at this house in your drawing--the house with the
water-pipe running down it from top to bottom. I once passed a night
there--a night I shall never forget to the day of my death. I have had
some awkward traveling adventures in my time; but _that_ adventure--!
Well, never mind, suppose we begin the sitting. I make but a bad return
for your kindness in giving me the sketch by thus wasting your time in
mere talk."

"Come! come!" thought I, as he went back to the sitter's chair, "I shall
see your natural expression on your face if I can only get you to talk
about that adventure." It was easy enough to lead him in the right
direction. At the first hint from me, he returned to the subject of the
house in the back street. Without, I hope, showing any undue curiosity,
I contrived to let him see that I felt a deep interest in everything he
now said. After two or three preliminary hesitations, he at last, to
my great joy, fairly started on the narrative of his adventure. In the
interest of his subject he soon completely forgot that he was sitting
for his portrait--the very expression that I wanted came over his
face--and my drawing proceeded toward completion, in the right
direction, and to the best purpose. At every fresh touch I felt more and
more certain that I was now getting the better of my grand difficulty;
and I enjoyed the additional gratification of having my work lightened
by the recital of a true story, which possessed, in my estimation, all
the excitement of the most exciting romance.

This, as I recollect it, is how Mr. Faulkner told me his adventure:




THE TRAVELER'S STORY OF A TERRIBLY STRANGE BED.

Shortly after my education at college was finished, I happened to be
staying at Paris with an English friend. We were both young men then,
and lived, I am afraid, rather a wild life, in the delightful city of
our sojourn. One night we were idling about the neighborhood of
the Palais Royal, doubtful to what amusement we should next betake
ourselves. My friend proposed a visit to Frascati's; but his suggestion
was not to my taste. I knew Frascati's, as the French saying is, by
heart; had lost and won plenty of five-franc pieces there, merely for
amusement's sake, until it was amusement no longer, and was thoroughly
tired, in fact, of all the ghastly respectabilities of such a social
anomaly as a respectable gambling-house. "For Heaven's sake," said I
to my friend, "let us go somewhere where we can see a little genuine,
blackguard, poverty-stricken gaming with no false gingerbread glitter
thrown over it all. Let us get away from fashionable Frascati's, to a
house where they don't mind letting in a man with a ragged coat, or a
man with no coat, ragged or otherwise." "Very well," said my friend, "we
needn't go out of the Palais Royal to find the sort of company you want.
Here's the place just before us; as blackguard a place, by all report,
as you could possibly wish to see." In another minute we arrived at the
door, and entered the house, the back of which you have drawn in your
sketch.

When we got upstairs, and had left our hats and sticks with the
doorkeeper, we were admitted into the chief gambling-room. We did not
find many people assembled there. But, few as the men were who looked
up at us on our entrance, they were all types--lamentably true types--of
their respective classes.

We had come to see blackguards; but these men were something
worse. There is a comic side, more or less appreciable, in all
blackguardism--here there was nothing but tragedy--mute, weird tragedy.
The quiet in the room was horrible. The thin, haggard, long-haired young
man, whose sunken eyes fiercely watched the turning up of the cards,
never spoke; the flabby, fat-faced, pimply player, who pricked his piece
of pasteboard perseveringly, to register how often black won, and how
often red--never spoke; the dirty, wrinkled old man, with the vulture
eyes and the darned great-coat, who had lost his last _sou,_ and still
looked on desperately, after he could play no longer--never spoke. Even
the voice of the croupier sounded as if it were strangely dulled and
thickened in the atmosphere of the room. I had entered the place to
laugh, but the spectacle before me was something to weep over. I soon
found it necessary to take refuge in excitement from the depression
of spirits which was fast stealing on me. Unfortunately I sought the
nearest excitement, by going to the table and beginning to play. Still
more unfortunately, as the event will show, I won--won prodigiously;
won incredibly; won at such a rate that the regular players at the table
crowded round me; and staring at my stakes with hungry, superstitious
eyes, whispered to one another that the English stranger was going to
break the bank.

The game was _Rouge et Noir_. I had played at it in every city in
Europe, without, however, the care or the wish to study the Theory of
Chances--that philosopher's stone of all gamblers! And a gambler, in the
strict sense of the word, I had never been. I was heart-whole from the
corroding passion for play. My gaming was a mere idle amusement. I never
resorted to it by necessity, because I never knew what it was to want
money. I never practiced it so incessantly as to lose more than I could
afford, or to gain more than I could coolly pocket without being thrown
off my balance by my good luck. In short, I had hitherto
frequented gambling-tables--just as I frequented ball-rooms and
opera-houses--because they amused me, and because I had nothing better
to do with my leisure hours.

But on this occasion it was very different--now, for the first time in
my life, I felt what the passion for play really was. My success
first bewildered, and then, in the most literal meaning of the word,
intoxicated me. Incredible as it may appear, it is nevertheless true,
that I only lost when I attempted to estimate chances, and played
according to previous calculation. If I left everything to luck, and
staked without any care or consideration, I was sure to win--to win in
the face of every recognized probability in favor of the bank. At first
some of the men present ventured their money safely enough on my color;
but I speedily increased my stakes to sums which they dared not risk.
One after another they left off playing, and breathlessly looked on at
my game.

Still, time after time, I staked higher and higher, and still won. The
excitement in the room rose to fever pitch. The silence was interrupted
by a deep-muttered chorus of oaths and exclamations in different
languages, every time the gold was shoveled across to my side of the
table--even the imperturbable croupier dashed his rake on the floor in
a (French) fury of astonishment at my success. But one man present
preserved his self-possession, and that man was my friend. He came to my
side, and whispering in English, begged me to leave the place, satisfied
with what I had already gained. I must do him the justice to say that he
repeated his warnings and entreaties several times, and only left me
and went away after I had rejected his advice (I was to all intents and
purposes gambling drunk) in terms which rendered it impossible for him
to address me again that night.

Shortly after he had gone, a hoarse voice behind me cried: "Permit me,
my dear sir--permit me to restore to their proper place two napoleons
which you have dropped. Wonderful luck, sir! I pledge you my word of
honor, as an old soldier, in the course of my long experience in this
sort of thing, I never saw such luck as yours--never! Go on, sir--_Sacre
mille bombes!_ Go on boldly, and break the bank!"

I turned round and saw, nodding and smiling at me with inveterate
civility, a tall man, dressed in a frogged and braided surtout.

If I had been in my senses, I should have considered him, personally, as
being rather a suspicious specimen of an old soldier. He had goggling,
bloodshot eyes, mangy mustaches, and a broken nose. His voice betrayed a
barrack-room intonation of the worst order, and he had the dirtiest pair
of hands I ever saw--even in France. These little personal peculiarities
exercised, however, no repelling influence on me. In the mad excitement,
the reckless triumph of that moment, I was ready to "fraternize" with
anybody who encouraged me in my game. I accepted the old soldier's
offered pinch of snuff; clapped him on the back, and swore he was the
honestest fellow in the world--the most glorious relic of the Grand Army
that I had ever met with. "Go on!" cried my military friend, snapping
his fingers in ecstasy--"Go on, and win! Break the bank--_Mille
tonnerres!_ my gallant English comrade, break the bank!"

And I _did_ go on--went on at such a rate, that in another quarter of an
hour the croupier called out, "Gentlemen, the bank has discontinued for
to-night." All the notes, and all the gold in that "bank," now lay in
a heap under my hands; the whole floating capital of the gambling-house
was waiting to pour into my pockets!

"Tie up the money in your pocket-handkerchief, my worthy sir," said the
old soldier, as I wildly plunged my hands into my heap of gold. "Tie
it up, as we used to tie up a bit of dinner in the Grand Army; your
winnings are too heavy for any breeches-pockets that ever were sewed.
There! that's it--shovel them in, notes and all! _Credie!_ what luck!
Stop! another napoleon on the floor! _Ah! sacre petit polisson de
Napoleon!_ have I found thee at last? Now then, sir--two tight double
knots each way with your honorable permission, and the money's safe.
Feel it! feel it, fortunate sir! hard and round as a cannon-ball--_Ah,
bah!_ if they had only fired such cannon-balls at us at Austerlitz--_nom
d'une pipe!_ if they only had! And now, as an ancient grenadier, as
an ex-brave of the French army, what remains for me to do? I ask what?
Simply this: to entreat my valued English friend to drink a bottle of
Champagne with me, and toast the goddess Fortune in foaming goblets
before we part!"

Excellent ex-brave! Convivial ancient grenadier! Champagne by all means!
An English cheer for an old soldier! Hurrah! hurrah! Another English
cheer for the goddess Fortune! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!

"Bravo! the Englishman; the amiable, gracious Englishman, in whose veins
circulates the vivacious blood of France! Another glass? _Ah, bah!_--the
bottle is empty! Never mind! _Vive le vin!_ I, the old soldier, order
another bottle, and half a pound of bonbons with it!"

"No, no, ex-brave; never--ancient grenadier! _Your_ bottle last time;
_my_ bottle this. Behold it! Toast away! The French Army! the great
Napoleon! the present company! the croupier! the honest croupier's wife
and daughters--if he has any! the Ladies generally! everybody in the
world!"

By the time the second bottle of Champagne was emptied, I felt as if I
had been drinking liquid fire--my brain seemed all aflame. No excess in
wine had ever had this effect on me before in my life. Was it the result
of a stimulant acting upon my system when I was in a highly excited
state? Was my stomach in a particularly disordered condition? Or was the
Champagne amazingly strong?

"Ex-brave of the French Army!" cried I, in a mad state of exhilaration,
"_I_ am on fire! how are _you?_ You have set me on fire! Do you hear, my
hero of Austerlitz? Let us have a third bottle of Champagne to put the
flame out!"

The old soldier wagged his head, rolled his goggle-eyes, until I
expected to see them slip out of their sockets; placed his dirty
forefinger by the side of his broken nose; solemnly ejaculated "Coffee!"
and immediately ran off into an inner room.

The word pronounced by the eccentric veteran seemed to have a magical
effect on the rest of the company present. With one accord they all rose
to depart. Probably they had expected to profit by my intoxication; but
finding that my new friend was benevolently bent on preventing me from
getting dead drunk, had now abandoned all hope of thriving pleasantly on
my winnings. Whatever their motive might be, at any rate they went away
in a body. When the old soldier returned, and sat down again opposite to
me at the table, we had the room to ourselves. I could see the croupier,
in a sort of vestibule which opened out of it, eating his supper in
solitude. The silence was now deeper than ever.

A sudden change, too, had come over the "ex-brave." He assumed a
portentously solemn look; and when he spoke to me again, his speech was
ornamented by no oaths, enforced by no finger-snapping, enlivened by no
apostrophes or exclamations.

"Listen, my dear sir," said he, in mysteriously confidential
tones--"listen to an old soldier's advice. I have been to the mistress
of the house (a very charming woman, with a genius for cookery!) to
impress on her the necessity of making us some particularly strong and
good coffee. You must drink this coffee in order to get rid of your
little amiable exaltation of spirits before you think of going home--you
_must,_ my good and gracious friend! With all that money to take home
to-night, it is a sacred duty to yourself to have your wits about you.
You are known to be a winner to an enormous extent by several gentlemen
present to-night, who, in a certain point of view, are very worthy and
excellent fellows; but they are mortal men, my dear sir, and they have
their amiable weaknesses. Need I say more? Ah, no, no! you understand
me! Now, this is what you must do--send for a cabriolet when you feel
quite well again--draw up all the windows when you get into it--and
tell the driver to take you home only through the large and well-lighted
thoroughfares. Do this; and you and your money will be safe. Do this;
and to-morrow you will thank an old soldier for giving you a word of
honest advice."

Just as the ex-brave ended his oration in very lachrymose tones, the
coffee came in, ready poured out in two cups. My attentive friend handed
me one of the cups with a bow. I was parched with thirst, and drank it
off at a draught. Almost instantly afterwards, I was seized with a fit
of giddiness, and felt more completely intoxicated than ever. The
room whirled round and round furiously; the old soldier seemed to
be regularly bobbing up and down before me like the piston of a
steam-engine. I was half deafened by a violent singing in my ears; a
feeling of utter bewilderment, helplessness, idiocy, overcame me. I rose
from my chair, holding on by the table to keep my balance; and stammered
out that I felt dreadfully unwell--so unwell that I did not know how I
was to get home.

"My dear friend," answered the old soldier--and even his voice seemed to
be bobbing up and down as he spoke--"my dear friend, it would be madness
to go home in _your_ state; you would be sure to lose your money; you
might be robbed and murdered with the greatest ease. _I_ am going to
sleep here; do _you_ sleep here, too--they make up capital beds in this
house--take one; sleep off the effects of the wine, and go home safely
with your winnings to-morrow--to-morrow, in broad daylight."

I had but two ideas left: one, that I must never let go hold of my
handkerchief full of money; the other, that I must lie down somewhere
immediately, and fall off into a comfortable sleep. So I agreed to the
proposal about the bed, and took the offered arm of the old soldier,
carrying my money with my disengaged hand. Preceded by the croupier, we
passed along some passages and up a flight of stairs into the bedroom
which I was to occupy. The ex-brave shook me warmly by the hand,
proposed that we should breakfast together, and then, followed by the
croupier, left me for the night.

I ran to the wash-hand stand; drank some of the water in my jug; poured
the rest out, and plunged my face into it; then sat down in a chair and
tried to compose myself. I soon felt better. The change for my lungs,
from the fetid atmosphere of the gambling-room to the cool air of the
apartment I now occupied, the almost equally refreshing change for
my eyes, from the glaring gaslights of the "salon" to the dim, quiet
flicker of one bedroom-candle, aided wonderfully the restorative effects
of cold water. The giddiness left me, and I began to feel a little like
a reasonable being again. My first thought was of the risk of sleeping
all night in a gambling-house; my second, of the still greater risk of
trying to get out after the house was closed, and of going home alone at
night through the streets of Paris with a large sum of money about me.
I had slept in worse places than this on my travels; so I determined
to lock, bolt, and barricade my door, and take my chance till the next
morning.

Accordingly, I secured myself against all intrusion; looked under the
bed, and into the cupboard; tried the fastening of the window; and then,
satisfied that I had taken every proper precaution, pulled off my upper
clothing, put my light, which was a dim one, on the hearth among a
feathery litter of wood-ashes, and got into bed, with the handkerchief
full of money under my pillow.

I soon felt not only that I could not go to sleep, but that I could not
even close my eyes. I was wide awake, and in a high fever. Every nerve
in my body trembled--every one of my senses seemed to be preternaturally
sharpened. I tossed and rolled, and tried every kind of position, and
perseveringly sought out the cold corners of the bed, and all to no
purpose. Now I thrust my arms over the clothes; now I poked them under
the clothes; now I violently shot my legs straight out down to the
bottom of the bed; now I convulsively coiled them up as near my chin
as they would go; now I shook out my crumpled pillow, changed it to
the cool side, patted it flat, and lay down quietly on my back; now
I fiercely doubled it in two, set it up on end, thrust it against the
board of the bed, and tried a sitting posture. Every effort was in vain;
I groaned with vexation as I felt that I was in for a sleepless night.

What could I do? I had no book to read. And yet, unless I found out some
method of diverting my mind, I felt certain that I was in the condition
to imagine all sorts of horrors; to rack my brain with forebodings of
every possible and impossible danger; in short, to pass the night in
suffering all conceivable varieties of nervous terror.

I raised myself on my elbow, and looked about the room--which was
brightened by a lovely moonlight pouring straight through the window--to
see if it contained any pictures or ornaments that I could at all
clearly distinguish. While my eyes wandered from wall to wall, a
remembrance of Le Maistre's delightful little book, "Voyage autour de ma
Chambre," occurred to me. I resolved to imitate the French author,
and find occupation and amusement enough to relieve the tedium of my
wakefulness, by making a mental inventory of every article of furniture
I could see, and by following up to their sources the multitude of
associations which even a chair, a table, or a wash-hand stand may be
made to call forth.

In the nervous unsettled state of my mind at that moment, I found
it much easier to make my inventory than to make my reflections, and
thereupon soon gave up all hope of thinking in Le Maistre's fanciful
track--or, indeed, of thinking at all. I looked about the room at the
different articles of furniture, and did nothing more.

There was, first, the bed I was lying in; a four-post bed, of all things
in the world to meet with in Paris--yes, a thorough clumsy British
four-poster, with the regular top lined with chintz--the regular fringed
valance all round--the regular stifling, unwholesome curtains, which
I remembered having mechanically drawn back against the posts without
particularly noticing the bed when I first got into the room. Then
there was the marble-topped wash-hand stand, from which the water I had
spilled, in my hurry to pour it out, was still dripping, slowly and
more slowly, on to the brick floor. Then two small chairs, with my coat,
waistcoat, and trousers flung on them. Then a large elbow-chair covered
with dirty-white dimity, with my cravat and shirt collar thrown over the
back. Then a chest of drawers with two of the brass handles off, and a
tawdry, broken china inkstand placed on it by way of ornament for the
top. Then the dressing-table, adorned by a very small looking-glass,
and a very large pincushion. Then the window--an unusually large window.
Then a dark old picture, which the feeble candle dimly showed me. It
was a picture of a fellow in a high Spanish hat, crowned with a plume of
towering feathers. A swarthy, sinister ruffian, looking upward, shading
his eyes with his hand, and looking intently upward--it might be at some
tall gallows at which he was going to be hanged. At any rate, he had the
appearance of thoroughly deserving it.

This picture put a kind of constraint upon me to look upward too--at
the top of the bed. It was a gloomy and not an interesting object, and
I looked back at the picture. I counted the feathers in the man's
hat--they stood out in relief--three white, two green. I observed the
crown of his hat, which was of conical shape, according to the fashion
supposed to have been favored by Guido Fawkes. I wondered what he was
looking up at. It couldn't be at the stars; such a desperado was neither
astrologer nor astronomer. It must be at the high gallows, and he was
going to be hanged presently. Would the executioner come into possession
of his conical crowned hat and plume of feathers? I counted the feathers
again--three white, two green.

While I still lingered over this very improving and intellectual
employment, my thoughts insensibly began to wander. The moonlight
shining into the room reminded me of a certain moonlight night in
England--the night after a picnic party in a Welsh valley. Every
incident of the drive homeward, through lovely scenery, which the
moonlight made lovelier than ever, came back to my remembrance, though I
had never given the picnic a thought for years; though, if I had _tried_
to recollect it, I could certainly have recalled little or nothing of
that scene long past. Of all the wonderful faculties that help to tell
us we are immortal, which speaks the sublime truth more eloquently than
memory? Here was I, in a strange house of the most suspicious character,
in a situation of uncertainty, and even of peril, which might seem to
make the cool exercise of my recollection almost out of the question;
nevertheless, remembering, quite involuntarily, places, people,
conversations, minute circumstances of every kind, which I had thought
forgotten forever; which I could not possibly have recalled at will,
even under the most favorable auspices. And what cause had produced in
a moment the whole of this strange, complicated, mysterious effect?
Nothing but some rays of moonlight shining in at my bedroom window.

I was still thinking of the picnic--of our merriment on the drive
home--of the sentimental young lady who _would_ quote "Childe Harold"
because it was moonlight. I was absorbed by these past scenes and past
amusements, when, in an instant, the thread on which my memories hung
snapped asunder; my attention immediately came back to present things
more vividly than ever, and I found myself, I neither knew why nor
wherefore, looking hard at the picture again.

Looking for what?

Good God! the man had pulled his hat down on his brows! No! the hat
itself was gone! Where was the conical crown? Where the feathers--three
white, two green? Not there! In place of the hat and feathers, what
dusky object was it that now hid his forehead, his eyes, his shading
hand?

Was the bed moving?

I turned on my back and looked up. Was I mad? drunk? dreaming? giddy
again? or was the top of the bed really moving down--sinking slowly,
regularly, silently, horribly, right down throughout the whole of its
length and breadth--right down upon me, as I lay underneath?

My blood seemed to stand still. A deadly paralysing coldness stole all
over me as I turned my head round on the pillow and determined to test
whether the bed-top was really moving or not, by keeping my eye on the
man in the picture.

The next look in that direction was enough. The dull, black, frowzy
outline of the valance above me was within an inch of being parallel
with his waist. I still looked breathlessly. And steadily and
slowly--very slowly--I saw the figure, and the line of frame below the
figure, vanish, as the valance moved down before it.

I am, constitutionally, anything but timid. I have been on more than one
occasion in peril of my life, and have not lost my self-possession for
an instant; but when the conviction first settled on my mind that the
bed-top was really moving, was steadily and continuously sinking down
upon me, I looked up shuddering, helpless, panic-stricken, beneath the
hideous machinery for murder, which was advancing closer and closer to
suffocate me where I lay.

I looked up, motionless, speechless, breathless. The candle, fully
spent, went out; but the moonlight still brightened the room. Down and
down, without pausing and without sounding, came the bed-top, and still
my panic-terror seemed to bind me faster and faster to the mattress on
which I lay--down and down it sank, till the dusty odor from the lining
of the canopy came stealing into my nostrils.

At that final moment the instinct of self-preservation startled me out
of my trance, and I moved at last. There was just room for me to roll
myself sidewise off the bed. As I dropped noiselessly to the floor, the
edge of the murderous canopy touched me on the shoulder.

Without stopping to draw my breath, without wiping the cold sweat
from my face, I rose instantly on my knees to watch the bed-top. I was
literally spellbound by it. If I had heard footsteps behind me, I
could not have turned round; if a means of escape had been miraculously
provided for me, I could not have moved to take advantage of it. The
whole life in me was, at that moment, concentrated in my eyes.

It descended--the whole canopy, with the fringe round it, came
down--down--close down; so close that there was not room now to squeeze
my finger between the bed-top and the bed. I felt at the sides, and
discovered that what had appeared to me from beneath to be the ordinary
light canopy of a four-post bed was in reality a thick, broad mattress,
the substance of which was concealed by the valance and its fringe. I
looked up and saw the four posts rising hideously bare. In the middle
of the bed-top was a huge wooden screw that had evidently worked it down
through a hole in the ceiling, just as ordinary presses are worked down
on the substance selected for compression. The frightful apparatus moved
without making the faintest noise. There had been no creaking as it came
down; there was now not the faintest sound from the room above. Amid a
dead and awful silence I beheld before me--in the nineteenth century,
and in the civilized capital of France--such a machine for secret
murder by suffocation as might have existed in the worst days of the
Inquisition, in the lonely inns among the Hartz Mountains, in the
mysterious tribunals of Westphalia! Still, as I looked on it, I could
not move, I could hardly breathe, but I began to recover the power of
thinking, and in a moment I discovered the murderous conspiracy framed
against me in all its horror.

My cup of coffee had been drugged, and drugged too strongly. I had been
saved from being smothered by having taken an overdose of some narcotic.
How I had chafed and fretted at the fever fit which had preserved my
life by keeping me awake! How recklessly I had confided myself to the
two wretches who had led me into this room, determined, for the sake
of my winnings, to kill me in my sleep by the surest and most horrible
contrivance for secretly accomplishing my destruction! How many men,
winners like me, had slept, as I had proposed to sleep, in that bed, and
had never been seen or heard of more! I shuddered at the bare idea of
it.

But, ere long, all thought was again suspended by the sight of the
murderous canopy moving once more. After it had remained on the bed--as
nearly as I could guess--about ten minutes, it began to move up again.
The villains who worked it from above evidently believed that their
purpose was now accomplished. Slowly and silently, as it had descended,
that horrible bed-top rose towards its former place. When it reached
the upper extremities of the four posts, it reached the ceiling, too.
Neither hole nor screw could be seen; the bed became in appearance an
ordinary bed again--the canopy an ordinary canopy--even to the most
suspicious eyes.

Now, for the first time, I was able to move--to rise from my knees--to
dress myself in my upper clothing--and to consider of how I should
escape. If I betrayed by the smallest noise that the attempt to
suffocate me had failed, I was certain to be murdered. Had I made any
noise already? I listened intently, looking towards the door.

No! no footsteps in the passage outside--no sound of a tread, light or
heavy, in the room above--absolute silence everywhere. Besides locking
and bolting my door, I had moved an old wooden chest against it, which
I had found under the bed. To remove this chest (my blood ran cold as
I thought of what its contents _might_ be!) without making some
disturbance was impossible; and, moreover, to think of escaping through
the house, now barred up for the night, was sheer insanity. Only one
chance was left me--the window. I stole to it on tiptoe.

My bedroom was on the first floor, above an _entresol,_ and looked into
a back street, which you have sketched in your view. I raised my hand
to open the window, knowing that on that action hung, by the merest
hair-breadth, my chance of safety. They keep vigilant watch in a House
of Murder. If any part of the frame cracked, if the hinge creaked, I was
a lost man! It must have occupied me at least five minutes, reckoning
by time--five _hours,_ reckoning by suspense--to open that window. I
succeeded in doing it silently--in doing it with all the dexterity of
a house-breaker--and then looked down into the street. To leap the
distance beneath me would be almost certain destruction! Next, I
looked round at the sides of the house. Down the left side ran a thick
water-pipe which you have drawn--it passed close by the outer edge of
the window. The moment I saw the pipe I knew I was saved. My breath came
and went freely for the first time since I had seen the canopy of the
bed moving down upon me!

To some men the means of escape which I had discovered might have seemed
difficult and dangerous enough--to _me_ the prospect of slipping down
the pipe into the street did not suggest even a thought of peril. I had
always been accustomed, by the practice of gymnastics, to keep up my
school-boy powers as a daring and expert climber; and knew that my head,
hands, and feet would serve me faithfully in any hazards of ascent
or descent. I had already got one leg over the window-sill, when I
remembered the handkerchief filled with money under my pillow. I
could well have afforded to leave it behind me, but I was revengefully
determined that the miscreants of the gambling-house should miss their
plunder as well as their victim. So I went back to the bed and tied the
heavy handkerchief at my back by my cravat.

Just as I had made it tight and fixed it in a comfortable place, I
thought I heard a sound of breathing outside the door. The chill feeling
of horror ran through me again as I listened. No! dead silence still
in the passage--I had only heard the night air blowing softly into the
room. The next moment I was on the window-sill--and the next I had a
firm grip on the water-pipe with my hands and knees.

I slid down into the street easily and quietly, as I thought I should,
and immediately set off at the top of my speed to a branch "Prefecture"
of Police, which I knew was situated in the immediate neighborhood. A
"Sub-prefect," and several picked men among his subordinates, happened
to be up, maturing, I believe, some scheme for discovering the
perpetrator of a mysterious murder which all Paris was talking of just
then. When I began my story, in a breathless hurry and in very bad
French, I could see that the Sub-prefect suspected me of being a drunken
Englishman who had robbed somebody; but he soon altered his opinion as
I went on, and before I had anything like concluded, he shoved all
the papers before him into a drawer, put on his hat, supplied me with
another (for I was bareheaded), ordered a file of soldiers, desired his
expert followers to get ready all sorts of tools for breaking open doors
and ripping up brick flooring, and took my arm, in the most friendly and
familiar manner possible, to lead me with him out of the house. I will
venture to say that when the Sub-prefect was a little boy, and was taken
for the first time to the play, he was not half as much pleased as he
was now at the job in prospect for him at the gambling-house!

Away we went through the streets, the Sub-prefect cross-examining and
congratulating me in the same breath as we marched at the head of our
formidable _posse comitatus._ Sentinels were placed at the back and
front of the house the moment we got to it; a tremendous battery of
knocks was directed against the door; a light appeared at a window; I
was told to conceal myself behind the police--then came more knocks and
a cry of "Open in the name of the law!" At that terrible summons bolts
and locks gave way before an invisible hand, and the moment after the
Sub-prefect was in the passage, confronting a waiter half-dressed and
ghastly pale. This was the short dialogue which immediately took place:

"We want to see the Englishman who is sleeping in this house?"

"He went away hours ago."

"He did no such thing. His friend went away; _he_ remained. Show us to
his bedroom!"

"I swear to you, Monsieur le Sous-prefect, he is not here! he--"

"I swear to you, Monsieur le Garcon, he is. He slept here--he didn't
find your bed comfortable--he came to us to complain of it--here he
is among my men--and here am I ready to look for a flea or two in his
bedstead. Renaudin! (calling to one of the subordinates, and pointing
to the waiter) collar that man and tie his hands behind him. Now, then,
gentlemen, let us walk upstairs!"

Every man and woman in the house was secured--the "Old Soldier" the
first. Then I identified the bed in which I had slept, and then we went
into the room above.

No object that was at all extraordinary appeared in any part of it. The
Sub-prefect looked round the place, commanded everybody to be silent,
stamped twice on the floor, called for a candle, looked attentively
at the spot he had stamped on, and ordered the flooring there to be
carefully taken up. This was done in no time. Lights were produced, and
we saw a deep raftered cavity between the floor of this room and
the ceiling of the room beneath. Through this cavity there ran
perpendicularly a sort of case of iron thickly greased; and inside the
case appeared the screw, which communicated with the bed-top below.
Extra lengths of screw, freshly oiled; levers covered with felt; all
the complete upper works of a heavy press--constructed with infernal
ingenuity so as to join the fixtures below, and when taken to pieces
again, to go into the smallest possible compass--were next discovered
and pulled out on the floor. After some little difficulty the
Sub-prefect succeeded in putting the machinery together, and, leaving
his men to work it, descended with me to the bedroom. The smothering
canopy was then lowered, but not so noiselessly as I had seen it
lowered. When I mentioned this to the Sub-prefect, his answer, simple
as it was, had a terrible significance. "My men," said he, "are working
down the bed-top for the first time--the men whose money you won were in
better practice."

We left the house in the sole possession of two police agents--every
one of the inmates being removed to prison on the spot. The Sub-prefect,
after taking down my _"proces verbal"_ in his office, returned with me
to my hotel to get my passport. "Do you think," I asked, as I gave it to
him, "that any men have really been smothered in that bed, as they tried
to smother _me?_"

"I have seen dozens of drowned men laid out at the Morgue," answered the
Sub-prefect, "in whose pocket-books were found letters stating that they
had committed suicide in the Seine, because they had lost everything
at the gaming table. Do I know how many of those men entered the same
gambling-house that _you_ entered? won as _you_ won? took that bed as
_you_ took it? slept in it? were smothered in it? and were privately
thrown into the river, with a letter of explanation written by the
murderers and placed in their pocket-books? No man can say how many or
how few have suffered the fate from which you have escaped. The people
of the gambling-house kept their bedstead machinery a secret from
_us_--even from the police! The dead kept the rest of the secret for
them. Good-night, or rather good-morning, Monsieur Faulkner! Be at my
office again at nine o'clock--in the meantime, _au revoir!_"

The rest of my story is soon told. I was examined and re-examined; the
gambling-house was strictly searched all through from top to bottom; the
prisoners were separately interrogated; and two of the less guilty among
them made a confession. I discovered that the Old Soldier was the master
of the gambling-house--_justice_ discovered that he had been drummed
out of the army as a vagabond years ago; that he had been guilty of all
sorts of villainies since; that he was in possession of stolen property,
which the owners identified; and that he, the croupier, another
accomplice, and the woman who had made my cup of coffee, were all in the
secret of the bedstead. There appeared some reason to doubt whether the
inferior persons attached to the house knew anything of the suffocating
machinery; and they received the benefit of that doubt, by being treated
simply as thieves and vagabonds. As for the Old Soldier and his two head
myrmidons, they went to the galleys; the woman who had drugged my coffee
was imprisoned for I forget how many years; the regular attendants
at the gambling-house were considered "suspicious" and placed under
"surveillance"; and I became, for one whole week (which is a long time)
the head "lion" in Parisian society. My adventure was dramatized by
three illustrious play-makers, but never saw theatrical daylight; for
the censorship forbade the introduction on the stage of a correct copy
of the gambling-house bedstead.

One good result was produced by my adventure, which any censorship must
have approved: it cured me of ever again trying _"Rouge et Noir"_ as an
amusement. The sight of a green cloth, with packs of cards and heaps of
money on it, will henceforth be forever associated in my mind with the
sight of a bed canopy descending to suffocate me in the silence and
darkness of the night.



Just as Mr. Faulkner pronounced these words he started in his chair, and
resumed his stiff, dignified position in a great hurry. "Bless my soul!"
cried he, with a comic look of astonishment and vexation, "while I have
been telling you what is the real secret of my interest in the sketch
you have so kindly given to me, I have altogether forgotten that I came
here to sit for my portrait. For the last hour or more I must have been
the worst model you ever had to draw from!"

"On the contrary, you have been the best," said I. "I have been
trying to catch your likeness; and, while telling your story, you have
unconsciously shown me the natural expression I wanted to insure my
success."

NOTE BY MRS. KERBY.

I cannot let this story end without mentioning what the chance saying
was which caused it to be told at the farmhouse the other night. Our
friend the young sailor, among his other quaint objections to sleeping
on shore, declared that he particularly hated four-post beds, because he
never slept in one without doubting whether the top might not come down
in the night and suffocate him. I thought this chance reference to the
distinguishing feature of William's narrative curious enough, and
my husband agreed with me. But he says it is scarcely worth while to
mention such a trifle in anything so important as a book. I cannot
venture, after this, to do more than slip these lines in modestly at
the end of the story. If the printer should notice my few last
words, perhaps he may not mind the trouble of putting them into some
out-of-the-way corner.

L. K.




PROLOGUE TO THE SECOND STORY.

The beginning of an excellent connection which I succeeded in
establishing in and around that respectable watering-place,
Tidbury-on-the-Marsh, was an order for a life-size oil portrait of a
great local celebrity--one Mr. Boxsious, a solicitor, who was understood
to do the most thriving business of any lawyer in the town.

The portrait was intended as a testimonial "expressive (to use the
language of the circular forwarded to me at the time) of the eminent
services of Mr. Boxsious in promoting and securing the prosperity of
the town." It had been subscribed for by the "Municipal Authorities
and Resident Inhabitants" of Tidbury-on-the-Marsh; and it was to
be presented, when done, to Mrs. Boxsious, "as a slight but sincere
token"--and so forth. A timely recommendation from one of my kindest
friends and patrons placed the commission for painting the likeness in
my lucky hands; and I was instructed to attend on a certain day at Mr.
Boxsious's private residence, with all my materials ready for taking a
first sitting.

On arriving at the house, I was shown into a very prettily furnished
morning-room. The bow-window looked out on a large inclosed meadow,
which represented the principal square in Tidbury. On the opposite side
of the meadow I could see the new hotel (with a wing lately added), and
close by, the old hotel obstinately unchanged since it had first been
built. Then, further down the street, the doctor's house, with a colored
lamp and a small door-plate, and the banker's office, with a plain lamp
and a big door-plate--then some dreary private lodging-houses--then,
at right angles to these, a street of shops; the cheese-monger's very
small, the chemist's very smart, the pastry-cook's very dowdy, and
the green-grocer's very dark, I was still looking out at the view thus
presented, when I was suddenly apostrophized by a glib, disputatious
voice behind me.

"Now, then, Mr. Artist," cried the voice, "do you call that getting
ready for work? Where are your paints and brushes, and all the rest of
it? My name's Boxsious, and I'm here to sit for my picture."

I turned round, and confronted a little man with his legs astraddle,
and his hands in his pockets. He had light-gray eyes, red all round the
lids, bristling pepper-colored hair, an unnaturally rosy complexion, and
an eager, impudent, clever look. I made two discoveries in one glance
at him: First, that he was a wretched subject for a portrait; secondly,
that, whatever he might do or say, it would not be of the least use for
me to stand on my dignity with him.

"I shall be ready directly, sir," said I.

"Ready directly?" repeated my new sitter. "What do you mean, Mr. Artist,
by ready directly? I'm ready now. What was your contract with the Town
Council, who have subscribed for this picture? To paint the portrait.
And what was my contract? To sit for it. Here am I ready to sit, and
there are you not ready to paint me. According to all the rules of law
and logic, you are committing a breach of contract already. Stop! let's
have a look at your paints. Are they the best quality? If not, I warn
you, sir, there's a second breach of contract! Brushes, too? Why,
they're old brushes, by the Lord Harry! The Town Council pays you well,
Mr. Artist; why don't you work for them with new brushes? What? you work
best with old? I contend, sir, that you can't. Does my housemaid clean
best with an old broom? Do my clerks write best with old pens? Don't
color up, and don't look as if you were going to quarrel with me! You
can't quarrel with me. If you were fifty times as irritable a man as
you look, you couldn't quarrel with me. I'm not young, and I'm not
touchy--I'm Boxsious, the lawyer; the only man in the world who can't be
insulted, try it how you like!"

He chuckled as he said this, and walked away to the window. It was quite
useless to take anything he said seriously, so I finished preparing
my palette for the morning's work with the utmost serenity of look and
manner that I could possibly assume.

"There!" he went on, looking out of the window; "do you see that fat
man slouching along the Parade, with a snuffy nose? That's my favorite
enemy, Dunball. He tried to quarrel with me ten years ago, and he has
done nothing but bring out the hidden benevolence of my character ever
since. Look at him! look how he frowns as he turns this way. And now
look at me! I can smile and nod to him. I make a point of always smiling
and nodding to him--it keeps my hand in for other enemies. Good-morning!
(I've cast him twice in heavy damages) good-morning, Mr. Dunball.
He bears malice, you see; he won't speak; he's short in the neck,
passionate, and four times as fat as he ought to be; he has fought
against my amiability for ten mortal years; when he can't fight any
longer, he'll die suddenly, and I shall be the innocent cause of it."

Mr. Boxsious uttered this fatal prophecy with extraordinary complacency,
nodding and smiling out of the window all the time at the unfortunate
man who had rashly tried to provoke him. When his favorite enemy was out
of sight, he turned away, and indulged himself in a brisk turn or two up
and down the room. Meanwhile I lifted my canvas on the easel, and was on
the point of asking him to sit down, when he assailed me again.

"Now, Mr. Artist," he cried, quickening his walk impatiently, "in the
interests of the Town Council, your employers, allow me to ask you for
the last time when you are going to begin?"

"And allow me, Mr. Boxsious, in the interest of the Town Council also,"
said I, "to ask you if your notion of the proper way of sitting for your
portrait is to walk about the room!"

"Aha! well put--devilish well put!" returned Mr. Boxsious; "that's the
only sensible thing you have said since you entered my house; I begin
to like you already." With these words he nodded at me approvingly, and
jumped into the high chair that I had placed for him with the alacrity
of a young man.

"I say, Mr. Artist," he went on, when I had put him into the right
position (he insisted on the front view of his face being taken, because
the Town Council would get the most for their money in that way), "you
don't have many such good jobs as this, do you?"

"Not many," I said. "I should not be a poor man if commissions for
life-size portraits often fell in my way."

"You poor!" exclaimed Mr. Boxsious, contemptuously. "I dispute that
point with you at the outset. Why, you've got a good cloth coat, a clean
shirt, and a smooth-shaved chin. You've got the sleek look of a man
who has slept between sheets and had his breakfast. You can't humbug
me about poverty, for I know what it is. Poverty means looking like
a scarecrow, feeling like a scarecrow, and getting treated like a
scarecrow. That was _my_ luck, let me tell you, when I first thought of
trying the law. Poverty, indeed! Do you shake in your shoes, Mr. Artist,
when you think what you were at twenty? I do, I can promise you."

He began to shift about so irritably in his chair, that, in the
interests of my work, I was obliged to make an effort to calm him.

"It must be a pleasant occupation for you in your present prosperity,"
said I, "to look back sometimes at the gradual processes by which you
passed from poverty to competence, and from that to the wealth you now
enjoy."

"Gradual, did you say?" cried Mr. Boxsious; "it wasn't gradual at all. I
was sharp--damned sharp, and I jumped at my first start in business slap
into five hundred pounds in one day."

"That was an extraordinary step in advance," I rejoined. "I suppose you
contrived to make some profitable investment--"

"Not a bit of it! I hadn't a spare sixpence to invest with. I won the
money by my brains, my hands, and my pluck; and, what's more, I'm proud
of having done it. That was rather a curious case, Mr. Artist. Some men
might be shy of mentioning it; I never was shy in my life and I mention
it right and left everywhere--the whole case, just as it happened,
except the names. Catch me ever committing myself to mentioning names!
Mum's the word, sir, with yours to command, Thomas Boxsious."

"As you mention 'the case' everywhere," said I, "perhaps you would not
be offended with me if I told you I should like to hear it?"

"Man alive! haven't I told you already that I can't be offended? And
didn't I say a moment ago that I was proud of the case? I'll tell you,
Mr. Artist--but stop! I've got the interests of the Town Council to look
after in this business. Can you paint as well when I'm talking as when
I'm not? Don't sneer, sir; you're not wanted to sneer--you're wanted to
give an answer--yes or no?"

"Yes, then," I replied, in his own sharp way. "I can always paint the
better when I am hearing an interesting story."

"What do you mean by talking about a story? I'm not going to tell you a
story; I'm going to make a statement. A statement is a matter of fact,
therefore the exact opposite of a story, which is a matter of fiction.
What I am now going to tell you really happened to me."

I was glad to see that he settled himself quietly in his chair before he
began. His odd manners and language made such an impression on me at
the time, that I think I can repeat his "statement" now, almost word for
word as he addressed it to me.





THE LAWYER'S STORY OF A STOLEN LETTER.

I served my time--never mind in whose office--and I started in business
for myself in one of our English country towns, I decline stating which.
I hadn't a farthing of capital, and my friends in the neighborhood were
poor and useless enough, with one exception. That exception was Mr.
Frank Gatliffe, son of Mr. Gatliffe, member for the county, the richest
man and the proudest for many a mile round about our parts. Stop a bit,
Mr. Artist, you needn't perk up and look knowing. You won't trace any
particulars by the name of Gatliffe. I'm not bound to commit myself or
anybody else by mentioning names. I have given you the first that came
into my head.

Well, Mr. Frank was a stanch friend of mine, and ready to recommend me
whenever he got the chance. I had contrived to get him a little timely
help--for a consideration, of course--in borrowing money at a fair
rate of interest; in fact, I had saved him from the Jews. The money was
borrowed while Mr. Frank was at college. He came back from college, and
stopped at home a little while, and then there got spread about all our
neighborhood a report that he had fallen in love, as the saying is, with
his young sister's governess, and that his mind was made up to marry
her. What! you're at it again, Mr. Artist! You want to know her name,
don't you? What do you think of Smith?

Speaking as a lawyer, I consider report, in a general way, to be a fool
and a liar. But in this case report turned out to be something very
different. Mr. Frank told me he was really in love, and said upon his
honor (an absurd expression which young chaps of his age are always
using) he was determined to marry Smith, the governess--the sweet,
darling girl, as _he_ called her; but I'm not sentimental, and _I_ call
her Smith, the governess. Well, Mr. Frank's father, being as proud as
Lucifer, said "No," as to marrying the governess, when Mr. Frank wanted
him to say "Yes." He was a man of business, was old Gatliffe, and he
took the proper business course. He sent the governess away with a
first-rate character and a spanking present, and then he, looked about
him to get something for Mr. Frank to do. While he was looking about,
Mr. Frank bolted to London after the governess, who had nobody alive
belonging to her to go to but an aunt--her father's sister. The aunt
refuses to let Mr. Frank in without the squire's permission. Mr. Frank
writes to his father, and says he will marry the girl as soon as he is
of age, or shoot himself. Up to town comes the squire and his wife and
his daughter, and a lot of sentimentality, not in the slightest degree
material to the present statement, takes places among them; and the
upshot of it is that old Gatliffe is forced into withdrawing the word
No, and substituting the word Yes.

I don't believe he would ever have done it, though, but for one lucky
peculiarity in the case. The governess's father was a man of good
family--pretty nigh as good as Gatliffe's own. He had been in the army;
had sold out; set up as a wine-merchant--failed--died; ditto his wife,
as to the dying part of it. No relation, in fact, left for the squire
to make inquiries about but the father's sister--who had behaved, as
old Gatliffe said, like a thorough-bred gentlewoman in shutting the door
against Mr. Frank in the first instance. So, to cut the matter short,
things were at last made up pleasant enough. The time was fixed for the
wedding, and an announcement about it--Marriage in High Life and all
that--put into the county paper. There was a regular biography, besides,
of the governess's father, so as to stop people from talking--a great
flourish about his pedigree, and a long account of his services in
the army; but not a word, mind ye, of his having turned wine-merchant
afterward. Oh, no--not a word about that!

I knew it, though, for Mr. Frank told me. He hadn't a bit of pride about
him. He introduced me to his future wife one day when I met him out
walking, and asked me if I did not think he was a lucky fellow. I don't
mind admitting that I did, and that I told him so. Ah! but she was one
of my sort, was that governess. Stood, to the best of my recollection,
five foot four. Good lissom figure, that looked as if it had never been
boxed up in a pair of stays. Eyes that made me feel as if I was under
a pretty stiff cross-examination the moment she looked at me. Fine red,
kiss-and-come-again sort of lips. Cheeks and complexion--No, Mr. Artist,
you wouldn't identify her by her cheeks and complexion, if I drew you a
picture of them this very moment. She has had a family of children since
the time I'm talking of; and her cheeks are a trifle fatter, and her
complexion is a shade or two redder now, than when I first met her out
walking with Mr. Frank.

The marriage was to take place on a Wednesday. I decline mentioning the
year or the month. I had started as an attorney on my own account--say
six weeks, more or less, and was sitting alone in my office on the
Monday morning before the wedding-day, trying to see my way clear before
me and not succeeding particularly well, when Mr. Frank suddenly bursts
in, as white as any ghost that ever was painted, and says he's got
the most dreadful case for me to advise on, and not an hour to lose in
acting on my advice.

"Is this in the way of business, Mr. Frank?" says I, stopping him just
as he was beginning to get sentimental. "Yes or no, Mr. Frank?" rapping
my new office paper-knife on the table, to pull him up short all the
sooner.

"My dear fellow"--he was always familiar with me--"it's in the way of
business, certainly; but friendship--"

I was obliged to pull him up short again, and regularly examine him as
if he had been in the witness-box, or he would have kept me talking to
no purpose half the day.

"Now, Mr. Frank," says I, "I can't have any sentimentality mixed up with
business matters. You please to stop talking, and let me ask questions.
Answer in the fewest words you can use. Nod when nodding will do instead
of words."

I fixed him with my eye for about three seconds, as he sat groaning and
wriggling in his chair. When I'd done fixing him, I gave another rap
with my paper-knife on the table to startle him up a bit. Then I went
on.

"From what you have been stating up to the present time," says I, "I
gather that you are in a scrape which is likely to interfere seriously
with your marriage on Wednesday?"

(He nodded, and I cut in again before he could say a word):

"The scrape affects your young lady, and goes back to the period of a
transaction in which her late father was engaged, doesn't it?"

(He nods, and I cut in once more):

"There is a party, who turned up after seeing the announcement of your
marriage in the paper, who is cognizant of what he oughtn't to know, and
who is prepared to use his knowledge of the same to the prejudice of the
young lady and of your marriage, unless he receives a sum of money to
quiet him? Very well. Now, first of all, Mr. Frank, state what you have
been told by the young lady herself about the transaction of her late
father. How did you first come to have any knowledge of it?"

"She was talking to me about her father one day so tenderly and
prettily, that she quite excited my interest about him," begins Mr.
Frank; "and I asked her, among other things, what had occasioned his
death. She said she believed it was distress of mind in the first
instance; and added that this distress was connected with a shocking
secret, which she and her mother had kept from everybody, but which she
could not keep from me, because she was determined to begin her married
life by having no secrets from her husband." Here Mr. Frank began to
get sentimental again, and I pulled him up short once more with the
paper-knife.

"She told me," Mr. Frank went on, "that the great mistake of her
father's life was his selling out of the army and taking to the wine
trade. He had no talent for business; things went wrong with him from
the first. His clerk, it was strongly suspected, cheated him--"

"Stop a bit," says I. "What was that suspected clerk's name?"

"Davager," says he.

"Davager," says I, making a note of it. "Go on, Mr. Frank."

"His affairs got more and more entangled," says Mr. Frank; "he was
pressed for money in all directions; bankruptcy, and consequent dishonor
(as he considered it) stared him in the face. His mind was so affected
by his troubles that both his wife and daughter, toward the last,
considered him to be hardly responsible for his own acts. In this state
of desperation and misery, he--" Here Mr. Frank began to hesitate.

We have two ways in the law of drawing evidence off nice and clear from
an unwilling client or witness. We give him a fright, or we treat him to
a joke. I treated Mr. Frank to a joke.

"Ah!" says I, "I know what he did. He had a signature to write; and, by
the most natural mistake in the world, he wrote another gentleman's name
instead of his own--eh?"

"It was to a bill," says Mr. Frank, looking very crestfallen, instead
of taking the joke. "His principal creditor wouldn't wait till he could
raise the money, or the greater part of it. But he was resolved, if he
sold off everything, to get the amount and repay--"

"Of course," says I, "drop that. The forgery was discovered. When?"

"Before even the first attempt was made to negotiate the bill. He had
done the whole thing in the most absurdly and innocently wrong way. The
person whose name he had used was a stanch friend of his, and a relation
of his wife's--a good man as well as a rich one. He had influence with
the chief creditor, and he used it nobly. He had a real affection for
the unfortunate man's wife, and he proved it generously."

"Come to the point," says I. "What did he do? In a business way, what
did he do?"

"He put the false bill into the fire, drew a bill of his own to replace
it, and then--only then--told my dear girl and her mother all that had
happened. Can you imagine anything nobler?" asks Mr. Frank.

"Speaking in my professional capacity, I can't imagine anything
greener," says I. "Where was the father? Off, I suppose?"

"Ill in bed," says Mr. Frank, coloring. "But he mustered strength enough
to write a contrite and grateful letter the same day, promising to prove
himself worthy of the noble moderation and forgiveness extended to him,
by selling off everything he possessed to repay his money debt. He
did sell off everything, down to some old family pictures that were
heirlooms; down to the little plate he had; down to the very tables and
chairs that furnished his drawing-room. Every farthing of the debt
was paid; and he was left to begin the world again, with the kindest
promises of help from the generous man who had forgiven him. It was
too late. His crime of one rash moment--atoned for though it had
been--preyed upon his mind. He became possessed with the idea that he
had lowered himself forever in the estimation of his wife and daughter,
and--"

"He died," I cut in. "Yes, yes, we know that. Let's go back for a minute
to the contrite and grateful letter that he wrote. My experience in
the law, Mr. Frank, has convinced me that if everybody burned everybody
else's letters, half the courts of justice in this country might shut
up shop. Do you happen to know whether the letter we are now speaking of
contained anything like an avowal or confession of the forgery?"

"Of course it did," says he. "Could the writer express his contrition
properly without making some such confession?"

"Quite easy, if he had been a lawyer," says I. "But never mind that; I'm
going to make a guess--a desperate guess, mind. Should I be altogether
in error if I thought that this letter had been stolen; and that the
fingers of Mr. Davager, of suspicious commercial celebrity, might
possibly be the fingers which took it?"

"That is exactly what I wanted to make you understand," cried Mr. Frank.

"How did he communicate the interesting fact of the theft to you?"

"He has not ventured into my presence. The scoundrel actually had the
audacity--"

"Aha!" says I. "The young lady herself! Sharp practitioner, Mr.
Davager."

"Early this morning, when she was walking alone in the shrubbery," Mr.
Frank goes on, "he had the assurance to approach her, and to say that
he had been watching his opportunity of getting a private interview
for days past. He then showed her--actually showed her--her unfortunate
father's letter; put into her hands another letter directed to me;
bowed, and walked off; leaving her half dead with astonishment and
terror. If I had only happened to be there at the time!" says Mr. Frank,
shaking his fist murderously in the air, by way of a finish.

"It's the greatest luck in the world that you were not," says I. "Have
you got that other letter?"

He handed it to me. It was so remarkably humorous and short, that I
remember every word of it at this distance of time. It began in this
way:

_"To Francis Gatliffe, Esq., Jun._

"SIR--I have an extremely curious autograph letter to sell. The price is
a five-hundred-pound note. The young lady to whom you are to be married
on Wednesday will inform you of the nature of the letter, and the
genuineness of the autograph. If you refuse to deal, I shall send a copy
to the local paper, and shall wait on your highly-respected father with
the original curiosity, on the afternoon of Tuesday next. Having come
down here on family business, I have put up at the family hotel--being
to be heard of at the Gatliffe Arms. Your very obedient servant, ALFRED
DAVAGER."

"A clever fellow that," says I, putting the letter into my private
drawer.

"Clever!" cries Mr. Frank, "he ought to be horsewhipped within an inch
of his life. I would have done it myself; but she made me promise,
before she told me a word of the matter, to come straight to you."

"That was one of the wisest promises you ever made," says I. "We can't
afford to bully this fellow, whatever else we may do with him. Do you
think I am saying anything libelous against your excellent father's
character when I assert that if he saw the letter he would certainly
insist on your marriage being put off, at the very least?"

"Feeling as my father does about my marriage, he would insist on its
being dropped altogether, if he saw this letter," says Mr. Frank, with
a groan. "But even that is not the worst of it. The generous, noble
girl herself says that if the letter appears in the paper, with all the
unanswerable comments this scoundrel would be sure to add to it, she
would rather die than hold me to my engagement, even if my father would
let me keep it."

As he said this his eyes began to water. He was a weak young fellow, and
ridiculously fond of her. I brought him back to business with another
rap of the paper-knife.

"Hold up, Mr. Frank," says I. "I have a question or two more. Did you
think of asking the young lady whether, to the best of her knowledge,
this infernal letter was the only written evidence of the forgery now in
existence?"

"Yes, I did think directly of asking her that," says he; "and she told
me she was quite certain that there was no written evidence of the
forgery except that one letter."

"Will you give Mr. Davager his price for it?" says I.

"Yes," says Mr. Frank, quite peevish with me for asking him such a
question. He was an easy young chap in money matters, and talked of
hundreds as most men talk of sixpences.

"Mr. Frank," says I, "you came here to get my help and advice in this
extremely ticklish business, and you are ready, as I know without
asking, to remunerate me for all and any of my services at the usual
professional rate. Now, I've made up my mind to act boldly--desperately,
if you like--on the hit or miss, win all or lose all principle--in
dealing with this matter. Here is my proposal. I'm going to try if
I can't do Mr. Davager out of his letter. If I don't succeed before
to-morrow afternoon, you hand him the money, and I charge you nothing
for professional services. If I do succeed, I hand you the letter
instead of Mr. Davager, and you give me the money instead of giving it
to him. It's a precious risk for me, but I'm ready to run it. You must
pay your five hundred any way. What do you say to my plan? Is it Yes,
Mr. Frank, or No?"

"Hang your questions!" cries Mr. Frank, jumping up; "you know it's Yes
ten thousand times over. Only you earn the money and--"

"And you will be too glad to give it to me. Very good. Now go home.
Comfort the young lady--don't let Mr. Davager so much as set eyes on
you--keep quiet--leave everything to me--and feel as certain as you
please that all the letters in the world can't stop your being married
on Wednesday." With these words I hustled him off out of the office, for
I wanted to be left alone to make my mind up about what I should do.

The first thing, of course, was to have a look at the enemy. I wrote to
Mr. Davager, telling him that I was privately appointed to arrange the
little business matter between himself and "another party" (no names!)
on friendly terms; and begging him to call on me at his earliest
convenience. At the very beginning of the case, Mr. Davager bothered
me. His answer was, that it would not be convenient to him to call till
between six and seven in the evening. In this way, you see, he contrived
to make me lose several precious hours, at a time when minutes almost
were of importance. I had nothing for it but to be patient, and to give
certain instructions, before Mr. Davager came, to my boy Tom.

There never was such a sharp boy of fourteen before, and there never
will be again, as my boy Tom. A spy to look after Mr. Davager was, of
course, the first requisite in a case of this kind; and Tom was the
smallest, quickest, quietest, sharpest, stealthiest little snake of a
chap that ever dogged a gentleman's steps and kept cleverly out of range
of a gentleman's eyes. I settled it with the boy that he was not to show
at all when Mr. Davager came; and that he was to wait to hear me ring
the bell when Mr. Davager left. If I rang twice, he was to show the
gentleman out. If I rang once, he was to keep out of the way, and follow
the gentleman whereever he went till he got back to the inn. Those were
the only preparations I could make to begin with; being obliged to wait,
and let myself be guided by what turned up.

About a quarter to seven my gentleman came.

In the profession of the law we get somehow quite remarkably mixed up
with ugly people, blackguard people, and dirty people. But far away the
ugliest and dirtiest blackguard I ever saw in my life was Mr. Alfred
Davager. He had greasy white hair and a mottled face. He was low in the
forehead, fat in the stomach, hoarse in the voice, and weak in the legs.
Both his eyes were bloodshot, and one was fixed in his head. He smelled
of spirits, and carried a toothpick in his mouth. "How are you? I've
just done dinner," says he; and he lights a cigar, sits down with his
legs crossed, and winks at me.

I tried at first to take the measure of him in a wheedling, confidential
way; but it was no good. I asked him, in a facetious, smiling manner,
how he had got hold of the letter. He only told me in answer that he had
been in the confidential employment of the writer of it, and that he had
always been famous since infancy for a sharp eye to his own interests.
I paid him some compliments; but he was not to be flattered. I tried to
make him lose his temper; but he kept it in spite of me. It ended in his
driving me to my last resource--I made an attempt to frighten him.

"Before we say a word about the money," I began, "let me put a case,
Mr. Davager. The pull you have on Mr. Francis Gatliffe is, that you can
hinder his marriage on Wednesday. Now, suppose I have got a magistrate's
warrant to apprehend you in my pocket? Suppose I have a constable to
execute it in the next room? Suppose I bring you up to-morrow--the day
before the marriage--charge you only generally with an attempt to extort
money, and apply for a day's remand to complete the case? Suppose, as a
suspicious stranger, you can't get bail in this town? Suppose--"

"Stop a bit," says Mr. Davager. "Suppose I should not be the greenest
fool that ever stood in shoes? Suppose I should not carry the letter
about me? Suppose I should have given a certain envelope to a certain
friend of mine in a certain place in this town? Suppose the letter
should be inside that envelope, directed to old Gatliffe, side by side
with a copy of the letter directed to the editor of the local paper?
Suppose my friend should be instructed to open the envelope, and take
the letters to their right address, if I don't appear to claim them
from him this evening? In short, my dear sir, suppose you were born
yesterday, and suppose I wasn't?" says Mr. Davager, and winks at me
again.

He didn't take me by surprise, for I never expected that he had the
letter about him. I made a pretense of being very much taken aback,
and of being quite ready to give in. We settled our business about
delivering the letter, and handing over the money, in no time. I was
to draw out a document, which he was to sign. He knew the document
was stuff and nonsense, just as well as I did, and told me I was only
proposing it to swell my client's bill. Sharp as he was, he was wrong
there. The document was not to be drawn out to gain money from Mr.
Frank, but to gain time from Mr. Davager. It served me as an excuse to
put off the payment of the five hundred pounds till three o'clock on the
Tuesday afternoon. The Tuesday morning Mr. Davager said he should
devote to his amusement, and asked me what sights were to be seen in the
neighborhood of the town. When I had told him, he pitched his toothpick
into my grate, yawned, and went out.

I rang the bell once--waited till he had passed the window--and then
looked after Tom. There was my jewel of a boy on the opposite side
of the street, just setting his top going in the most playful manner
possible. Mr. Davager walked away up the street toward the market-place.
Tom whipped his top up the street toward the market-place, too.

In a quarter of an hour he came back, with all his evidence collected
in a beautifully clear and compact state. Mr. Davager had walked to a
public-house just outside the town, in a lane leading to the highroad.
On a bench outside the public-house there sat a man smoking. He said
"All right?" and gave a letter to Mr. Davager, who answered "All right!"
and walked back to the inn. In the hall he ordered hot rum-and-water,
cigars, slippers, and a fire to be lit in his room. After that he went
upstairs, and Tom came away.

I now saw my road clear before me--not very far on, but still clear.
I had housed the letter, in all probability for that night, at the
Gatliffe Arms. After tipping Tom, I gave him directions to play about
the door of the inn, and refresh himself when he was tired at the
tart-shop opposite, eating as much as he pleased, on the understanding
that he crammed all the time with his eye on the window. If Mr. Davager
went out, or Mr. Davager's friend called on him, Tom was to let me know.
He was also to take a little note from me to the head chambermaid--an
old friend of mine--asking her to step over to my office, on a private
matter of business, as soon as her work was done for that night. After
settling these little matters, having half an hour to spare, I turned
to and did myself a bloater at the office fire, and had a drop of
gin-and-water hot, and felt comparatively happy.

When the head chambermaid came, it turned out, as good luck would have
it, that Mr. Davager had drawn her attention rather too closely to his
ugliness, by offering her a testimony of his regard in the shape of a
kiss. I no sooner mentioned him than she flew into a passion; and when I
added, by way of clinching the matter, that I was retained to defend
the interests of a very beautiful and deserving young lady (name not
referred to, of course) against the most cruel underhand treachery
on the part of Mr. Davager, the head chambermaid was ready to go any
lengths that she could safely to serve my cause. In a few words I
discovered that Boots was to call Mr. Davager at eight the next morning,
and was to take his clothes downstairs to brush as usual. If Mr. D------
had not emptied his own pockets overnight, we arranged that Boots was
to forget to empty them for him, and was to bring the clothes downstairs
just as he found them. If Mr. D------'s pockets were emptied, then, of
course, it would be necessary to transfer the searching process to
Mr. D------'s room. Under any circumstances, I was certain of the head
chambermaid; and under any circumstances, also, the head chambermaid was
certain of Boots.

I waited till Tom came home, looking very puffy and bilious about the
face; but as to his intellects, if anything, rather sharper than ever.
His report was uncommonly short and pleasant. The inn was shutting
up; Mr. Davager was going to bed in rather a drunken condition; Mr.
Davager's friend had never appeared. I sent Tom (properly instructed
about keeping our man in view all the next morning) to his shake-down
behind the office-desk, where I heard him hiccoughing half the night, as
even the best boys will, when over-excited and too full of tarts.

At half-past seven next morning, I slipped quietly into Boots's pantry.

Down came the clothes. No pockets in trousers. Waistcoat-pockets empty.
Coat-pockets with something in them. First, handkerchief; secondly,
bunch of keys; thirdly, cigar-case; fourthly, pocketbook. Of course I
wasn't such a fool as to expect to find the letter there, but I opened
the pocketbook with a certain curiosity, notwithstanding.

Nothing in the two pockets of the book but some old advertisements cut
out of newspapers, a lock of hair tied round with a dirty bit of ribbon,
a circular letter about a loan society, and some copies of verses not
likely to suit any company that was not of an extremely free-and-easy
description. On the leaves of the pocketbook, people's addresses
scrawled in pencil, and bets jotted down in red ink. On one leaf, by
itself, this queer inscription:

"MEM. 5 ALONG. 4 ACROSS."

I understood everything but those words and figures, so of course I
copied them out into my own book.

Then I waited in the pantry till Boots had brushed the clothes, and had
taken them upstairs. His report when he came down was, that Mr. D------
had asked if it was a fine morning. Being told that it was, he had
ordered breakfast at nine, and a saddle-horse to be at the door at ten,
to take him to Grimwith Abbey--one of the sights in our neighborhood
which I had told him of the evening before.

"I'll be here, coming in by the back way, at half-past ten," says I to
the head chambermaid.

"What for?" says she.

"To take the responsibility of making Mr. Davager's bed off your hands
for this morning only," says I.

"Any more orders?" says she.

"One more," says I. "I want to hire Sam for the morning. Put it down in
the order-book that he's to be brought round to my office at ten."

In case you should think Sam was a man, I'd better perhaps tell you he
was a pony. I'd made up my mind that it would be beneficial to Tom's
health, after the tarts, if he took a constitutional airing on a nice
hard saddle in the direction of Grimwith Abbey.

"Anything else?" says the head chambermaid.

"Only one more favor," says I. "Would my boy Tom be very much in the
way if he came, from now till ten, to help with the boots and shoes,
and stood at his work close by this window which looks out on the
staircase?"

"Not a bit," says the head chambermaid.

"Thank you," says I; and stepped back to my office directly.

When I had sent Tom off to help with the boots and shoes, I reviewed the
whole case exactly as it stood at that time.

There were three things Mr. Davager might do with the letter. He might
give it to his friend again before ten--in which case Tom would most
likely see the said friend on the stairs. He might take it to his
friend, or to some other friend, after ten--in which case Tom was ready
to follow him on Sam the pony. And, lastly, he might leave it hidden
somewhere in his room at the inn--in which case I was all ready for
him with a search-warrant of my own granting, under favor always of my
friend the head chambermaid. So far I had my business arrangements all
gathered up nice and compact in my own hands. Only two things bothered
me; the terrible shortness of the time at my disposal, in case I failed
in my first experiments, for getting hold of the letter, and that queer
inscription which I had copied out of the pocketbook:

"MEM. 5 ALONG. 4 ACROSS."

It was the measurement most likely of something, and he was afraid of
forgetting it; therefore it was something important. Query--something
about himself? Say "5" (inches) "along"--he doesn't wear a wig. Say "5"
(feet) "along"--it can't be coat, waistcoat, trousers, or underclothing.
Say "5" (yards) "along"--it can't be anything about himself, unless he
wears round his body the rope that he's sure to be hanged with one of
these days. Then it is _not_ something about himself. What do I know of
that is important to him besides? I know of nothing but the Letter. Can
the memorandum be connected with that? Say, yes. What do "5 along" and
"4 across" mean, then? The measurement of something he carries about
with him? or the measurement of something in his room? I could get
pretty satisfactorily to myself as far as that; but I could get no
further.

Tom came back to the office, and reported him mounted for his ride.
His friend had never appeared. I sent the boy off, with his proper
instructions, on Sam's back--wrote an encouraging letter to Mr. Frank
to keep him quiet--then slipped into the inn by the back way a little
before half-past ten. The head chambermaid gave me a signal when the
landing was clear. I got into his room without a soul but her seeing me,
and locked the door immediately.

The case was, to a certain extent, simplified now. Either Mr. Davager
had ridden out with the letter about him, or he had left it in some safe
hiding-place in his room. I suspected it to be in his room, for a reason
that will a little astonish you--his trunk, his dressing-case, and all
the drawers and cupboards, were left open. I knew my customer, and I
thought this extraordinary carelessness on his part rather suspicious.

Mr. Davager had taken one of the best bedrooms at the Gatliffe Arms.
Floor carpeted all over, walls beautifully papered, four-poster, and
general furniture first-rate. I searched, to begin with, on the usual
plan, examining everything in every possible way, and taking more than
an hour about it. No discovery. Then I pulled out a carpenter's
rule which I had brought with me. Was there anything in the room
which--either in inches, feet, or yards--answered to "5 along" and "4
across"? Nothing. I put the rule back in my pocket--measurement was no
good, evidently. Was there anything in the room that would count up to 5
one way and 4 another, seeing that nothing would measure up to it? I had
got obstinately persuaded by this time that the letter must be in the
room--principally because of the trouble I had had in looking after
it. And persuading myself of that, I took it into my head next, just
as obstinately, that "5 along" and "4 across" must be the right clew to
find the letter by--principally because I hadn't left myself, after all
my searching and thinking, even so much as the ghost of another guide
to go by. "Five along"--where could I count five along the room, in any
part of it?

Not on the paper. The pattern there was pillars of trellis-work and
flowers, inclosing a plain green ground--only four pillars along the
wall and only two across. The furniture? There were not five chairs
or five separate pieces of any furniture in the room altogether. The
fringes that hung from the cornice of the bed? Plenty of them, at any
rate! Up I jumped on the counterpane, with my pen-knife in my hand.
Every way that "5 along" and "4 across" could be reckoned on those
unlucky fringes I reckoned on them--probed with my penknife--scratched
with my nails--crunched with my fingers. No use; not a sign of a letter;
and the time was getting on--oh, Lord! how the time did get on in Mr.
Davager's room that morning.

I jumped down from the bed, so desperate at my ill luck that I hardly
cared whether anybody heard me or not. Quite a little cloud of dust rose
at my feet as they thumped on the carpet.

"Hullo!" thought I, "my friend the head chambermaid takes it easy here.
Nice state for a carpet to be in, in one of the best bedrooms at the
Gatliffe Arms." Carpet! I had been jumping up on the bed, and staring
up at the walls, but I had never so much as given a glance down at the
carpet. Think of me pretending to be a lawyer, and not knowing how to
look low enough!

The carpet! It had been a stout article in its time, had evidently began
in a drawing-room; then descended to a coffee-room; then gone upstairs
altogether to a bedroom. The ground was brown, and the pattern was
bunches of leaves and roses speckled over the ground at regular
distances. I reckoned up the bunches. Ten along the room--eight across
it. When I had stepped out five one way and four the other, and was down
on my knees on the center bunch, as true as I sit on this chair I could
hear my own heart beating so loud that it quite frightened me.

I looked narrowly all over the bunch, and I felt all over it with the
ends of my fingers, and nothing came of that. Then I scraped it over
slowly and gently with my nails. My second finger-nail stuck a little
at one place. I parted the pile of the carpet over that place, and saw
a thin slit which had been hidden by the pile being smoothed over it--a
slit about half an inch long, with a little end of brown thread, exactly
the color of the carpet ground, sticking out about a quarter of an inch
from the middle of it. Just as I laid hold of the thread gently, I heard
a footstep outside the door.

It was only the head chambermaid. "Haven't you done yet?" she whispers.

"Give me two minutes," says I, "and don't let anybody come near the
door--whatever you do, don't let anybody startle me again by coming near
the door."

I took a little pull at the thread, and heard something rustle. I took
a longer pull, and out came a piece of paper, rolled up tight like those
candle-lighters that the ladies make. I unrolled it--and, by George!
there was the letter!

The original letter! I knew it by the color of the ink. The letter that
was worth five hundred pounds to me! It was all that I could do to keep
myself at first from throwing my hat into the air, and hurrahing like
mad. I had to take a chair and sit quiet in it for a minute or two,
before I could cool myself down to my proper business level. I knew that
I was safely down again when I found myself pondering how to let Mr.
Davager know that he had been done by the innocent country attorney,
after all.

It was not long before a nice little irritating plan occurred to me.
I tore a blank leaf out of my pocketbook, wrote on it with my pencil,
"Change for a five-hundred-pound note," folded up the paper, tied the
thread to it, poked it back into the hiding-place, smoothed over the
pile of the carpet, and then bolted off to Mr. Frank. He in his turn
bolted off to show the letter to the young lady, who first certified
to its genuineness, then dropped it into the fire, and then took the
initiative for the first time since her marriage engagement, by flinging
her arms round his neck, kissing him with all her might, and going into
hysterics in his arms. So at least Mr. Frank told me, but that's not
evidence. It is evidence, however, that I saw them married with my
own eyes on the Wednesday; and that while they went off in a
carriage-and-four to spend the honeymoon, I went off on my own legs to
open a credit at the Town and County Bank with a five-hundred-pound note
in my pocket.

As to Mr. Davager, I can tell you nothing more about him, except what is
derived from hearsay evidence, which is always unsatisfactory evidence,
even in a lawyer's mouth.

My inestimable boy, Tom, although twice kicked off by Sam the pony,
never lost hold of the bridle, and kept his man in sight from first to
last. He had nothing particular to report except that on the way out to
the Abbey Mr. Davager had stopped at the public-house, had spoken a word
or two to his friend of the night before, and had handed him what looked
like a bit of paper. This was no doubt a clew to the thread that held
the letter, to be used in case of accidents. In every other respect Mr.
D. had ridden out and ridden in like an ordinary sightseer. Tom reported
him to me as having dismounted at the hotel about two. At half-past I
locked my office door, nailed a card under the knocker with "not at home
till to-morrow" written on it, and retired to a friend's house a mile or
so out of the town for the rest of the day.

Mr. Davager, I have been since given to understand, left the Gatliffe
Arms that same night with his best clothes on his back, and with all
the valuable contents of his dressing-case in his pockets. I am not in
a condition to state whether he ever went through the form of asking for
his bill or not; but I can positively testify that he never paid it, and
that the effects left in his bedroom did not pay it either. When I add
to these fragments of evidence that he and I have never met (luckily for
me, you will say) since I jockeyed him out of his banknote, I have about
fulfilled my implied contract as maker of a statement with you, sir, as
hearer of a statement. Observe the expression, will you? I said it was
a Statement before I began; and I say it's a Statement now I've done. I
defy you to prove it's a Story! How are you getting on with my portrait?
I like you very well, Mr. Artist; but if you have been taking advantage
of my talking to shirk your work, as sure as you're alive I'll split
upon you to the Town Council!


I attended a great many times at my queer sitter's house before his
likeness was completed. To the last he was dissatisfied with the
progress I made. Fortunately for me, the Town Council approved of the
portrait when it was done. Mr. Boxsious, however, objected to them as
being much too easy to please. He did not dispute the fidelity of the
likeness, but he asserted that I had not covered the canvas with half
paint enough for my money. To this day (for he is still alive), he
describes me to all inquiring friends as "The Painter-Man who jockeyed
the Town Council."




PROLOGUE TO THE THIRD STORY.

It was a sad day for me when Mr. Lanfray, of Rockleigh Place,
discovering that his youngest daughter's health required a warm climate,
removed from his English establishment to the South of France.
Roving from place to place, as I am obliged to do, though I make many
acquaintances, I keep but few friends. The nature of my calling is, I
am quite aware, mainly answerable for this. People cannot be blamed for
forgetting a man who, on leaving their houses, never can tell them for
certain when he is likely to be in their neighborhood again.

Mr. Lanfray was one of the few exceptional persons who always remembered
me. I have proofs of his friendly interest in my welfare in the shape
of letters which I treasure with grateful care. The last of these is an
invitation to his house in the South of France. There is little chance
at present of my being able to profit by his kindness; but I like to
read his invitation from time to time, for it makes me fancy, in my
happier moments, that I may one day really be able to accept it.

My introduction to this gentleman, in my capacity of portrait-painter,
did not promise much for me in a professional point of view. I was
invited to Rockleigh--or to "The Place," as it was more frequently
called among the people of the county--to take a likeness in
water-colors, on a small scale, of the French governess who lived with
Mr. Lanfray's daughters. My first idea on hearing of this was, that the
governess was about to leave her situation, and that her pupils wished
to have a memorial of her in the shape of a portrait. Subsequent
inquiry, however, informed me that I was in error. It was the eldest of
Mr. Lanfray's daughters, who was on the point of leaving the house to
accompany her husband to India; and it was for her that the portrait
had been ordered as a home remembrance of her best and dearest friend.
Besides these particulars, I discovered that the governess, though
still called "mademoiselle," was an old lady; that Mr. Lanfray had been
introduced to her many years since in France, after the death of his
wife; that she was absolute mistress in the house; and that her three
pupils had always looked up to her as a second mother, from the time
when their father first placed them under her charge.

These scraps of information made me rather anxious to see Mademoiselle
Clairfait, the governess.

On the day appointed for my attendance at the comfortable country house
of Rockleigh, I was detained on the road, and did not arrive at my
destination until late in the evening. The welcome accorded to me by
Mr. Lanfray gave an earnest of the unvarying kindness that I was to
experience at his hands in after-life. I was received at once on equal
terms, as if I had been a friend of the family, and was presented the
same evening to my host's daughters. They were not merely three elegant
and attractive young women, but--what means much more than that--three
admirable subjects for pictures, the bride particularly. Her young
husband did not strike me much at first sight; he seemed rather shy
and silent. After I had been introduced to him, I looked round for
Mademoiselle Clairfait, but she was not present; and I was soon
afterward informed by Mr. Lanfray that she always spent the latter part
of the evening in her own room.

At the breakfast-table the next morning, I again looked for my sitter,
and once more in vain. "Mamma, as we call her," said one of the ladies,
"is dressing expressly for her picture, Mr. Kerby. I hope you are
not above painting silk, lace, and jewelry. The dear old lady, who is
perfection in everything else, is perfection also in dress, and is bent
on being painted in all her splendor."

This explanation prepared me for something extraordinary; but I found
that my anticipations had fallen far below the reality when Mademoiselle
Clairfait at last made her appearance, and announced that she was ready
to sit for her portrait.

Never before or since have I seen such perfect dressing and such active
old age in combination. "Mademoiselle" was short and thin; her face
was perfectly white all over, the skin being puckered up in an infinite
variety of the smallest possible wrinkles. Her bright black eyes were
perfect marvels of youthfulness and vivacity. They sparkled, and beamed,
and ogled, and moved about over everybody and everything at such a rate,
that the plain gray hair above them looked unnaturally venerable, and
the wrinkles below an artful piece of masquerade to represent old age.
As for her dress, I remember few harder pieces of work than the painting
of it. She wore a silver-gray silk gown that seemed always flashing out
into some new light whenever she moved. It was as stiff as a board,
and rustled like the wind. Her head, neck, and bosom were enveloped in
clouds of the airiest-looking lace I ever saw, disposed about each part
of her with the most exquisite grace and propriety, and glistening at
all sorts of unexpected places with little fairy-like toys in gold and
precious stones. On her right wrist she wore three small bracelets,
with the hair of her three pupils worked into them; and on her left, one
large bracelet with a miniature let in over the clasp. She had a dark
crimson and gold scarf thrown coquettishly over her shoulders, and
held a lovely little feather-fan in her hand. When she first presented
herself before me in this costume, with a brisk courtesy and a bright
smile, filling the room with perfume, and gracefully flirting the
feather-fan, I lost all confidence in my powers as a portrait-painter
immediately. The brightest colors in my box looked dowdy and dim, and I
myself felt like an unwashed, unbrushed, unpresentable sloven.

"Tell me, my angels," said mademoiselle, apostrophizing her pupils
in the prettiest foreign English, "am I the cream of all creams this
morning? Do I carry my sixty years resplendently? Will the savages in
India, when my own love exhibits my picture among them, say, 'Ah! smart!
smart! this was a great dandy?' And the gentleman, the skillful artist,
whom it is even more an honor than a happiness to meet, does he approve
of me for a model? Does he find me pretty and paintable from top to
toe?" Here she dropped me another brisk courtesy, placed herself in
a languishing position in the sitter's chair, and asked us all if she
looked like a shepherdess in Dresden china.

The young ladies burst out laughing, and mademoiselle, as gay as any of
them and a great deal shriller, joined in the merriment. Never before
had I contended with any sitter half as restless as that wonderful
old lady. No sooner had I begun than she jumped out of the chair, and
exclaiming, "_Grand Dieu!_ I have forgotten to embrace my angels this
morning," ran up to her pupils, raised herself on tiptoe before them
in quick succession, put the two first fingers of each hand under their
ears, kissed them lightly on both cheeks, and was back again in the
chair before an English governess could have said, "Good-morning, my
dears, I hope you all slept well last night."

I began again. Up jumped mademoiselle for the second time, and tripped
across the room to a cheval-glass. "No!" I heard her say to herself, "I
have not discomposed my head in kissing my angels. I may come back and
pose for my picture."

Back she came. I worked from her for five minutes at the most. "Stop!"
cries mademoiselle, jumping up for the third time; "I must see how this
skillful artist is getting on. _Grand Dieu!_ why he has done nothing!"

For the fourth time I began, and for the fourth time the old lady
started out of her chair. "Now I must repose myself," said mademoiselle,
walking lightly from end to end of the room, and humming a French air,
by way of taking a rest.

I was at my wit's end, and the young ladies saw it. They all surrounded
my unmanageable sitter, and appealed to her compassion for me.
"Certainly!" said mademoiselle, expressing astonishment by flinging
up both her hands with all the fingers spread out in the air. "But why
apostrophize me thus? I am here, I am ready, I am at the service of this
skillful artist. Why apostrophize me?"

A fortunate chance question of mine steadied her for some time. I
inquired if I was expected to draw the whole of my sitter's figure as
well as her face. Mademoiselle replied by a comic scream of indignation.
If I was the brave and gifted man for whom she took me, I ought to be
ready to perish rather than leave out an inch of her anywhere. Dress was
her passion, and it would be an outrage on her sentiments if I did not
do full justice to everything she had on--to her robe, to her lace, to
her scarf, to her fan, to her rings, her jewels, and, above all, to her
bracelets. I groaned in spirit at the task before me, but made my best
bow of acquiescence. Mademoiselle was not to be satisfied by a mere bow;
she desired the pleasure of specially directing my attention, if I would
be so amiable as to get up and approach her, to one of her bracelets in
particular--the bracelet with the miniature, on her left wrist. It had
been the gift of the dearest friend she ever had, and the miniature
represented that friend's beloved and beautiful face. Could I make
a tiny, tiny copy of that likeness in my drawing! Would I only be so
obliging as to approach for one little moment, and see if such a thing
were possible?

I obeyed unwillingly enough, expecting, from mademoiselle's expression,
to see a commonplace portrait of some unfortunate admirer whom she
had treated with unmerited severity in the days of her youth. To my
astonishment, I found that the miniature, which was very beautifully
painted, represented a woman's face--a young woman with kind, sad eyes,
pale, delicate cheeks, light hair, and such a pure, tender, lovely
expressions that I thought of Raphael's Madonnas the moment I looked at
her portrait.

The old lady observed the impression which the miniature produced on me,
and nodded her head in silence. "What a beautiful, innocent, pure face!"
I said.

Mademoiselle Clairfait gently brushed a particle of dust from the
miniature with her handkerchief, and kissed it. "I have three angels
still left," she said, looking at her pupils. "They console me for the
fourth, who has gone to heaven."

She patted the face on the miniature gently with her little, withered,
white fingers, as if it had been a living thing. _"Sister Rose!"_ she
sighed to herself; then, looking up again at me, said, "I should like it
put into my portrait, sir, because I have always worn it since I was a
young woman, for 'Sister Rose's' sake."

The sudden change in her manner, from the extreme of flighty gayety to
the extreme of quiet sadness, would have looked theatrical in a woman of
any other nation. It seemed, however, perfectly natural and appropriate
in her. I went back to my drawing, rather perplexed. Who was "Sister
Rose"? Not one of the Lanfray family, apparently. The composure of the
young ladies when the name was mentioned showed plainly enough that the
original of the miniature had been no relation of theirs.

I tried to stifle my curiosity on the subject of Sister Rose, by giving
myself entirely to my work. For a full half-hour, Mademoiselle Clairfait
sat quietly before me, with her hands crossed on her lap, and her eyes
fixed on the bracelet. This happy alteration enabled me to do something
toward completing the outline of her face and figure. I might even,
under fortunate circumstances, have vanquished the preliminary
difficulties of my task at one effort; but the fates were against me
that day. While I was still working rapidly and to my satisfaction,
a servant knocked at the door to announce luncheon, and mademoiselle
lightly roused herself from her serious reflection and her quiet
position in a moment.

"Ah me!" she said, turning the miniature round on her wrist till it was
out of sight. "What animals we are, after all! The spiritual part of us
is at the mercy of the stomach. My heart is absorbed by tender thoughts,
yet I am not the less ready for luncheon! Come, my children and
fellow-mortals. _Allons cultiver notre jardin!"_

With this quotation from "Candide," plaintively delivered, the old lady
led the way out of the room, and was followed by her younger pupils.
The eldest sister remained behind for a moment, and reminded me that the
lunch was ready.

"I am afraid you have found the dear old soul rather an unruly sitter,"
she said, noticing the look of dissatisfaction with which I was
regarding my drawing. "But she will improve as you go on. She has done
better already for the last half-hour, has she not?"

"Much better," I answered. "My admiration of the miniature on the
bracelet seemed--I suppose, by calling up some old associations--to have
a strangely soothing effect on Mademoiselle Clairfait."

"Ah yes! only remind her of the original of that portrait, and you
change her directly, whatever she may have been saying or doing the
moment before. Sometimes she talks of _Sister Rose,_ and of all that she
went through in the time of the French Revolution, by the hour together.
It is wonderfully interesting--at least we all think so."

"I presume that the lady described as 'Sister Rose' was a relation of
Mademoiselle Clairfait's?"

"No, only a very dear friend. Mademoiselle Clairfait is the daughter
of a silk-mercer, once established at Chalons-sur-Marne. Her father
happened to give an asylum in his office to a lonely old man, to
whom 'Sister Rose' and her brother had been greatly indebted in the
revolutionary time; and out of a train of circumstances connected with
that, the first acquaintance between mademoiselle and the friend whose
portrait she wears, arose. After the time of her father's bankruptcy,
and for many years before we were placed under her charge, our good old
governess lived entirely with 'Sister Rose' and her brother. She must
then have heard all the interesting things that she has since often
repeated to my sisters and myself."

"Might I suggest," said I, after an instant's consideration, "that the
best way to give me a fair chance of studying Mademoiselle Clairfait's
face at the next sitting, would be to lead her thoughts again to that
quieting subject of the miniature, and to the events which the portrait
recalls? It is really the only plan, after what I have observed this
morning, that I can think of for enabling me to do myself and my sitter
justice."

"I am delighted to hear you say so," replied the lady; "for the
execution of your plan, by me or by my sisters, will be the easiest
thing in the world. A word from us at any time will set mademoiselle
thinking, and talking too, of the friend of her youthful days. Depend
on our assistance so far. And now let me show you the way to the
luncheon-table."



Two good results followed the ready rendering of the help I had asked
from my host's daughters. I succeeded with my portrait of Mademoiselle
Clairfait, and I heard the story which occupies the following pages.

In the case of the preceding narratives, I have repeated what was
related to me, as nearly as possible in the very words of my sitters.
In the case of this third story, it is impossible for me to proceed upon
the same plan. The circumstances of "Sister Rose's" eventful history
were narrated to me at different times, and in the most fragmentary and
discursive manner. Mademoiselle Clairfait characteristically mixed up
with the direct interest of her story, not only references to places and
people which had no recognizable connection with it, but outbursts of
passionate political declamation, on the extreme liberal side--to
say nothing of little tender apostrophes to her beloved friend, which
sounded very prettily as she spoke them, but which would lose
their effect altogether by being transferred to paper. Under these
circumstances, I have thought it best to tell the story in my own
way--rigidly adhering to the events of it exactly as they were related;
and never interfering on my own responsibility except to keep order
in the march of the incidents, and to present them, to the best of my
ability, variously as well as interestingly to the reader.




THE FRENCH GOVERNESS'S STORY OF SISTER ROSE.




PART FIRST.



CHAPTER I.

"Well, Monsieur Guillaume, what is the news this evening?"

"None that I know of, Monsieur Justin, except that Mademoiselle Rose is
to be married to-morrow."

"Much obliged, my respectable old friend, for so interesting and
unexpected a reply to my question. Considering that I am the valet of
Monsieur Danville, who plays the distinguished part of bridegroom in
the little wedding comedy to which you refer, I think I may assure you,
without offense, that your news is, so far as I am concerned, of the
stalest possible kind. Take a pinch of snuff, Monsieur Guillaume, and
excuse me if I inform you that my question referred to public news, and
not to the private affairs of the two families whose household interests
we have the pleasure of promoting."

"I don't understand what you mean by such a phrase as promoting
household interests, Monsieur Justin. I am the servant of Monsieur Louis
Trudaine, who lives here with his sister, Mademoiselle Rose. You are
the servant of Monsieur Danville, whose excellent mother has made up
the match for him with my young lady. As servants, both of us, the
pleasantest news we can have any concern with is news that is connected
with the happiness of our masters. I have nothing to do with public
affairs; and, being one of the old school, I make it my main object in
life to mind my own business. If our homely domestic politics have no
interests for you, allow me to express my regret, and to wish you a very
good-evening."

"Pardon me, my dear sir, I have not the slightest respect for the
old school, or the least sympathy with people who only mind their own
business. However, I accept your expressions of regret; I reciprocate
your 'Good-evening'; and I trust to find you improved in temper, dress,
manners, and appearance the next time I have the honor of meeting you.
Adieu, Monsieur Guillaume, and! _Vive la bagatelle!"_

These scraps of dialogue were interchanged on a lovely summer evening
in the year seventeen hundred and eighty-nine, before the back door of
a small house which stood on the banks of the Seine, about three miles
westward of the city of Rouen. The one speaker was lean, old, crabbed
and slovenly; the other was plump, young, oily-mannered and dressed in
the most gorgeous livery costume of the period. The last days of genuine
dandyism were then rapidly approaching all over the civilized world; and
Monsieur Justin was, in his own way, dressed to perfection, as a living
illustration of the expiring glories of his epoch.

After the old servant had left him, he occupied himself for a few
minutes in contemplating, superciliously enough, the back view of the
little house before which he stood. Judging by the windows, it did not
contain more than six or eight rooms in all. Instead of stables and
outhouses, there was a conservatory attached to the building on one
side, and a low, long room, built of wood, gayly painted, on the other.
One of the windows of this room was left uncurtained and through
it could be seen, on a sort of dresser inside, bottles filled with
strangely-colored liquids oddly-shaped utensils of brass and copper, one
end of a large furnace, and other objects, which plainly proclaimed that
the apartment was used as a chemical laboratory.

"Think of our bride's brother amusing himself in such a place as that
with cooking drugs in saucepans," muttered Monsieur Justin, peeping into
the room. "I am the least particular man in the universe, but I must
say I wish we were not going to be connected by marriage with an amateur
apothecary. Pah! I can smell the place through the window."

With these words Monsieur Justin turned his back on the laboratory in
disgust, and sauntered toward the cliffs overhanging the river.

Leaving the garden attached to the house, he ascended some gently rising
ground by a winding path. Arrived at the summit, the whole view of the
Seine, with its lovely green islands, its banks fringed with trees, its
gliding boats, and little scattered water-side cottages, opened before
him. Westward, where the level country appeared beyond the further
bank of the river, the landscape was all aglow with the crimson of the
setting sun. Eastward, the long shadows and mellow intervening lights,
the red glory that quivered on the rippling water, the steady ruby fire
glowing on cottage windows that reflected the level sunlight, led the
eye onward and onward, along the windings of the Seine, until it rested
upon the spires, towers, and broadly-massed houses of Rouen, with the
wooded hills rising beyond them for background. Lovely to look on at
any time, the view was almost supernaturally beautiful now under the
gorgeous evening light that glowed up in it. All its attractions,
however, were lost on the valet; he stood yawning with his hands in
his pockets, looking neither to the right nor to the left, but staring
straight before him at a little hollow, beyond which the ground sloped
away smoothly to the brink of the cliff. A bench was placed here, and
three persons--an old lady, a gentleman, and a young girl--were seated
on it, watching the sunset, and by consequence turning their backs on
Monsieur Justin. Near them stood two gentlemen, also looking toward the
river and the distant view. These five figures attracted the valet's
attention, to the exclusion of every other object around him.

"There they are still," he said to himself, discontentedly. "Madame
Danville in the same place on the seat; my master, the bridegroom,
dutifully next to her; Mademoiselle Rose, the bride, bashfully next to
him; Monsieur Trudaine, the amateur apothecary brother, affectionately
next to her; and Monsieur Lomaque, our queer land-steward, officially in
waiting on the whole party. There they all are indeed, incomprehensibly
wasting their time still in looking at nothing! Yes," continued Monsieur
Justin, lifting his eyes wearily, and staring hard, first up the river
at Rouen, then down the river at the setting sun; "yes, plague take
them! looking at nothing, absolutely and positively at nothing, all this
while."

Here Monsieur Justin yawned again, and, returning to the garden, sat
himself down in an arbor and resignedly went to sleep.

If the valet had ventured near the five persons whom he had been
apostrophizing from a distance, and if he had been possessed of some
little refinement of observation, he could hardly have failed to remark
that the bride and bridegroom of the morrow, and their companions on
either side, were all, in a greater or less degree, under the influence
of some secret restraint, which affected their conversation, their
gestures, and even the expression of their faces. Madame Danville--a
handsome, richly-dressed old lady, with very bright eyes, and a quick,
suspicious manner--looked composedly and happily enough, as long as her
attention was fixed on her son. But when she turned from him toward
the bride, a hardly perceptible uneasiness passed over her face--an
uneasiness which only deepened to positive distrust and dissatisfaction
whenever she looked toward Mademoiselle Trudaine's brother. In the same
way, her son, who was all smiles and happiness while he was speaking
with his future wife, altered visibly in manner and look exactly as his
mother altered, whenever the presence of Monsieur Trudaine specially
impressed itself on his attention. Then, again, Lomaque, the
land-steward--quiet, sharp, skinny Lomaque, with the submissive
manner, and the red-rimmed eyes--never looked up at his master's
future brother-in-law without looking away again rather uneasily, and
thoughtfully drilling holes in the grass with his long sharp-pointed
cane. Even the bride herself--the pretty, innocent girl, with her
childish shyness of manner--seemed to be affected like the others.
Doubt, if not distress, overshadowed her face from time to time, and the
hand which her lover held trembled a little, and grew restless, when she
accidentally caught her brother's eye.

Strangely enough there was nothing to repel, but, on the contrary,
everything to attract in the look and manner of the person whose mere
presence seemed to exercise such a curiously constraining influence over
the wedding-party. Louis Trudaine was a remarkably handsome man. His
expression was singularly kind and gentle; his manner irresistibly
winning in its frank, manly firmness and composure. His words, when he
occasionally spoke, seemed as unlikely to give offense as his looks;
for he only opened his lips in courteous reply to questions directly
addressed to him. Judging by a latent mournfulness in the tones of his
voice, and by the sorrowful tenderness which clouded his kind, earnest
eyes whenever they rested on his sister, his thoughts were certainly not
of the happy or the hopeful kind. But he gave them no direct expression;
he intruded his secret sadness, whatever it might be, on no one of his
companions. Nevertheless, modest and self-restrained as he was, there
was evidently some reproving or saddening influence in his presence
which affected the spirits of every one near him, and darkened the eve
of the wedding to bride and bridegroom alike.

As the sun slowly sank in the heavens, the conversation flagged more and
more. After a long silence, the bridegroom was the first to start a new
subject.

"Rose, love," he said, "that magnificent sunset is a good omen for our
marriage; it promises another lovely day to-morrow."

The bride laughed and blushed.

"Do you really believe in omens, Charles?" she said.

"My dear," interposed the old lady, before her son could answer, "if
Charles does believe in omens, it is nothing to laugh at. You will soon
know better, when you are his wife, than to confound him, even in the
slightest things, with the common herd of people. All his convictions
are well founded--so well, that if I thought he really did believe in
omens, I should most assuredly make up my mind to believe in them too."

"I beg your pardon, madame," Rose began, tremulously, "I only meant--"

"My dear child, have you so little knowledge of the world as to suppose
that I could be offended--"

"Let Rose speak," said the young man.

He turned round petulantly, almost with the air of a spoiled child,
to his mother, as he said those words. She had been looking fondly and
proudly on him the moment before. Now her eyes wandered disconcertedly
from his face; she hesitated an instant with a sudden confusion which
seemed quite foreign to her character, then whispered in his ear,

"Am I to blame, Charles, for trying to make her worthy of you?"

Her son took no notice of the question. He only reiterated sharply, "Let
Rose speak."

"I really had nothing to say," faltered the young girl, growing more and
more confused.

"Oh, but you had!"

There was such an ungracious sharpness in his voice, such an outburst of
petulance in his manner as he spoke, that his mother gave him a warning
touch on the arm, and whispered "Hush!"

Monsieur Lomaque, the land-steward, and Monsieur Trudaine, the
brother, both glanced searchingly at the bride, as the words passed the
bridegroom's lips. She seemed to be frightened and astonished, rather
than irritated or hurt. A curious smile puckered up Lomaque's lean face,
as he looked demurely down on the ground, and began drilling a fresh
hole in the turf with the sharp point of his cane. Trudaine turned aside
quickly, and, sighing, walked away a few paces; then came back, and
seemed about to speak, but Danville interrupted him.

"Pardon me, Rose," he said; "I am so jealous of even the appearance of
any want of attention toward you, that I was nearly allowing myself to
be irritated about nothing."

He kissed her hand very gracefully and tenderly as he made his excuse;
but there was a latent expression in his eye which was at variance
with the apparent spirit of his action. It was noticed by nobody but
observant and submissive Monsieur Lomaque, who smiled to himself again,
and drilled harder than ever at his hole in the grass.

"I think Monsieur Trudaine was about to speak," said Madame Danville.
"Perhaps he will have no objection to let us hear what he was going to
say."

"None, madame," replied Trudaine, politely. "I was about to take upon
myself the blame of Rose's want of respect for believers in omens, by
confessing that I have always encouraged her to laugh at superstitions
of every kind."

"You a ridiculer of superstitions?" said Danville, turning quickly
on him. "You, who have built a laboratory; you, who are an amateur
professor of the occult arts of chemistry--a seeker after the Elixir of
Life. On my word of honor, you astonish me!"

There was an ironical politeness in his voice, look, and manner as he
said this, which his mother and his land-steward, Monsieur Lomaque,
evidently knew how to interpret. The first touched his arm again and
whispered, "Be careful!" the second suddenly grew serious, and left off
drilling his hole in the grass. Rose neither heard the warning of Madame
Danville, nor noticed the alteration in Lomaque. She was looking round
at her brother, and was waiting with a bright, affectionate smile to
hear his answer. He nodded, as if to reassure her, before he spoke again
to Danville.

"You have rather romantic ideas about experiments in chemistry," he
said, quietly. "Mine have so little connection with what you call the
occult arts that all the world might see them, if all the world thought
it worth while. The only Elixirs of Life that I know of are a quiet
heart and a contented mind. Both those I found, years and years ago,
when Rose and I first came to live together in the house yonder."

He spoke with a quiet sadness in his voice, which meant far more to his
sister than the simple words he uttered. Her eyes filled with tears; she
turned for a moment from her lover, and took her brother's hand. "Don't
talk, Louis, as if you thought you were going to lose your sister,
because--" Her lips began to tremble, and she stopped suddenly.

"More jealous than ever of your taking her away from him!" whispered
Madame Danville in her son's ear. "Hush! don't, for God's sake, take any
notice of it," she added, hurriedly, as he rose from the seat and faced
Trudaine with undisguised irritation and impatience in his manner.
Before he could speak, the old servant Guillaume made his appearance,
and announced that coffee was ready. Madame Danville again said "Hush!"
and quickly took one of his arms, while he offered the other to Rose.
"Charles," said the young girl, amazedly, "how flushed your face is, and
how your arm trembles!"

He controlled himself in a moment, smiled, and said to her: "Can't you
guess why, Rose? I am thinking of to-morrow." While he was speaking, he
passed close by the land-steward, on his way back to the house with
the ladies. The smile returned to Monsieur Lomaque's lean face, and a
curious light twinkled in his red-rimmed eyes as he began a fresh hole
in the grass.

"Won't you go indoors, and take some coffee?" asked Trudaine, touching
the land-steward on the arm.

Monsieur Lomaque started a little and left his cane sticking in the
ground. "A thousand thanks, monsieur," he said; "may I be allowed to
follow you?"

"I confess the beauty of the evening makes me a little unwilling to
leave this place just yet."

"Ah! the beauties of Nature--I feel them with you, Monsieur Trudaine;
I feel them here." Saying this, Lomaque laid one hand on his heart,
and with the other pulled his stick out of the grass. He had looked as
little at the landscape or the setting sun as Monsieur Justin himself.

They sat down, side by side, on the empty bench; and then there followed
an awkward pause. Submissive Lomaque was too discreet to forget his
place, and venture on starting a new topic. Trudaine was preoccupied,
and disinclined to talk. It was necessary, however, in common
politeness, to say something. Hardly attending himself to his own words,
he began with a commonplace phrase: "I regret, Monsieur Lomaque, that we
have not had more opportunities of bettering our acquaintance."

"I feel deeply indebted," rejoined the land-steward, "to the admirable
Madame Danville for having chosen me as her escort hither from her son's
estate near Lyons, and having thereby procured for me the honor of this
introduction." Both Monsieur Lomaque's red-rimmed eyes were seized with
a sudden fit of winking, as he made this polite speech. His enemies
were accustomed to say that, whenever he was particularly insincere,
or particularly deceitful, he always took refuge in the weakness of his
eyes, and so evaded the trying ordeal of being obliged to look steadily
at the person whom he was speaking with.

"I was pleased to hear you mention my late father's name, at dinner, in
terms of high respect," continued Trudaine, resolutely keeping up the
conversation. "Did you know him?"

"I am indirectly indebted to your excellent father," answered the
land-steward, "for the very situation which I now hold. At a time when
the good word of a man of substance and reputation was needed to save me
from poverty and ruin, your father spoke that word. Since then I have,
in my own very small way, succeeded in life, until I have risen to the
honor of superintending the estate of Monsieur Danville."

"Excuse me, but your way of speaking of your present situation rather
surprises me. Your father, I believe, was a merchant, just as Danville's
father was a merchant; the only difference between them was that one
failed and the other realized a large fortune. Why should you speak of
yourself as honored by holding your present place?"

"Have you never heard?" exclaimed Lomaque, with an appearance of
great astonishment, "or can you have heard, and forgotten, that Madame
Danville is descended from one of the noble houses of France? Has she
never told you, as she has often told me, that she condescended when she
married her late husband; and that her great object in life is to get
the title of her family (years since extinct in the male line) settled
on her son?"

"Yes," replied Trudaine; "I remember to have heard something of this,
and to have paid no great attention to it at the time, having little
sympathy with such aspirations as you describe. You have lived many
years in Danville's service, Monsieur Lomaque; have you"--he hesitated
for a moment, then continued, looking the land-steward full in the
face--"have you found him a good and kind master?"

Lomaque's thin lips seemed to close instinctively at the question, as if
he were never going to speak again. He bowed--Trudaine waited--he only
bowed again. Trudaine waited a third time. Lomaque looked at his host
with perfect steadiness for an instant, then his eyes began to get weak
again. "You seem to have some special interest," he quietly remarked,
"if I may say so without offense, in asking me that question."

"I deal frankly, at all hazards, with every one," returned Trudaine;
"and stranger as you are, I will deal frankly with you. I acknowledge
that I have an interest in asking that question--the dearest, the
tenderest of all interests." At those last words, his voice trembled
for a moment, but he went on firmly; "from the beginning of my sister's
engagement with Danville, I made it my duty not to conceal my own
feelings; my conscience and my affection for Rose counseled me to be
candid to the last, even though my candor should distress or offend
others. When we first made the acquaintance of Madame Danville, and
when I first discovered that her son's attentions to Rose were not
unfavorably received, I felt astonished, and, though it cost me a hard
effort, I did not conceal that astonishment from my sister--"

Lomaque, who had hitherto been all attention, started here, and threw
up his hands in amazement. "Astonished, did I hear you say? Astonished,
Monsieur Trudaine, that the attentions of a young gentleman, possessed
of all the graces and accomplishments of a highly-bred Frenchman, should
be favorably received by a young lady! Astonished that such a dancer,
such a singer, such a talker, such a notoriously fascinating ladies' man
as Monsieur Danville, should, by dint of respectful assiduity, succeed
in making some impression on the heart of Mademoiselle Rose! Oh,
Monsieur Trudaine, venerated Monsieur Trudaine, this is almost too much
to credit!"

Lomaque's eyes grew weaker than ever, and winked incessantly as he
uttered this apostrophe. At the end, he threw up his hands again, and
blinked inquiringly all round him, in mute appeal to universal nature.

"When, in the course of time, matters were further advanced," continued
Trudaine, without paying any attention to the interruption; "when the
offer of marriage was made, and when I knew that Rose had in her own
heart accepted it, I objected, and I did not conceal my objections--"

"Heavens!" interposed Lomaque again, clasping his hands this time with
a look of bewilderment; "what objections, what possible objections to
a man young and well-bred, with an immense fortune and an uncompromised
character? I have heard of these objections; I know they have made bad
blood; and I ask myself again and again, what can they be?"

"God knows I have often tried to dismiss them from my mind as fanciful
and absurd," said Trudaine, "and I have always failed. It is impossible,
in your presence, that I can describe in detail what my own impressions
have been, from the first, of the master whom you serve. Let it be
enough if I confide to you that I cannot, even now, persuade myself of
the sincerity of his attachment to my sister, and that I feel--in
spite of myself, in spite of my earnest desire to put the most implicit
confidence in Rose's choice--a distrust of his character and temper,
which now, on the eve of the marriage, amounts to positive terror. Long
secret suffering, doubt, and suspense, wring this confession from me,
Monsieur Lomaque, almost unawares, in defiance of caution, in defiance
of all the conventionalities of society. You have lived for years under
the same roof with this man; you have seen him in his most unguarded and
private moments. I tempt you to betray no confidence--I only ask you if
you can make me happy by telling me that I have been doing your master
grievous injustice by my opinion of him? I ask you to take my hand,
and tell me if you can, in all honor, that my sister is not risking the
happiness of her whole life by giving herself in marriage to Danville
to-morrow!"

He held out his hand while he spoke. By some strange chance, Lomaque
happened just at that moment to be looking away toward those beauties of
Nature which he admired so greatly. "Really, Monsieur Trudaine, really
such an appeal from you, at such a time, amazes me." Having got so far,
he stopped and said no more.

"When we first sat down together here, I had no thought of making this
appeal, no idea of talking to you as I have talked," pursued the other.
"My words have escaped me, as I told you, almost unawares; you must
make allowances for them and for me. I cannot expect others, Monsieur
Lomaque, to appreciate and understand my feelings for Rose. We two have
lived alone in the world together; father, mother, kindred, they all
died years since, and left us. I am so much older than my sister that I
have learned to feel toward her more as a father than as a brother.
All my life, all my dearest hopes, all my highest expectations, have
centered in her. I was past the period of my boyhood when my mother put
my little child sister's hand in mine, and said to me on her death-bed:
'Louis, be all to her that I have been, for she has no one left to look
to but you.' Since then the loves and ambitions of other men have not
been my loves or my ambitions. Sister Rose--as we all used to call her
in those past days, as I love to call her still--Sister Rose has
been the one aim, the one happiness, the one precious trust, the one
treasured reward, of all my life. I have lived in this poor house,
in this dull retirement, as in a paradise, because Sister Rose--my
innocent, happy, bright-faced Eve--has lived here with me. Even if the
husband of her choice had been the husband of mine, the necessity of
parting with her would have been the hardest, the bitterest of trials.
As it is, thinking what I think, dreading what I dread, judge what my
feelings must be on the eve of her marriage; and know why, and with what
object, I made the appeal which surprised you a moment since, but which
cannot surprise you now. Speak if you will--I can say no more." He
sighed bitterly; his head dropped on his breast, and the hand which he
had extended to Lomaque trembled as he withdrew it and let it fall at
his side.

The land-steward was not a man accustomed to hesitate, but he hesitated
now. He was not usually at a loss for phrases in which to express
himself, but he stammered at the very outset of his reply. "Suppose I
answered," he began, slowly; "suppose I told you that you wronged him,
would my testimony really be strong enough to shake opinions, or rather
presumptions, which have been taking firmer and firmer hold of you for
months and months past? Suppose, on the other hand, that my master had
his little" (Lomaque hesitated before he pronounced the next word)--"his
little--infirmities, let me say; but only hypothetically, mind
that--infirmities; and suppose I had observed them, and was willing to
confide them to you, what purpose would such a confidence answer now,
at the eleventh hour, with Mademoiselle Rose's heart engaged, with the
marriage fixed for to-morrow? No! no! trust me--"

Trudaine looked up suddenly. "I thank you for reminding me, Monsieur
Lomaque, that it is too late now to make inquiries, and by consequence
too late also to trust in others. My sister has chosen; and on the
subject of that choice my lips shall be henceforth sealed. The events of
the future are with God; whatever they may be, I hope I am strong enough
to bear my part in them with the patience and the courage of a man! I
apologize, Monsieur Lomaque, for having thoughtlessly embarrassed you
by questions which I had no right to ask. Let us return to the house--I
will show you the way."

Lomaque's lips opened, then closed again; he bowed uneasily, and his
sallow complexion whitened for a moment.

Trudaine led the way in silence back to the house; the land-steward
following slowly at a distance of several paces, and talking in whispers
to himself. "His father was the saving of me," muttered Lomaque; "that
is truth, and there is no getting over it; his father was the saving of
me; and yet here am I--no! it's too late!--too late to speak--too late
to act--too late to do anything!"

Close to the house they were met by the old servant.

"My young lady has just sent me to call you in to coffee, monsieur,"
said Guillaume. "She has kept a cup hot for you, and another cup for
Monsieur Lomaque."

The land-steward started--this time with genuine astonishment. "For me!"
he exclaimed. "Mademoiselle Rose has troubled herself to keep a cup of
coffee hot for me?" The old servant stared; Trudaine stopped and looked
back.

"What is there so very surprising," he asked, "in such an ordinary act
of politeness on my sister's part?"

"Excuse me, Monsieur Trudaine," answered Lomaque; "you have not passed
such an existence as mine--you are not a friendless old man--you have
a settled position in the world, and are used to be treated with
consideration. I am not. This is the first occasion in my life on which
I find myself an object for the attention of a young lady, and it takes
me by surprise. I repeat my excuses; pray let us go in."

Trudaine made no reply to this curious explanation. He wondered at it
a little, however, and he wondered still more when, on entering
the drawing-room, he saw Lomaque walk straight up to his sister,
and--apparently not noticing that Danville was sitting at the
harpsichord and singing at the time--address her confusedly and
earnestly with a set speech of thanks for his hot cup of coffee. Rose
looked perplexed, and half inclined to laugh, as she listened to
him. Madame Danville, who sat by her side, frowned, and tapped the
land-steward contemptuously on the arm with her fan.

"Be so good as to keep silent until my son has done singing," she said.
Lomaque made a low bow, and retiring to a table in a corner, took up a
newspaper lying on it. If Madame Danville had seen the expression that
came over his face when he turned away from her, proud as she was, her
aristocratic composure might possibly have been a little ruffled.

Danville had finished his song, had quitted the harpsichord, and was
talking in whispers to his bride; Madame Danville was adding a word to
the conversation every now and then; Trudaine was seated apart at the
far end of the room, thoughtfully reading a letter which he had taken
from his pocket, when an exclamation from Lomaque, who was still engaged
with the newspaper, caused all the other occupants of the apartment to
suspend their employments and look up.

"What is it?" asked Danville, impatiently.

"Shall I be interrupting if I explain?" inquired Lomaque, getting very
weak in the eyes again, as he deferentially addressed himself to Madame
Danville.

"You have already interrupted us," said the old lady, sharply; "so you
may now just as well explain."

"It is a passage from the _Scientific Intelligence_ which has given me
great delight, and which will be joyful news for every one here." Saying
this, Lomaque looked significantly at Trudaine, and then read from the
newspaper these lines:



"ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, PARIS.--The vacant sub-professorship of chemistry
has been offered, we are rejoiced to hear, to a gentleman whose modesty
has hitherto prevented his scientific merits from becoming sufficiently
prominent in the world. To the members of the academy he has
been long since known as the originator of some of the most
remarkable improvements in chemistry which have been made of late
years--improvements, the credit of which he has, with rare, and we were
almost about to add, culpable moderation, allowed others to profit by
with impunity. No man in any profession is more thoroughly entitled to
have a position of trust and distinction conferred on him by the State
than the gentleman to whom we refer--M. Louis Trudaine."



Before Lomaque could look up from the paper to observe the impression
which his news produced, Rose had gained her brother's side and was
kissing him in a flutter of delight.

"Dear Louis," she cried, clapping her hands, "let me be the first to
congratulate you! How proud and glad I am! You accept the professorship,
of course?"

Trudaine, who had hastily and confusedly put his letter back in his
pocket the moment Lomaque began to read, seemed at a loss for an answer.
He patted his sister's hand rather absently, and said:

"I have not made up my mind; don't ask me why, Rose--at least not now,
not just now." An expression of perplexity and distress came over his
face, as he gently motioned her to resume her chair.

"Pray, is a sub-professor of chemistry supposed to hold the rank of a
gentleman?" asked Madame Danville, without the slightest appearance of
any special interest in Lomaque's news.

"Of course not," replied her son, with a sarcastic laugh; "he is
expected to work and make himself useful. What gentleman does that?"

"Charles!" exclaimed the old lady, reddening with anger.

"Bah!" cried Danville, turning his back on her, "enough of chemistry.
Lomaque, now you have begun reading the newspaper, try if you can't find
something interesting to read about. What are the last accounts from
Paris? Any more symptoms of a general revolt?"

Lomaque turned to another part of the paper. "Bad, very bad prospects
for the restoration of tranquillity," he said. "Necker, the people's
Minister, is dismissed. Placards against popular gatherings are posted
all over Paris. The Swiss Guards have been ordered to the Champs
Elysees, with four pieces of artillery. No more is yet known, but the
worst is dreaded. The breach between the aristocracy and the people is
widening fatally almost hour by hour."

Here he stopped and laid down the newspaper. Trudaine took it from him,
and shook his head forebodingly as he looked over the paragraph which
had just been read.

"Bah!" cried Madame Danville. "The People, indeed! Let those four pieces
of artillery be properly loaded, let the Swiss Guards do their duty, and
we shall hear no more of the People!"

"I advise you not to be sure of that," said her son, carelessly; "there
are rather too many people in Paris for the Swiss Guards to shoot
conveniently. Don't hold your head too aristocratically high, mother,
till we are quite certain which way the wind really does blow. Who knows
if I may not have to bow just as low one of these days to King Mob as
ever you courtesied in your youth to King Louis the Fifteenth?"

He laughed complacently as he ended, and opened his snuff-box. His
mother rose from her chair, her face crimson with indignation.

"I won't hear you talk so--it shocks, it horrifies me!" she exclaimed,
with vehement gesticulation. "No, no! I decline to hear another word. I
decline to sit by patiently while my son, whom I love, jests at the most
sacred principles, and sneers at the memory of an anointed king. This is
my reward, is it, for having yielded and having come here, against
all the laws of etiquette, the night before the marriage? I comply no
longer; I resume my own will and my own way. I order you, my son, to
accompany me back to Rouen. We are the bridegroom's party, and we have
no business overnight at the house of the bride. You meet no more till
you meet at the church. Justin, my coach! Lomaque, pick up my hood.
Monsieur Trudaine, thanks for your hospitality; I shall hope to
return it with interest the first time you are in our neighborhood.
Mademoiselle, put on your best looks to-morrow, along with your wedding
finery; remember that my son's bride must do honor to my son's taste.
Justin! my coach--drone, vagabond, idiot, where is my coach?"

"My mother looks handsome when she is in a passion, does she not, Rose?"
said Danville, quietly putting up his snuff-box as the old lady sailed
out of the room. "Why, you seem quite frightened, love," he added,
taking her hand with his easy, graceful air; "frightened, let me assure
you, without the least cause. My mother has but that one prejudice, and
that one weak point, Rose. You will find her a very dove for gentleness,
as long as you do not wound her pride of caste. Come, come, on this
night, of all others, you must not send me away with such a face as
that."

He bent down and whispered to her a bridegroom's compliment, which
brought the blood back to her cheek in an instant.

"Ah, how she loves him--how dearly she loves him!" thought her brother,
watching her from his solitary corner of the room, and seeing the smile
that brightened her blushing face when Danville kissed her hand at
parting.

Lomaque, who had remained imperturbably cool during the outbreak of
the old lady's anger--Lomaque, whose observant eyes had watched
sarcastically the effect of the scene between mother and son on Trudaine
and his sister, was the last to take leave. After he had bowed to Rose
with a certain gentleness in his manner, which contrasted strangely with
his wrinkled, haggard face, he held out his hand to her brother "I did
not take your hand when we sat together on the bench," he said; "may I
take it now?"

Trudaine met his advance courteously, but in silence. "You may alter
your opinion of me one of these days." Adding those words in a whisper,
Monsieur Lomaque bowed once more to the bride and went out.

For a few minutes after the door had closed the brother and sister kept
silence. "Our last night together at home!" That was the thought which
now filled the heart of each. Rose was the first to speak. Hesitating a
little as she approached her brother, she said to him, anxiously:

"I am sorry for what happened with Madame Danville, Louis. Does it make
you think the worse of Charles?"

"I can make allowance for Madame Danville's anger," returned Trudaine,
evasively, "because she spoke from honest conviction."

"Honest?" echoed Rose, sadly, "honest?--ah, Louis! I know you are
thinking disparagingly of Charles's convictions, when you speak so of
his mother's."

Trudaine smiled and shook his head; but she took no notice of the
gesture of denial--only stood looking earnestly and wistfully into his
face. Her eyes began to fill; she suddenly threw her arms round his
neck, and whispered to him: "Oh, Louis, Louis! how I wish I could teach
you to see Charles with my eyes!"

He felt her tears on his cheek as she spoke, and tried to reassure her.

"You shall teach me, Rose--you shall, indeed. Come, come, we must keep
up our spirits, or how are you to look your best to-morrow?"

He unclasped her arms, and led her gently to a chair. At the same moment
there was a knock at the door, and Rose's maid appeared, anxious
to consult her mistress on some of the preparations for the wedding
ceremony. No interruption could have been more welcome just at that
time. It obliged Rose to think of present trifles, and it gave her
brother an excuse for retiring to his study.

He sat down by his desk, doubting and heavy-hearted, and placed the
letter from the Academy of Sciences open before him.

Passing over all the complimentary expressions which it contained, his
eye rested only on these lines at the end: "During the first three years
of your professorship, you will be required to reside in or near Paris
nine months out of the year, for the purpose of delivering lectures and
superintending experiments from time to time in the laboratories." The
letter in which these lines occurred offered him such a position as
in his modest self-distrust he had never dreamed of before; the lines
themselves contained the promise of such vast facilities for carrying
on his favorite experiments as he could never hope to command in his
own little study, with his own limited means; and yet, there he now
sat doubting whether he should accept or reject the tempting honors and
advantages that were offered to him--doubting for his sister's sake!

"Nine months of the year in Paris," he said to himself, sadly; "and Rose
is to pass her married life at Lyons. Oh, if I could clear my heart of
its dread on her account--if I could free my mind of its forebodings for
her future--how gladly I would answer this letter by accepting the trust
it offers me!"

He paused for a few minutes, and reflected. The thoughts that were in
him marked their ominous course in the growing paleness of his cheek,
in the dimness that stole over his eyes. "If this cleaving distrust from
which I cannot free myself should be in very truth the mute prophecy of
evil to come--to come, I know not when--if it be so (which God forbid!),
how soon she may want a friend, a protector near at hand, a ready refuge
in the time of her trouble! Where shall she then find protection or
refuge? With that passionate woman? With her husband's kindred and
friends?"

He shuddered as the thought crossed his mind, and opening a blank sheet
of paper, dipped his pen in the ink. "Be all to her, Louis, that I have
been," he murmured to himself, repeating his mother's last words, and
beginning the letter while he uttered them. It was soon completed. It
expressed in the most respectful terms his gratitude for the offer
made to him, and his inability to accept it, in consequence of domestic
circumstances which it was needless to explain. The letter was directed,
sealed; it only remained for him to place it in the post-bag, lying near
at hand. At this last decisive act he hesitated. He had told Lomaque,
and he had firmly believed himself, that he had conquered all ambitions
for his sister's sake. He knew now, for the first time, that he had
only lulled them to rest--he knew that the letter from Paris had aroused
them. His answer was written, his hand was on the post-bag, and at that
moment the whole struggle had to be risked over again--risked when he
was most unfit for it! He was not a man under any ordinary circumstances
to procrastinate, but he procrastinated now.

"Night brings counsel; I will wait till to-morrow," he said to himself,
and put the letter of refusal in his pocket, and hastily quitted the
laboratory.



CHAPTER II.

Inexorably the important morrow came: irretrievably, for good or for
evil, the momentous marriage-vow was pronounced. Charles Danville and
Rose Trudaine were now man and wife. The prophecy of the magnificent
sunset overnight had not proved false. It was a cloudless day on
the marriage morning. The nuptial ceremonies had proceeded smoothly
throughout, and had even satisfied Madame Danville. She returned with
the wedding-party to Trudaine's house, all smiles and serenity. To
the bride she was graciousness itself. "Good girl," said the old lady,
following Rose into a corner, and patting her approvingly on the cheek
with her fan; "good girl, you have looked well this morning--you have
done credit to my son's taste. Indeed, you have pleased me, child! Now
go upstairs, and get on your traveling-dress, and count on my maternal
affection as long as you make Charles happy."

It had been arranged that the bride and bridegroom should pass their
honeymoon in Brittany, and then return to Danville's estate near Lyons.
The parting was hurried over, as all such partings should be. The
carriage had driven off; Trudaine, after lingering long to look after
it, had returned hastily to the house; the very dust of the whirling
wheels had all dispersed; there was absolutely nothing to see; and yet
there stood Monsieur Lomaque at the outer gate; idly, as if he was an
independent man--calmly, as if no such responsibilities as the calling
of Madame Danville's coach, and the escorting of Madame Danville back to
Lyons, could possibly rest on his shoulders.

Idly and calmly, slowly rubbing his hands one over the other, slowly
nodding his head in the direction by which the bride and bridegroom
had departed, stood the eccentric land-steward at the outer gate. On
a sudden the sound of footsteps approaching from the house seemed to
arouse him. Once more he looked out into the road, as if he expected
still to see the carriage of the newly-married couple. "Poor girl! ah,
poor girl!" said Monsieur Lomaque softly to himself, turning round to
ascertain who was coming from the house.

It was only the postman with a letter in his hand, and the post-bag
crumpled up under his arm.

"Any fresh news from Paris, friend?" asked Lomaque.

"Very bad, monsieur," answered the postman. "Camille Desmoulins has
appealed to the people in the Palais Royal; there are fears of a riot."

"Only a riot!" repeated Lomaque, sarcastically. "Oh, what a brave
Government not to be afraid of anything worse! Any letters?" he added,
hastily dropping the subject.

"None _to_ the house," said the postman, "only one _from_ it, given me
by Monsieur Trudaine. Hardly worth while," he added, twirling the letter
in his hand, "to put it into the bag, is it?"

Lomaque looked over his shoulder as he spoke, and saw that the letter
was directed to the President of the Academy of Sciences, Paris.

"I wonder whether he accepts the place or refuses it?" thought the
land-steward, nodding to the postman, and continuing on his way back to
the house.

At the door he met Trudaine, who said to him, rather hastily, "You are
going back to Lyons with Madame Danville, I suppose?"

"This very day," answered Lomaque.

"If you should hear of a convenient bachelor lodging, at Lyons, or near
it," continued the other, dropping his voice and speaking more rapidly
than before, "you would be doing me a favor if you would let me know
about it."

Lomaque assented; but before he could add a question which was on the
tip of his tongue, Trudaine had vanished in the interior of the house.

"A bachelor lodging!" repeated the land-steward, standing alone on the
doorstep. "At or near Lyons! Aha! Monsieur Trudaine, I put your bachelor
lodging and your talk to me last night together, and I make out a sum
total which is, I think, pretty near the mark. You have refused that
Paris appointment, my friend; and I fancy I can guess why."

He paused thoughtfully, and shook his head with ominous frowns and
bitings of his lips.

"All clear enough in that sky," he continued, after a while, looking up
at the lustrous midday heaven. "All clear enough there; but I think I
see a little cloud rising in a certain household firmament already--a
little cloud which hides much, and which I for one shall watch
carefully."




PART SECOND.



CHAPTER I.

Five years have elapsed since Monsieur Lomaque stood thoughtfully at the
gate of Trudaine's house, looking after the carriage of the bride and
bridegroom, and seriously reflecting on the events of the future.
Great changes have passed over that domestic firmament in which he
prophetically discerned the little warning cloud. Greater changes have
passed over the firmament of France.

What was revolt five years ago is Revolution now--revolution which
has ingulfed thrones, and principalities, and powers; which has set
up crownless, inhereditary kings and counselors of its own, and has
bloodily torn them down again by dozens; which has raged and raged on
unrestrainedly in fierce earnest, until but one king can still govern
and control it for a little while. That king is named Terror, and
seventeen hundred and ninety-four is the year of his reign.

Monsieur Lomaque, land-steward no longer, sits alone in an
official-looking room in one of the official buildings of Paris. It is
another July evening, as fine as that evening when he and Trudaine sat
talking together on the bench overlooking the Seine. The window of the
room is wide open, and a faint, pleasant breeze is beginning to flow
through it. But Lomaque breathes uneasily, as if still oppressed by the
sultry midday heat; and there are signs of perplexity and trouble in his
face as he looks down absently now and then into the street.

The times he lives in are enough of themselves to sadden any man's face.
In the Reign of Terror no living being in all the city of Paris can rise
in the morning and be certain of escaping the spy, the denunciation, the
arrest, or the guillotine, before night. Such times are trying enough to
oppress any man's spirits; but Lomaque is not thinking of them or caring
for them now. Out of a mass of papers which lie before him on his old
writing-table, he has just taken up and read one, which has carried his
thoughts back to the past, and to the changes which have taken place
since he stood alone on the doorstep of Trudaine's house, pondering on
what might happen.

More rapidly even than he had foreboded those changes had occurred.
In less time even than he had anticipated, the sad emergency for which
Rose's brother had prepared, as for a barely possible calamity,
overtook Trudaine, and called for all the patience, the courage, the
self-sacrifice which he had to give for his sister's sake. By slow
gradations downward, from bad to worse, her husband's character
manifested itself less and less disguisedly almost day by day.
Occasional slights, ending in habitual neglect; careless estrangement,
turning to cool enmity; small insults, which ripened evilly to great
injuries--these were the pitiless signs which showed her that she
had risked all and lost all while still a young woman--these were the
unmerited afflictions which found her helpless, and would have left her
helpless, but for the ever-present comfort and support of her brother's
self-denying love. From the first, Trudaine had devoted himself to meet
such trials as now assailed him; and like a man he met them, in defiance
alike of persecution from the mother and of insult from the son.

The hard task was only lightened when, as time advanced, public trouble
began to mingle itself with private grief. Then absorbing political
necessities came as a relief to domestic misery. Then it grew to be the
one purpose and pursuit of Danville's life cunningly to shape his course
so that he might move safely onward with the advancing revolutionary
tide--he cared not whither, as long as he kept his possessions safe and
his life out of danger. His mother, inflexibly true to her Old-World
convictions through all peril, might entreat and upbraid, might talk of
honor, and courage, and sincerity--he heeded her not, or heeded only to
laugh. As he had taken the false way with his wife, so he was now bent
on taking it with the world.

The years passed on; destroying changes swept hurricane-like over the
old governing system of France; and still Danville shifted successfully
with the shifting times. The first days of the Terror approached; in
public and in private--in high places and in low--each man now suspected
his brother. Crafty as Danville was, even he fell under suspicion at
last, at headquarters in Paris, principally on his mother's account.
This was his first political failure; and, in a moment of thoughtless
rage and disappointment, he wreaked the irritation caused by it on
Lomaque. Suspected himself, he in turn suspected the land-steward. His
mother fomented the suspicion--Lomaque was dismissed.

In the old times the victim would have been ruined, in the new times he
was simply rendered eligible for a political vocation in life. Lomaque
was poor, quick-witted, secret, not scrupulous. He was a good patriot;
he had good patriot friends, plenty of ambition, a subtle, cat-like
courage, nothing to dread--and he went to Paris. There were plenty of
small chances there for men of his caliber. He waited for one of them.
It came; he made the most of it; attracted favorably the notice of the
terrible Fouquier-Tinville; and won his way to a place in the office of
the Secret Police.

Meanwhile, Danville's anger cooled down; he recovered the use of that
cunning sense which had hitherto served him well, and sent to recall the
discarded servant. It was too late. Lomaque was already in a position to
set him at defiance--nay, to put his neck, perhaps, under the blade of
the guillotine. Worse than this, anonymous letters reached him, warning
him to lose no time in proving his patriotism by some indisputable
sacrifice, and in silencing his mother, whose imprudent sincerity was
likely ere long to cost her her life. Danville knew her well enough
to know that there was but one way of saving her, and thereby saving
himself. She had always refused to emigrate; but he now insisted that
she should seize the first opportunity he could procure for her of
quitting France until calmer times arrived.

Probably she would have risked her own life ten times over rather than
have obeyed him; but she had not the courage to risk her son's too;
and she yielded for his sake. Partly by secret influence, partly by
unblushing fraud, Danville procured for her such papers and permits as
would enable her to leave France by way of Marseilles. Even then she
refused to depart, until she knew what her son's plans were for the
future. He showed her a letter which he was about to dispatch to
Robespierre himself, vindicating his suspected patriotism, and
indignantly demanding to be allowed to prove it by filling some office,
no matter how small, under the redoubtable triumvirate which then
governed, or more properly terrified, France. The sight of this document
reassured Madame Danville. She bade her son farewell, and departed at
last, with one trusty servant, for Marseilles.

Danville's intention, in sending his letter to Paris, had been simply to
save himself by patriotic bluster. He was thunderstruck at receiving
a reply, taking him at his word, and summoning him to the capital to
accept employment there under the then existing Government. There was no
choice but to obey. So to Paris he journeyed, taking his wife with him
into the very jaws of danger. He was then at open enmity with Trudaine;
and the more anxious and alarmed he could make the brother feel on the
sister's account, the better he was pleased. True to his trust and his
love, through all dangers as through all persecutions, Trudaine followed
them; and the street of their sojourn at Paris, in the perilous days of
the Terror, was the street of his sojourn too.

Danville had been astonished at the acceptance of his proffered
services; he was still more amazed when he found that the post selected
for him was one of the superintendent's places in that very office of
Secret Police in which Lomaque was employed as agent. Robespierre and
his colleagues had taken the measure of their man--he had money enough,
and local importance enough to be worth studying. They knew where he was
to be distrusted, and how he might be made useful. The affairs of the
Secret Police were the sort of affairs which an unscrupulously cunning
man was fitted to help on; and the faithful exercise of that cunning in
the service of the State was insured by the presence of Lomaque in the
office. The discarded servant was just the right sort of spy to watch
the suspected master. Thus it happened that, in the office of the Secret
Police at Paris, and under the Reign of Terror, Lomaque's old master
was, nominally, his master still--the superintendent to whom he was
ceremonially accountable, in public--the suspected man, whose slightest
words and deeds he was officially set to watch, in private.

Ever sadder and darker grew the face of Lomaque as he now pondered alone
over the changes and misfortunes of the past five years. A neighboring
church-clock striking the hour of seven aroused him from his
meditations. He arranged the confused mass of papers before him--looked
toward the door, as if expecting some one to enter--then, finding
himself still alone, recurred to the one special paper which had first
suggested his long train of gloomy thoughts. The few lines it contained
were signed in cipher, and ran thus:



"You are aware that your superintendent, Danville, obtained leave of
absence last week to attend to some affairs of his at Lyons, and that he
is not expected back just yet for a day or two. While he is away, push
on the affair of Trudaine. Collect all the evidence, and hold yourself
in readiness to act on it at a moment's notice. Don't leave the office
till you have heard from me again. If you have a copy of the Private
Instructions respecting Danville, which you wrote for me, send it to my
house. I wish to refresh my memory. Your original letter is burned."



Here the note abruptly terminated. As he folded it up and put it in his
pocket, Lomaque sighed. This was a very rare expression of feeling with
him. He leaned back in his chair, and beat his nails impatiently on the
table. Suddenly there was a faint little tap at the room door, and eight
or ten men--evidently familiars of the new French Inquisition--quietly
entered, and ranged themselves against the wall.

Lomaque nodded to two of them. "Picard and Magloire, go and sit down
at that desk. I shall want you after the rest are gone." Saying this,
Lomaque handed certain sealed and docketed papers to the other men
waiting in the room, who received them in silence, bowed, and went
out. Innocent spectators might have thought them clerks taking bills
of lading from a merchant. Who could have imagined that the giving
and receiving of Denunciations, Arrest-orders, and Death-warrants--the
providing of its doomed human meal for the all-devouring
guillotine--could have been managed so coolly and quietly, with such
unruffled calmness of official routine?

"Now," said Lomaque, turning to the two men at the desk, as the door
closed, "have you got those notes about you?" (They answered in the
affirmative.) "Picard, you have the first particulars of this affair of
Trudaine; so you must begin reading. I have sent in the reports; but we
may as well go over the evidence again from the commencement, to make
sure that nothing has been left out. If any corrections are to be made,
now is the time to make them. Read, Picard, and lose as little time as
you possibly can."

Thus admonished, Picard drew some long slips of paper from his pocket,
and began reading from them as follows:



"Minutes of evidence collected concerning Louis Trudaine, suspected, on
the denunciation of Citizen Superintendent Danville, of hostility to the
sacred cause of liberty, and of disaffection to the sovereignty of the
people. (1.) The suspected person is placed under secret observation,
and these facts are elicited: He is twice seen passing at night from his
own house to a house in the Rue de Clery. On the first night he carries
with him money--on the second, papers. He returns without either.
These particulars have been obtained through a citizen engaged to help
Trudaine in housekeeping (one of the sort called Servants in the days
of the Tyrants). This man is a good patriot, who can be trusted to watch
Trudaine's actions. (2.) The inmates of the house in the Rue de Clery
are numerous, and in some cases not so well known to the Government as
could be wished. It is found difficult to gain certain information about
the person or persons visited by Trudaine without having recourse to an
arrest. (3.) An arrest is thought premature at this preliminary stage of
the proceedings, being likely to stop the development of conspiracy, and
give warning to the guilty to fly. Order thereupon given to watch and
wait for the present. (4.) Citizen Superintendent Danville quits Paris
for a short time. The office of watching Trudaine is then taken out
of the hands of the undersigned, and is confided to his comrade,
Magloire.--Signed, PICARD. Countersigned, LOMAQUE."



Having read so far, the police agent placed his papers on the
writing-table, waited a moment for orders, and, receiving none, went
out. No change came over the sadness and perplexity of Lomaque's face.
He still beat his nails anxiously on the writing-table, and did not
even look at the second agent as he ordered the man to read his report.
Magloire produced some slips of paper precisely similar to Picard's and
read from them in the same rapid, business-like, unmodulated tones:



"Affair of Trudaine. Minutes continued. Citizen Agent Magloire having
been appointed to continue the surveillance of Trudaine, reports the
discovery of additional facts of importance. (1.) Appearances make it
probable that Trudaine meditates a third secret visit to the house
in the Rue de Clery. The proper measures are taken for observing him
closely, and the result is the implication of another person discovered
to be connected with the supposed conspiracy. This person is the sister
of Trudaine, and the wife of Citizen Superintendent Danville."


"Poor, lost creature! ah, poor, lost creature!" muttered Lomaque to
himself, sighing again, and shifting uneasily from side to side, in his
mangy old leathern armchair. Apparently, Magloire was not accustomed
to sighs, interruptions, and expressions of regret from the usually
imperturbable chief agent. He looked up from his papers with a stare
of wonder. "Go on, Magloire!" cried Lomaque, with a sudden outburst of
irritability. "Why the devil don't you go on?"--"All ready, citizen,"
returned Magloire, submissively, and proceeded:


"(2.) It is at Trudaine's house that the woman Danville's connection
with her brother's secret designs is ascertained, through the vigilance
of the before-mentioned patriot citizen. The interview of the two
suspected persons is private; their conversation is carried on in
whispers. Little can be overheard; but that little suffices to prove
that Trudaine's sister is perfectly aware of his intention to proceed
for the third time to the house in the Rue de Clery. It is further
discovered that she awaits his return, and that she then goes back
privately to her own house. (3.) Meanwhile, the strictest measures are
taken for watching the house in the Rue de Clery. It is discovered that
Trudaine's visits are paid to a man and woman known to the landlord
and lodgers by the name of Dubois. They live on the fourth floor. It is
impossible, at the time of the discovery, to enter this room, or to
see the citizen and citoyenne Dubois, without producing an undesirable
disturbance in the house and neighborhood. A police agent is left to
watch the place, while search and arrest orders are applied for. The
granting of these is accidentally delayed. When they are ultimately
obtained, it is discovered that the man and the woman are both missing.
They have not hitherto been traced. (4.) The landlord of the house is
immediately arrested, as well as the police agent appointed to watch the
premises. The landlord protests that he knows nothing of his tenants.
It is suspected, however, that he has been tampered with, as also that
Trudaine's papers, delivered to the citizen and citoyenne Dubois, are
forged passports. With these and with money, it may not be impossible
that they have already succeeded in escaping from France. The proper
measures have been taken for stopping them, if they have not yet passed
the frontiers. No further report in relation to them has yet been
received (5.) Trudaine and his sister are under perpetual surveillance,
and the undersigned holds himself ready for further orders.--Signed,
MAGLOIRE. Countersigned, LOMAQUE."


Having finished reading his notes, Magloire placed them on the
writing-table. He was evidently a favored man in the office, and he
presumed upon his position; for he ventured to make a remark, instead of
leaving the room in silence, like his predecessor Picard.

"When Citizen Danville returns to Paris," he began, "he will be rather
astonished to find that in denouncing his wife's brother he had also
unconsciously denounced his wife."

Lomaque looked up quickly, with that old weakness in his eyes which
affected them in such a strangely irregular manner on certain occasions.
Magloire knew what this symptom meant, and would have become confused if
he had not been a police agent. As it was, he quietly backed a step or
two from the table, and held his tongue.

"Friend Magloire," said Lomaque, winking mildly, "your last remark looks
to me like a question in disguise. I put questions constantly to others;
I never answer questions myself. You want to know, citizen, what our
superintendent's secret motive is for denouncing his wife's brother?
Suppose you try and find that out for yourself. It will be famous
practice for you, friend Magloire--famous practice after office hours."

"Any further orders?" inquired Magloire, sulkily.

"None in relation to the reports," returned Lomaque. "I find nothing to
alter or add on a revised hearing. But I shall have a little note ready
for you immediately. Sit down at the other desk, friend Magloire; I am
very fond of you when you are not inquisitive; pray sit down."

While addressing this polite invitation to the agent in his softest
voice, Lomaque produced his pocketbook, and drew from it a little note,
which he opened and read through attentively. It was headed: "Private
Instructions relative to Superintendent Danville," and proceeded thus:

"The undersigned can confidently assert, from long domestic experience
in Danville's household that his motive for denouncing his wife's
brother is purely a personal one, and is not in the most remote degree
connected with politics. Briefly, the facts are these: Louis Trudaine,
from the first, opposed his sister's marriage with Danville, distrusting
the latter's temper and disposition. The marriage, however, took place,
and the brother resigned himself to await results--taking the precaution
of living in the same neighborhood as his sister, to interpose, if need
be, between the crimes which the husband might commit and the sufferings
which the wife might endure. The results soon exceeded his worst
anticipations, and called for the interposition for which he had
prepared himself. He is a man of inflexible firmness, patience, and
integrity, and he makes the protection and consolation of his sister the
business of his life. He gives his brother-in-law no pretext for openly
quarreling with him. He is neither to be deceived, irritated, nor tired
out, and he is Danville's superior every way--in conduct, temper, and
capacity. Under these circumstances, it is unnecessary to say that his
brother-in-law's enmity toward him is of the most implacable kind,
and equally unnecessary to hint at the perfectly plain motive of the
denunciation.

"As to the suspicious circumstances affecting not Trudaine only, but
his sister as well, the undersigned regrets his inability, thus far, to
offer either explanation or suggestion. At this preliminary stage, the
affair seems involved in impenetrable mystery."

Lomaque read these lines through, down to his own signature at the end.
They were the duplicate Secret Instructions demanded from him in the
paper which he had been looking over before the entrance of the two
police agents. Slowly, and, as it seemed, unwillingly, he folded the
note up in a fresh sheet of paper, and was preparing to seal it when a
tap at the door stopped him. "Come in," he cried, irritably; and a man
in traveling costume, covered with dust, entered, quietly whispered
a word or two in his ear, and then went out. Lomaque started at the
whisper, and, opening his note again, hastily wrote under his signature:
"I have just heard that Danville has hastened his return to Paris, and
may be expected back to-night." Having traced these lines, he closed,
sealed, and directed the letter, and gave it to Magloire. The police
agent looked at the address as he left the room; it was "To Citizen
Robespierre, Rue Saint-Honore."

Left alone again, Lomaque rose, and walked restlessly backward and
forward, biting his nails.

"Danville comes back to-night," he said to himself, "and the crisis
comes with him. Trudaine a conspirator! Bah! conspiracy can hardly be
the answer to the riddle this time. What is?"

He took a turn or two in silence--then stopped at the open window,
looking out on what little glimpse the street afforded him of the sunset
sky. "This time five years," he said, "Trudaine was talking to me on
that bench overlooking the river; and Sister Rose was keeping poor
hatchet-faced old Lomaque's cup of coffee hot for him! Now I am
officially bound to suspect them both; perhaps to arrest them;
perhaps--I wish this job had fallen into other hands. I don't want it--I
don't want it at any price!"

He returned to the writing-table and sat down to his papers, with the
dogged air of a man determined to drive away vexing thoughts by dint
of sheer hard work. For more than an hour he labored on resolutely,
munching a bit of dry bread from time to time. Then he paused a little,
and began to think again. Gradually the summer twilight faded, and the
room grew dark.

"Perhaps we shall tide over to-night, after all--who knows?" said
Lomaque, ringing his handbell for lights. They were brought in, and with
them ominously returned the police agent Magloire with a small sealed
packet. It contained an arrest-order and a tiny three-cornered note,
looking more like a love-letter, or a lady's invitation to a party,
than anything else. Lomaque opened the note eagerly and read these lines
neatly written, and signed with Robespierre's initials--M. R.--formed
elegantly in cipher:

"Arrest Trudaine and his sister to-night. On second thoughts, I am not
sure, if Danville comes back in time to be present, that it may not
be all the better. He is unprepared for his wife's arrest. Watch him
closely when it takes place, and report privately to me. I am afraid he
is a vicious man; and of all things I abhor Vice."

"Any more work for me to-night?" asked Magloire, with a yawn.

"Only an arrest," replied Lomaque. "Collect our men; and when you're
ready get a coach at the door."

"We were just going to supper," grumbled Magloire to himself, as he went
out. "The devil seize the Aristocrats! They're all in such a hurry to
get to the guillotine that they won't even give a man time to eat his
victuals in peace!"

"There's no choice now," muttered Lomaque, angrily thrusting the
arrest-order and the three-cornered note into his pocket. "His father
was the saving of me; he himself welcomed me like an equal; his sister
treated me like a gentleman, as the phrase went in those days; and
now--"

He stopped and wiped his forehead--then unlocked his desk, produced a
bottle of brandy, and poured himself out a glass of the liquor, which he
drank by sips, slowly.

"I wonder whether other men get softer-hearted as they grow older!" he
said. "I seem to do so, at any rate. Courage! courage! what must be,
must. If I risked my head to do it, I couldn't stop this arrest. Not a
man in the office but would be ready to execute it, if I wasn't."

Here the rumble of carriage-wheels sounded outside.

"There's the coach!" exclaimed Lomaque, locking up the brandy-bottle,
and taking his hat. "After all, as this arrest is to be made, it's as
well for them that I should make it."

Consoling himself as he best could with this reflection, Chief Police
Agent Lomaque blew out the candles, and quitted the room.




CHAPTER II.

Ignorant of the change in her husband's plans, which was to bring him
back to Paris a day before the time that had been fixed for his return,
Sister Rose had left her solitary home to spend the evening with her
brother. They had sat talking together long after sunset, and had let
the darkness steal on them insensibly, as people will who are only
occupied with quiet, familiar conversation. Thus it happened, by a
curious coincidence, that just as Lomaque was blowing out his candles at
the office Rose was lighting the reading-lamp at her brother's lodgings.

Five years of disappointment and sorrow had sadly changed her to outward
view. Her face looked thinner and longer; the once delicate red and
white of her complexion was gone; her figure had wasted under the
influence of some weakness, which had already made her stoop a little
when she walked. Her manner had lost its maiden shyness, only to become
unnaturally quiet and subdued. Of all the charms which had so fatally,
yet so innocently, allured her heartless husband, but one remained--the
winning gentleness of her voice. It might be touched now and then with a
note of sadness, but the soft attraction of its even, natural tone still
remained. In the marring of all other harmonies, this one harmony had
been preserved unchanged. Her brother, though his face was careworn, and
his manner sadder than of old, looked less altered from his former
self. It is the most fragile material which soonest shows the flaw. The
world's idol, Beauty, holds its frailest tenure of existence in the one
Temple where we most love to worship it.

"And so you think, Louis, that our perilous undertaking has really ended
well by this time?" said Rose, anxiously, as she lighted the lamp and
placed the glass shade over it. "What a relief it is only to hear you
say you think we have succeeded at last!"

"I said I hope, Rose," replied her brother.

"Well, even hoped is a great word from you, Louis--a great word from any
one in this fearful city, and in these days of Terror."

She stopped suddenly, seeing her brother raise his hand in warning. They
looked at each other in silence and listened. The sound of footsteps
going slowly past the house--ceasing for a moment just beyond it--then
going on again--came through the open window. There was nothing else,
out-of-doors or in, to disturb the silence of the night--the deadly
silence of Terror which, for months past, had hung over Paris. It was a
significant sign of the times, that even a passing footstep, sounding
a little strangely at night, was subject for suspicion, both to brother
and sister--so common a subject, that they suspended their conversation
as a matter of course, without exchanging a word of explanation, until
the tramp of the strange footsteps had died away.

"Louis," continued Rose, dropping her voice to a whisper, after nothing
more was audible, "when may I trust our secret to my husband?"

"Not yet!" rejoined Trudaine, earnestly. "Not a word, not a hint of it,
till I give you leave. Remember, Rose, you promised silence from the
first. Everything depends on your holding that promise sacred till I
release you from it."

"I will hold it sacred; I will indeed, at all hazards, under all
provocations," she answered.

"That is quite enough to reassure me--and now, love, let us change the
subject. Even these walls may have ears, and the closed door yonder
may be no protection." He looked toward it uneasily while he spoke.
"By-the-by, I have come round to your way of thinking, Rose, about that
new servant of mine--there is something false in his face. I wish I had
been as quick to detect it as you were."

Rose glanced at him affrightedly. "Has he done anything suspicious? Have
you caught him watching you? Tell me the worst, Louis."

"Hush! hush! my dear, not so loud. Don't alarm yourself; he has done
nothing suspicious."

"Turn him off--pray, pray turn him off, before it is too late!"

"And be denounced by him, in revenge, the first night he goes to his
Section. You forget that servants and masters are equal now. I am not
supposed to keep a servant at all. I have a citizen living with me
who lays me under domestic obligations, for which I make a pecuniary
acknowledgment. No! no! if I do anything, I must try if I can't entrap
him into giving me warning. But we have got to another unpleasant
subject already--suppose I change the topic again? You will find a
little book on that table there, in the corner--tell me what you think
of it."

The book was a copy of Corneille's "Cid," prettily bound in blue
morocco. Rose was enthusiastic in her praises. "I found it in a
bookseller's shop, yesterday," said her brother, "and bought it as a
present for you. Corneille is not an author to compromise any one, even
in these times. Don't you remember saying the other day that you
felt ashamed of knowing but little of our greatest dramatist?" Rose
remembered well, and smiled almost as happily as in the old times over
her present. "There are some good engravings at the beginning of each
act," continued Trudaine, directing her attention rather earnestly to
the illustrations, and then suddenly leaving her side when he saw that
she became interested in looking at them.

He went to the window--listened--then drew aside the curtain, and looked
up and down the street. No living soul was in sight. "I must have been
mistaken," he thought, returning hastily to his sister; "but I certainly
fancied I was followed in my walk to-day by a spy."

"I wonder," asked Rose, still busy over her book, "I wonder, Louis,
whether my husband would let me go with you to see 'Le Cid' the next
time it is acted."

"No!" cried a voice at the door; "not if you went on your knees to ask
him."

Rose turned round with a scream. There stood her husband on the
threshold, scowling at her, with his hat on, and his hands thrust
doggedly into his pockets. Trudaine's servant announced him, with an
insolent smile, during the pause that followed the discovery. "Citizen
Superintendent Danville, to visit the citoyenne, his wife," said the
fellow, making a mock bow to his master.

Rose looked at her brother, then advanced a few paces toward the door.
"This is a surprise," she said, faintly; "has anything happened?
We--we didn't expect you." Her voice failed her as she saw her husband
advancing, pale to his very lips with suppressed anger.

"How dare you come here, after what I told you?" he asked, in quick, low
tones.

She shrank at his voice almost as if he had struck her. The blood flew
into her brother's face as he noticed the action; but he controlled
himself, and, taking her hand, led her in silence to a chair.

"I forbid you to sit down in his house," said Danville, advancing still;
"I order you to come back with me! Do you hear? I order you."

He was approaching nearer to her, when he caught Trudaine's eye fixed on
him, and stopped. Rose started up, and placed herself between them.

"Oh, Charles, Charles!" she said to her husband, "be friends with Louis
to-night, and be kind again to me. I have a claim to ask that much of
you, though you may not think it!"

He turned away from her, and laughed contemptuously. She tried to speak
again, but Trudaine touched her on the arm, and gave her a warning look.

"Signals!" exclaimed Danville; "secret signals between you!"

His eye, as he glanced suspiciously at his wife, fell on Trudaine's
gift-book, which she still held unconsciously.

"What book is that?" he asked.

"Only a play of Corneille's," answered Rose; "Louis has just made me a
present of it."

At this avowal Danville's suppressed anger burst beyond all control.

"Give it him back!" he cried, in a voice of fury. "You shall take no
presents from him; the venom of the household spy soils everything he
touches. Give it him back!" She hesitated. "You won't?" He tore the book
from her with an oath, threw it on the floor, and set his foot on it.

"Oh, Louis! Louis! for God's sake, remember."

Trudaine was stepping forward as the book fell to the floor. At the same
moment his sister threw her arms round him. He stopped, turning from
fiery red to ghastly pale.

"No, no, Louis!" she said, clasping him closer; "not after five years'
patience. No--no!"

He gently detached her arms.

"You are right, love. Don't be afraid; it is all over now."

Saying that, he put her from him, and in silence took up the book from
the floor.

"Won't _that_ offend you even?" said Danville, with an insolent smile.
"You have a wonderful temper--any other man would have called me out!"

Trudaine looked back at him steadily; and taking out his handkerchief,
passed it over the soiled cover of the book.

"If I could wipe the stain of your blood off my conscience as easily as
I can wipe the stain of your boot off this book," he said quietly, "you
should not live another hour. Don't cry, Rose," he continued, turning
again to his sister: "I will take care of your book for you until you
can keep it yourself."

"You will do this! you will do that!" cried Danville, growing more
and more exasperated, and letting his anger got the better even of his
cunning now. "Talk less confidently of the future--you don't know what
it has in store for you. Govern your tongue when you are in my presence;
a day may come when you will want my help--my help; do you hear that?"

Trudaine turned his face from his sister, as if he feared to let her see
it when those words were spoken.

"The man who followed me to-day was a spy--Danville's spy!" That thought
flashed across his mind, but he gave it no utterance. There was an
instant's pause of silence; and through it there came heavily on the
still night air the rumbling of distant wheels. The sound advanced
nearer and nearer--advanced and ceased under the window.

Danville hurried to it, and looked out eagerly. "I have not hastened my
return without reason. I wouldn't have missed this arrest for anything!"
thought he, peering into the night.

The stars were out, but there was no moon. He could not recognize either
the coach or the persons who got out of it, and he turned again into the
interior of the room. His wife had sunk into a chair, her brother was
locking up in a cabinet the book which he had promised to take care of
for her. The dead silence made the noise of slowly ascending footsteps
on the stairs painfully audible. At last the door opened softly.

"Citizen Danville, health and fraternity!" said Lomaque, appearing
in the doorway, followed by his agents. "Citizen Louis Trudaine?" he
continued, beginning with the usual form.

Rose started out of her chair; but her brother's hand was on her lips
before she could speak.

"My name is Louis Trudaine," he answered.

"Charles!" cried his sister, breaking from him and appealing to her
husband, "who are these men? What are they here for?"

He gave her no answer.

"Louis Trudaine," said Lomaque, slowly, drawing the order from his
pocket, "in the name of the Republic, I arrest you."

"Rose, come back," cried Trudaine.

It was too late; she had broken from him, and in the recklessness of
terror, had seized her husband by the arm.

"Save him!" she cried. "Save him, by all you hold dearest in the world!
You are that man's superior, Charles--order him from the room!"

Danville roughly shook her hand off his arm.

"Lomaque is doing his duty. Yes," he added, with a glance of
malicious triumph at Trudaine, "yes, doing his duty. Look at me as you
please--your looks won't move me. I denounced you! I admit it--I glory
in it! I have rid myself of an enemy, and the State of a bad citizen.
Remember your secret visits to the house in the Rue de Clery!"

His wife uttered a cry of horror. She seized his arm again with both
hands--frail, trembling hands--that seemed suddenly nerved with all the
strength of a man's.

"Come here--come here! I must and will speak to you!"

She dragged him by main force a few paces back, toward an unoccupied
corner of the room. With deathly cheeks and wild eyes she raised herself
on tiptoe, and put her lips to her husband's ear. At that instant
Trudaine called to her:

"Rose, if you speak I am lost!"

She stopped at the sound of his voice, dropped her hold on her husband's
arm, and faced her brother, shuddering.

"Rose," he continued, "you have promised, and your promise is sacred.
If you prize your honor, if you love me, come here--come here, and be
silent."

He held out his hand. She ran to him; and, laying her head on his bosom,
burst into a passion of tears.

Danville turned uneasily toward the police agents. "Remove your
prisoner," he said. "You have done your duty here."

"Only half of it," retorted Lomaque, eying him attentively. "Rose
Danville--"

"My wife!" exclaimed the other. "What about my wife?"

"Rose Danville," continued Lomaque, impassibly, "you are included in the
arrest of Louis Trudaine."

Rose raised her head quickly from her brother's breast. His firmness
had deserted him--he was trembling. She heard him whispering to himself,
"Rose, too! Oh, my God! I was not prepared for that." She heard these
words, and dashed the tears from her eyes, and kissed him, saying:

"I am glad of it, Louis. We risked all together--we shall now suffer
together. I am glad of it!"

Danville looked incredulously at Lomaque, after the first shock of
astonishment was over.

"Impossible!" he exclaimed. "I never denounced my wife. There is some
mistake; you have exceeded your orders."

"Silence!" retorted Lomaque, imperiously. "Silence, citizen, and respect
to a decree of the Republic!"

"You blackguard! show me the arrest-order!" said Danville. "Who has
dared to denounce my wife?"

"You have!" said Lomaque, turning on him with a grin of contempt.
"You--and 'blackguard' back in your teeth! You, in denouncing her
brother! Aha! we work hard in our office; we don't waste time in
calling names--we make discoveries. If Trudaine is guilty, your wife is
implicated in his guilt. We know it; and we arrest her."

"I resist the arrest," cried Danville. "I am the authority here. Who
opposes me?"

The impassible chief agent made no answer. Some new noise in the street
struck his quick ear. He ran to the window and looked out eagerly.

"Who opposes me?" reiterated Danville.

"Hark!" exclaimed Lomaque, raising his hand. "Silence, and listen!"

The heavy, dull tramp of men marching together became audible as he
spoke. Voices humming low and in unison the Marseillaise hymn,
joined solemnly with the heavy, regular footfalls. Soon the flare of
torch-light began to glimmer redder and redder under the dim, starlight
sky.

"Do you hear that? Do you see the advancing torch-light?" cried Lomaque,
pointing exultingly into the street. "Respect to the national hymn,
and to the man who holds in the hollow of his hand the destinies of all
France! Hat off, Citizen Danville! Robespierre is in the street. His
bodyguard, the Hard-hitters, are lighting him on his way to the Jacobin
Club! Who shall oppose you, did you say? Your master and mine; the
man whose signature is at the bottom of this order--the man who with
a scratch of his pen can send both our heads rolling together into the
sack of the guillotine! Shall I call to him as he passes the house?
Shall I tell him that Superintendent Danville resists me in making an
arrest? Shall I? Shall I?" And in the immensity of his contempt, Lomaque
seemed absolutely to rise in stature, as he thrust the arrest order
under Danville's eyes and pointed to the signature with the head of his
stick.

Rose looked round in terror, as Lomaque spoke his last words--looked
round, and saw her husband recoil before the signature on the arrest
order, as if the guillotine itself had suddenly arisen before him.
Her brother felt her shrinking back in his arms, and trembled for the
preservation of her self-control if the terror and suspense of the
arrest lasted any longer.

"Courage, Rose, courage!" he said. "You have behaved nobly; you must not
fail now. No, no! Not a word more. Not a word till I am able to think
clearly again, and to decide what is best. Courage, love; our lives
depend on it. Citizen," he continued, addressing himself to Lomaque,
"proceed with your duty--we are ready."

The heavy marching footsteps outside were striking louder and louder on
the ground; the chanting voices were every moment swelling in volume;
the dark street was flaming again with the brightening torch-light, as
Lomaque, under pretext of giving Trudaine his hat, came close to him,
and, turning his back toward Danville, whispered: "I have not forgotten
the eve of the wedding and the bench on the river bank."

Before Trudaine could answer, he had taken Rose's cloak and hood from
one of his assistants, and was helping her on with it. Danville, still
pale and trembling, advanced a step when he saw these preparations for
departure, and addressed a word or two to his wife; but he spoke in
low tones, and the fast-advancing march of feet and sullen low roar of
singing outside drowned his voice. An oath burst from his lips, and he
struck his fist, in impotent fury, on a table near him.

"The seals are set on everything in this room and in the bedroom," said
Magloire, approaching Lomaque, who nodded and signed to him to bring up
the other police agents at the door.

"Ready," cried Magloire, coming forward immediately with his men, and
raising his voice to make himself heard. "Where to?"

Robespierre and his Hard-hitters were passing the house. The smoke of
the torch-light was rolling in at the window; the tramping footsteps
struck heavier and heavier on the ground; the low sullen roar of the
Marseillaise was swelling to its loudest, as Lomaque referred for a
moment to his arrest-order, and then answered:

"To the prison of St. Lazare!"



CHAPTER III.

The head jailer of St. Lazare stood in the outer hall of the prison, two
days after the arrest at Trudaine's lodgings, smoking his morning pipe.
Looking toward the courtyard gate, he saw the wicket opened, and a
privileged man let in, whom he soon recognized as the chief agent of
the second section of Secret Police. "Why, friend Lomaque," cried the
jailer, advancing toward the courtyard, "what brings you here this
morning, business or pleasure?"

"Pleasure, this time, citizen. I have an idle hour or two to spare for a
walk. I find myself passing the prison, and I can't resist calling in
to see how my friend the head jailer is getting on." Lomaque spoke in
a surprisingly brisk and airy manner. His eyes were suffering under a
violent fit of weakness and winking; but he smiled, notwithstanding,
with an air of the most inveterate cheerfulness. Those old enemies of
his, who always distrusted him most when his eyes were most affected,
would have certainly disbelieved every word of the friendly speech he
had just made, and would have assumed it as a matter of fact that his
visit to the head jailer had some specially underhand business at the
bottom of it.

"How am I getting on?" said the jailer, shaking his head. "Overworked,
friend--overworked. No idle hours in our department. Even the guillotine
is getting too slow for us!"

"Sent off your batch of prisoners for trial this morning?" asked
Lomaque, with an appearance of perfect unconcern.

"No; they're just going," answered the other. "Come and have a look at
them." He spoke as if the prisoners were a collection of pictures on
view, or a set of dresses just made up. Lomaque nodded his head, still
with his air of happy, holiday carelessness. The jailer led the way
to an inner hall; and, pointing lazily with his pipe-stem, said: "Our
morning batch, citizen, just ready for the baking."

In one corner of the hall were huddled together more than thirty men and
women of all ranks and ages; some staring round them with looks of blank
despair; some laughing and gossiping recklessly. Near them lounged
a guard of "Patriots," smoking, spitting, and swearing. Between the
patriots and the prisoners sat, on a rickety stool, the second jailer--a
humpbacked man, with an immense red mustache--finishing his breakfast of
broad beans, which he scooped out of a basin with his knife, and washed
down with copious draughts of wine from a bottle. Carelessly as Lomaque
looked at the shocking scene before him, his quick eyes contrived to
take note of every prisoner's face, and to descry in a few minutes
Trudaine and his sister standing together at the back of the group.

"Now then, Apollo!" cried the head jailer, addressing his subordinate
by a facetious prison nickname, "don't be all day starting that
trumpery batch of yours. And harkye, friend, I have leave of absence, on
business, at my Section this afternoon. So it will be your duty to read
the list for the guillotine, and chalk the prisoners' doors before the
cart comes to-morrow morning. 'Ware the bottle, Apollo, to-day; 'ware
the bottle, for fear of accidents with the death-list to-morrow."

"Thirsty July weather, this--eh, citizen?" said Lomaque, leaving the
head jailer, and patting the hunchback in the friendliest manner on the
shoulder. "Why, how you have got your batch huddled up together this
morning! Shall I help you to shove them into marching order? My time is
quite at your disposal. This is a holiday morning with me!"

"Ha, ha, ha! what a jolly dog he is on his holiday morning!" exclaimed
the head jailer, as Lomaque--apparently taking leave of his natural
character altogether in the exhilaration of an hour's unexpected
leisure--began pushing and pulling the prisoners into rank, with
humorous mock apologies, at which not the officials only, but many of
the victims themselves--reckless victims of a reckless tyranny--laughed
heartily. Persevering to the last in his practical jest, Lomaque
contrived to get close to Trudaine for a minute, and to give him one
significant look before he seized him by the shoulders, like the rest.
"Now, then, rear-guard," cried Lomaque, pushing Trudaine on, "close the
line of march, and mind you keep step with your young woman there. Pluck
up your spirits, citoyenne! one gets used to everything in this world,
even to the guillotine!"

While he was speaking and pushing at the same time, Trudaine felt a
piece of paper slip quickly between his neck and his cravat. "Courage!"
he whispered, pressing his sister's hand, as he saw her shuddering under
the assumed brutality of Lomaque's joke.

Surrounded by the guard of "Patriots," the procession of prisoners
moved slowly into the outer courtyard, on its way to the revolutionary
tribunal, the humpbacked jailer bringing up the rear. Lomaque was
about to follow at some little distance, but the head jailer hospitably
expostulated. "What a hurry you're in!" said he. "Now that incorrigible
drinker, my second in command, has gone off with his batch, I don't mind
asking you to step in and have a drop of wine."

"Thank you," answered Lomaque; "but I have rather a fancy for hearing
the trial this morning. Suppose I come back afterward? What time do you
go to your Section? At two o'clock, eh? Good! I shall try if I can't
get here soon after one." With these words he nodded and went out. The
brilliant sunlight in the courtyard made him wink faster than ever. Had
any of his old enemies been with him, they would have whispered within
themselves, "If you mean to come back at all, Citizen Lomaque, it will
not be soon after one!"

On his way through the streets, the chief agent met one or two police
office friends, who delayed his progress; so that when he arrived at the
revolutionary tribunal the trials of the day were just about to begin.

The principal article of furniture in the Hall of Justice was a long,
clumsy, deal table, covered with green baize. At the head of this
table sat the president and his court, with their hats on, backed by
a heterogeneous collection of patriots officially connected in various
ways with the proceedings that were to take place. Below the front of
the table, a railed-off space, with a gallery beyond, was appropriated
to the general public--mostly represented, as to the gallery, on
this occasion, by women, all sitting together on forms, knitting,
shirt-mending, and baby-linen-making, as coolly as if they were at home.
Parallel with the side of the table furthest from the great door
of entrance was a low platform railed off, on which the prisoners,
surrounded by their guard, were now assembled to await their trial. The
sun shone in brightly from a high window, and a hum of ceaseless talking
pervaded the hall cheerfully as Lomaque entered it. He was a privileged
man here, as at the prison; and he made his way in by a private door, so
as to pass to the prisoners' platform, and to walk round it, before he
got to a place behind the president's chair. Trudaine, standing with
his sister on the outermost limits of the group, nodded significantly as
Lomaque looked up at him for an instant. He had contrived, on his way to
the tribunal, to get an opportunity of reading the paper which the chief
agent had slipped into his cravat. It contained these lines:

"I have just discovered who the citizen and citoyenne Dubois are. There
is no chance for you but to confess everything. By that means you may
inculpate a certain citizen holding authority, and may make it his
interest, if he loves his own life, to save yours and your sister's."

Arrived at the back of the president's chair, Lomaque recognized his two
trusty subordinates, Magloire and Picard, waiting among the assembled
patriot officials, to give their evidence. Beyond them, leaning against
the wall, addressed by no one, and speaking to no one, stood the
superintendent, Danville. Doubt and suspense were written in every line
of his face; the fretfulness of an uneasy mind expressed itself in his
slightest gesture--even in his manner of passing a handkerchief from
time to time over his face, on which the perspiration was gathering
thick and fast already.

"Silence!" cried the usher of the court for the time being--a
hoarse-voiced man in top-boots with a huge saber buckled to his side,
and a bludgeon in his hand. "Silence for the Citizen President!" he
reiterated, striking his bludgeon on the table.

The president rose and proclaimed that the sitting for the day had
begun; then sat down again.

The momentary silence which followed was interrupted by a sudden
confusion among the prisoners on the platform. Two of the guards sprang
in among them. There was the thump of a heavy fall--a scream of terror
from some of the female prisoners--then another dead silence, broken by
one of the guards, who walked across the hall with a bloody knife in his
hand, and laid it on the table. "Citizen President," he said, "I have to
report that one of the prisoners has just stabbed himself." There was
a murmuring exclamation, "Is that all?" among the women spectators, as
they resumed their work. Suicide at the bar of justice was no uncommon
occurrence, under the Reign of Terror.

"Name?" asked the president, quietly taking up his pen and opening a
book.

"Martigne," answered the humpbacked jailer, coming forward to the table.

"Description?"

"Ex-royalist coach-maker to the tyrant Capet."

"Accusation?"

"Conspiracy in prison."

The president nodded, and entered in the book: "Martigne, coachmaker.
Accused of conspiring in prison. Anticipated course of law by suicide.
Action accepted as sufficient confession of guilt. Goods confiscated.
1st Thermidor, year two of the Republic."

"Silence!" cried the man with the bludgeon, as the president dropped a
little sand on the entry, and signing to the jailer that he might remove
the dead body, closed the book.

"Any special cases this morning?" resumed the president, looking round
at the group behind him.

"There is one," said Lomaque, making his way to the back of the official
chair. "Will it be convenient to you, citizen, to take the case of Louis
Trudaine and Rose Danville first? Two of my men are detained here as
witnesses, and their time is valuable to the Republic."

The president marked a list of names before him, and handed it to the
crier or usher, placing the figures one and two against Louis Trudaine
and Rose Danville.

While Lomaque was backing again to his former place behind the chair,
Danville approached and whispered to him, "There is a rumor that secret
information has reached you about the citizen and citoyenne Dubois. Is
it true? Do you know who they are?"

"Yes," answered Lomaque; "but I have superior orders to keep the
information to myself just at present."

The eagerness with which Danville put his question, and the
disappointment he showed on getting no satisfactory answer to it, were
of a nature to satisfy the observant chief agent that his superintendent
was really as ignorant as he appeared to be on the subject of the man
and woman Dubois. That one mystery, at any rate was still, for Danville,
a mystery unrevealed.

"Louis Trudaine! Rose Danville!" shouted the crier, with another rap of
his bludgeon.

The two came forward, at the appeal, to the front railing of the
platform. The first sight of her judges, the first shock on confronting
the pitiless curiosity of the audience, seemed to overwhelm Rose. She
turned from deadly pale to crimson, then to pale again, and hid her face
on her brother's shoulder. How fast she heard his heart throbbing! How
the tears filled her eyes as she felt that his fear was all for her!

"Now," said the president, writing down their names. "Denounced by
whom?"

Magloire and Picard stepped forward to the table. The first
answered--"By Citizen Superintendent Danville."

The reply made a great stir and sensation among both prisoners and
audience.

"Accused of what?" pursued the president.

"The male prisoner, of conspiracy against the Republic; the female
prisoner, of criminal knowledge of the same."

"Produce your proofs in answer to this order."

Picard and Magloire opened their minutes of evidence, and read to the
president the same particulars which they had formerly read to Lomaque
in the secret police office.

"Good," said the president, when they had done, "we need trouble
ourselves with nothing more than the identifying of the citizen and
citoyenne Dubois, which, of course, you are prepared for. Have you heard
the evidence?" he continued, turning to the prisoners; while Picard and
Magloire consulted together in whispers, looking perplexedly toward the
chief agent, who stood silent behind them. "Have you heard the evidence,
prisoners? Do you wish to say anything? If you do, remember that the
time of this tribunal is precious, and that you will not be suffered to
waste it."

"I demand permission to speak for myself and for my sister," answered
Trudaine. "My object is to save the time of the tribunal by making a
confession."

The faint whispering, audible among the women spectators a moment
before, ceased instantaneously as he pronounced the word confession. In
the breathless silence, his low, quiet tones penetrated to the remotest
corners of the hall; while, suppressing externally all evidences of the
death-agony of hope within him, he continued his address in these words:

"I confess my secret visits to the house in the Rue de Clery. I confess
that the persons whom I went to see are the persons pointed at in the
evidence. And, lastly, I confess that my object in communicating with
them as I did was to supply them with the means of leaving France. If
I had acted from political motives to the political prejudice of the
existing government, I admit that I should be guilty of that conspiracy
against the Republic with which I am charged. But no political purpose
animated, no political necessity urged me, in performing the action
which has brought me to the bar of this tribunal. The persons whom I
aided in leaving France were without political influence or political
connections. I acted solely from private motives of humanity toward them
and toward others--motives which a good republican may feel, and yet not
turn traitor to the welfare of his country."

"Are you ready to inform the court, next, who the man and woman Dubois
really are?" inquired the president, impatiently.

"I am ready," answered Trudaine. "But first I desire to say one word in
reference to my sister, charged here at the bar with me." His voice grew
less steady, and, for the first time, his color began to change, as
Rose lifted her face from his shoulder and looked up at him eagerly.
"I implore the tribunal to consider my sister as innocent of all active
participation in what is charged against me as a crime--" He went
on. "Having spoken with candor about myself, I have some claim to be
believed when I speak of her; when I assert that she neither did help me
nor could help me. If there be blame, it is mine only; if punishment, it
is I alone who should suffer."

He stopped suddenly, and grew confused. It was easy to guard himself
from the peril of looking at Rose, but he could not escape the hard
trial to his self-possession of hearing her, if she spoke. Just as
he pronounced the last sentence, she raised her face again from his
shoulder, and eagerly whispered to him:

"No, no, Louis! Not that sacrifice, after all the others--not that,
though you should force me into speaking to them myself!"

She abruptly quitted her hold of him, and fronted the whole court in
an instant. The railing in front of her shook with the quivering of
her arms and hands as she held by it to support herself! Her hair lay
tangled on her shoulders; her face had assumed a strange fixedness; her
gentle blue eyes, so soft and tender at all other times, were lit up
wildly. A low hum of murmured curiosity and admiration broke from the
women of the audience. Some rose eagerly from the benches; others cried:

"Listen, listen! she is going to speak!"

She did speak. Silvery and pure the sweet voice, sweeter than ever in
sadness, stole its way through the gross sounds--through the coarse
humming and the hissing whispers.

"My lord the president," began the poor girl firmly. Her next words were
drowned in a volley of hisses from the women.

"Ah! aristocrat, aristocrat! None of your accursed titles here!" was
their shrill cry at her. She fronted that cry, she fronted the fierce
gestures which accompanied it, with the steady light still in her eyes,
with the strange rigidity still fastened on her face. She would have
spoken again through the uproar and execration, but her brother's voice
overpowered her.

"Citizen president," he cried, "I have not concluded. I demand leave to
complete my confession. I implore the tribunal to attach no importance
to what my sister says. The trouble and terror of this day have shaken
her intellects. She is not responsible for her words--I assert it
solemnly, in the face of the whole court!"

The blood flew up into his white face as he made the asseveration. Even
at that supreme moment the great heart of the man reproached him for
yielding himself to a deception, though the motive of it was to save his
sister's life.

"Let her speak! let her speak!" exclaimed the women, as Rose, without
moving, without looking at her brother, without seeming even to have
heard what he said, made a second attempt to address her judges, in
spite of Trudaine's interposition.

"Silence!" shouted the man with the bludgeon. "Silence, you women! the
citizen president is going to speak."

"The prisoner Trudaine has the ear of the court," said the president,
"and may continue his confession. If the female prisoner wishes to
speak, she may be heard afterward. I enjoin both the accused persons
to make short work of it with their addresses to me, or they will
make their case worse instead of better. I command silence among the
audience, and if I am not obeyed, I will clear the hall. Now, prisoner
Trudaine, I invite you to proceed. No more about your sister; let her
speak for herself. Your business and ours is with the man and woman
Dubois. Are you, or are you not, ready to tell the court who they are?"

"I repeat that I am ready," answered Trudaine. "The citizen Dubois is
a servant. The woman Dubois is the mother of the man who denounces
me--Superintendent Danville."

A low, murmuring, rushing sound of hundreds of exclaiming voices, all
speaking, half-suppressedly, at the same moment, followed the delivery
of the answer. No officer of the court attempted to control the outburst
of astonishment. The infection of it spread to the persons on the
platform, to the crier himself, to the judges of the tribunal, lounging,
but the moment before, so carelessly silent in their chairs. When the
noise was at length quelled, it was subdued in the most instantaneous
manner by one man, who shouted from the throng behind the president's
chair:

"Clear the way there! Superintendent Danville is taken ill!"

A vehement whispering and contending of many voices interrupting each
other, followed; then a swaying among the assembly of official people;
then a great stillness; then the sudden appearance of Danville, alone,
at the table.

The look of him, as he turned his ghastly face toward the audience,
silenced and steadied them in an instant, just as they were on the point
of falling into fresh confusion. Every one stretched forward eagerly to
hear what he would say. His lips moved; but the few words that fell from
them were inaudible, except to the persons who happened to be close by
him. Having spoken, he left the table supported by a police agent,
who was seen to lead him toward the private door of the court, and,
consequently, also toward the prisoners' platform. He stopped, however,
halfway, quickly turned his face from the prisoners, and pointing toward
the public door at the opposite side of the hall, caused himself to be
led out into the air by that direction. When he had gone the president,
addressing himself partly to Trudaine and partly to the audience, said:

"The Citizen Superintendent Danville has been overcome by the heat
in the court. He has retired by my desire, under the care of a police
agent, to recover in the open air; pledging himself to me to come back
and throw a new light on the extraordinary and suspicious statement
which the prisoner has just made. Until the return of Citizen Danville,
I order the accused, Trudaine, to suspend any further acknowledgment
of complicity which he may have to address to me. This matter must be
cleared up before other matters are entered on. Meanwhile, in order
that the time of the tribunal may not be wasted, I authorize the female
prisoner to take this opportunity of making any statement concerning
herself which she may wish to address to the judges."

"Silence him!" "Remove him out of court!" "Gag him!" "Guillotine him!"
These cries rose from the audience the moment the president had done
speaking. They were all directed at Trudaine, who had made a last
desperate effort to persuade his sister to keep silence, and had been
detected in the attempt by the spectators.

"If the prisoner speaks another word to his sister, remove him," said
the president, addressing the guard round the platform.

"Good! we shall hear her at last. Silence! silence!" exclaimed the
women, settling themselves comfortably on their benches, and preparing
to resume their work.

"Rose Danville, the court is waiting to hear you," said the president,
crossing his legs and leaning back luxuriously in his large armchair.

Amid all the noise and confusion of the last few minutes, Rose had stood
ever in the same attitude, with that strangely fixed expression never
altering on her face but once. When her husband made his way to the
side of the table and stood there prominently alone, her lips trembled a
little, and a faint shade of color passed swiftly over her cheeks. Even
that slight change had vanished now--she was paler, stiller, more widely
altered from her former self than ever, as she faced the president and
said these words:

"I wish to follow my brother's example and make my confession, as he has
made his. I would rather he had spoken for me; but he is too generous
to say any words except such as he thinks may save me from sharing his
punishment. I refuse to be saved, unless he is saved with me. Where
he goes when he leaves this place, I will go; what he suffers, I will
suffer; if he is to die, I believe God will grant me the strength to die
resignedly with him!"

She paused for a moment, and half turned toward Trudaine--then checked
herself instantly and went on: "This is what I now wish to say, as to my
share in the offense charged against my brother. Some time ago, he told
me one day that he had seen my husband's mother in Paris, disguised as
a poor woman; that he had spoken to her, and forced her to acknowledge
herself. Up to this time we had all felt certain that she had left
France, because she held old-fashioned opinions which it is dangerous
for people to hold now--had left France before we came to Paris. She
told my brother that she had indeed gone (with an old, tried servant
of the family to help and protect her) as far as Marseilles; and that,
finding unforeseen difficulty there in getting further, she had taken it
as a warning from Providence not to desert her son, of whom she was very
passionately fond, and from whom she had been most unwilling to depart.
Instead of waiting in exile for quieter times, she determined to go and
hide herself in Paris, knowing her son was going there too. She assumed
the name of her old and faithful servant, who declined to the last to
leave her unprotected; and she proposed to live in the strictest secrecy
and retirement, watching, unknown, the career of her son, and ready at
a moment's notice to disclose herself to him, when the settlement of
public affairs might reunite her safely to her beloved child. My brother
thought this plan full of danger, both for herself, for her son, and for
the honest old man who was risking his head for his mistress's sake. I
thought so too; and in an evil hour I said to Louis: 'Will you try
in secret to get my husband's mother away, and see that her faithful
servant makes her really leave France this time?' I wrongly asked my
brother to do this for a selfish reason of my own--a reason connected
with my married life, which has not been a happy one. I had not
succeeded in gaining my husband's affection, and was not treated kindly
by him. My brother--who has always loved me far more dearly, I am
afraid, than I have ever deserved--my brother increased his kindness
to me, seeing me treated unkindly by my husband. This made ill-blood
between them. My thought, when I asked my brother to do for me what
I have said, was, that if we two in secret saved my husband's mother,
without danger to him, from imperiling herself and her son, we should,
when the time came for speaking of what we had done, appear to my
husband in a new and better light. I should have shown how well I
deserved his love, and Louis would have shown how well he deserved his
brother-in-law's gratitude; and so we should have made home happy at
last, and all three have lived together affectionately. This was my
thought; and when I told it to my brother, and asked him if there would
be much risk, out of his kindness and indulgence toward me, he said
'No.' He had so used me to accept sacrifices for my happiness that I let
him endanger himself to help me in my little household plan. I repent
this bitterly now; I ask his pardon with my whole heart. If he is
acquitted, I will try to show myself worthier of his love. If he is
found guilty, I, too, will go to the scaffold, and die with my brother,
who risked his life for my sake."

She ceased as quietly as she had begun, and turned once more to her
brother.

As she looked away from the court and looked at him, a few tears came
into her eyes, and something of the old softness of form and gentleness
of expression seemed to return to her face. He let her take his hand,
but he seemed purposely to avoid meeting the anxious gaze she fixed
on him. His head sunk on his breast; he drew his breath heavily, his
countenance darkened and grew distorted, as if he were suffering some
sharp pang of physical pain. He bent down a little, and, leaning his
elbow on the rail before him, covered his face with his hand; and so
quelled the rising agony, so forced back the scalding tears to his
heart. The audience had heard Rose in silence, and they preserved
the same tranquillity when she had done. This was a rare tribute to a
prisoner from the people of the Reign of Terror.

The president looked round at his colleagues, and shook his head
suspiciously.

"This statement of the female prisoner's complicates the matter very
seriously," said he. "Is there anybody in court," he added, looking
at the persons behind his chair, "who knows where the mother of
Superintendent Danville and the servant are now?"

Lomaque came forward at the appeal, and placed himself by the table.

"Why, citizen agent!" continued the president, looking hard at him, "are
you overcome by the heat, too?"

"The fit seemed to take him, citizen president, when the female prisoner
had made an end of her statement," exclaimed Magloire, pressing forward
officiously.

Lomaque gave his subordinate a look which sent the man back directly to
the shelter of the official group; then said, in lower tones than were
customary with him:

"I have received information relative to the mother of Superintendent
Danville and the servant, and am ready to answer any questions that may
be put to me."

"Where are they now?" asked the president.

"She and the servant are known to have crossed the frontier, and are
supposed to be on their way to Cologne. But, since they have entered
Germany, their whereabouts is necessarily a matter of uncertainty to the
republican authorities."

"Have you any information relative to the conduct of the old servant
while he was in Paris?"

"I have information enough to prove that he was not an object for
political suspicion. He seems to have been simply animated by servile
zeal for the woman's interests; to have performed for her all the menial
offices of a servant in private; and to have misled the neighbors by
affected equality with her in public."

"Have you any reason to believe that Superintendent Danville was privy
to his mother's first attempt at escaping from France?"

"I infer it from what the female prisoner has said, and for other
reasons which it would be irregular to detail before the tribunal. The
proofs can no doubt be obtained if I am allowed time to communicate with
the authorities at Lyons and Marseilles."

At this moment Danville re-entered the court; and, advancing to the
table, placed himself close by the chief agent's side. They looked each
other steadily in the face for an instant.

"He has recovered from the shock of Trudaine's answer," thought Lomaque,
retiring. "His hand trembles, his face is pale, but I can see regained
self-possession in his eye, and I dread the consequences already."

"Citizen president," began Danville, "I demand to know if anything has
transpired affecting my honor and patriotism in my absence?"

He spoke apparently with the most perfect calmness, but he looked nobody
in the face. His eyes were fixed steadily on the green baize of the
table beneath him.

"The female prisoner has made a statement, referring principally to
herself and her brother," answered the president, "but incidentally
mentioning a previous attempt on your mother's part to break existing
laws by emigrating from France. This portion of the confession contains
in it some elements of suspicion which seriously affect you--"

"They shall be suspicions no longer--at my own peril I will change them
to certainties!" exclaimed Danville, extending his arm theatrically, and
looking up for the first time. "Citizen president, I avow it with the
fearless frankness of a good patriot; I was privy to my mother's first
attempt at escaping from France."

Hisses and cries of execration followed this confession. He winced under
them at first; but recovered his self-possession before silence was
restored.

"Citizens, you have heard the confession of my fault," he resumed,
turning with desperate assurance toward the audience; "now hear the
atonement I have made for it at the altar of my country."

He waited at the end of that sentence, until the secretary to the
tribunal had done writing it down in the report book of the court.

"Transcribe faithfully to the letter!" cried Danville, pointing solemnly
to the open page of the volume. "Life and death hang on my words."

The secretary took a fresh dip of ink, and nodded to show that he was
ready. Danville went on:

"In these times of glory and trial for France," he proceeded, pitching
his voice to a tone of deep emotion, "what are all good citizens most
sacredly bound to do? To immolate their dearest private affections and
interests before their public duties! On the first attempt of my mother
to violate the laws against emigration, by escaping from France, I
failed in making the heroic sacrifice which inexorable patriotism
demanded of me. My situation was more terrible than the situation
of Brutus sitting in judgment on his own sons. I had not the Roman
fortitude to rise equal to it. I erred, citizens--erred as Coriolanus
did, when his august mother pleaded with him for the safety of Rome! For
that error I deserved to be purged out of the republican community;
but I escaped my merited punishment--nay, I even rose to the honor of
holding an office under the Government. Time passed; and again my mother
attempted an escape from France. Again, inevitable fate brought my civic
virtue to the test. How did I meet this second supremest trial? By an
atonement for past weakness, terrible as the trial itself. Citizens, you
will shudder; but you will applaud while you tremble. Citizens, look!
and while you look, remember well the evidence given at the opening of
this case. Yonder stands the enemy of his country, who intrigued to help
my mother to escape; here stands the patriot son, whose voice was the
first, the only voice, to denounce him for the crime!" As he spoke, he
pointed to Trudaine, then struck himself on the breast, then folded his
arms, and looked sternly at the benches occupied by the spectators.

"Do you assert," exclaimed the president, "that at the time when you
denounced Trudaine, you knew him to be intriguing to aid your mother's
escape?"

"I assert it," answered Danville.

The pen which the president held dropped from his hand at that reply;
his colleagues started, and looked at each other in blank silence.

A murmur of "Monster! monster!" began with the prisoners on the
platform, and spread instantly to the audience, who echoed and echoed it
again; the fiercest woman-republican on the benches joined cause at
last with the haughtiest woman-aristocrat on the platform. Even in that
sphere of direst discords, in that age of sharpest enmities, the
one touch of Nature preserved its old eternal virtue, and roused the
mother-instinct which makes the whole world kin.

Of the few persons in the court who at once foresaw the effect of
Danville's answer on the proceedings of the tribunal, Lomaque was one.
His sallow face whitened as he looked toward the prisoners' platform.

"They are lost," he murmured to himself, moving out of the group
in which he had hitherto stood. "Lost! The lie which has saved that
villain's head leaves them without the shadow of a hope. No need to stop
for the sentence--Danville's infamous presence of mind has given them up
to the guillotine!" Pronouncing these words, he went out hurriedly by a
door near the platform, which led to the prisoners' waiting-room.

Rose's head sank again on her brother's shoulder. She shuddered, and
leaned back faintly on the arm which he extended to support her. One of
the female prisoners tried to help Trudaine in speaking consolingly
to her; but the consummation of her husband's perfidy seemed to have
paralyzed her at heart. She murmured once in her brother's ear, "Louis!
I am resigned to die--nothing but death is left for me after the
degradation of having loved that man." She said those words and closed
her eyes wearily, and spoke no more.

"One other question, and you may retire," resumed the president,
addressing Danville. "Were you cognizant of your wife's connection with
her brother's conspiracy?"

Danville reflected for a moment, remembered that there were witnesses in
court who could speak to his language and behavior on the evening of his
wife's arrest, and resolved this time to tell the truth.

"I was not aware of it," he answered. "Testimony in my favor can be
called which will prove that when my wife's complicity was discovered I
was absent from Paris."

Heartlessly self-possessed as he was, the public reception of his last
reply had shaken his nerve. He now spoke in low tones, turning his back
on the spectators, and fixing his eyes again on the green baize of the
table at which he stood.

"Prisoners, have you any objection to make, any evidence to call,
invalidating the statement by which Citizen Danville has cleared himself
of suspicion?" inquired the president.

"He has cleared himself by the most execrable of all falsehoods,"
answered Trudaine. "If his mother could be traced and brought here, her
testimony would prove it."

"Can you produce any other evidence in support of your allegation?"
asked the president.

"I cannot."

"Citizen Superintendent Danville, you are at liberty to retire. Your
statement will be laid before the authority to whom you are officially
responsible. Either you merit a civic crown for more than Roman virtue,
or--" Having got thus far, the president stopped abruptly, as if
unwilling to commit himself too soon to an opinion, and merely repeated,
"You may retire."

Danville left the court immediately, going out again by the public door.
He was followed by murmurs from the women's benches, which soon ceased,
however, when the president was observed to close his note-book, and
turn round toward his colleagues. "The sentence!" was the general
whisper now. "Hush, hush--the sentence!"

After a consultation of a few minutes with the persons behind him, the
president rose, and spoke the momentous words:

"Louis Trudaine and Rose Danville, the revolutionary tribunal, having
heard the charge against you, and having weighed the value of what
you have said in answer to it, decides that you are both guilty, and
condemns you to the penalty of death."

Having delivered the sentence in those terms, he sat down again, and
placed a mark against the two first condemned names on the list of
prisoners. Immediately afterward the next case was called on, and the
curiosity of the audience was stimulated by a new trial.



CHAPTER IV.

The waiting-room of the revolutionary tribunal was a grim, bare place,
with a dirty stone floor, and benches running round the walls. The
windows were high and barred; and at the outer door, leading into the
street, two sentinels kept watch. On entering this comfortless retreat
from the court, Lomaque found it perfectly empty. Solitude was just then
welcome to him. He remained in the waiting-room, walking slowly from
end to end over the filthy pavement, talking eagerly and incessantly to
himself.

After a while, the door communicating with the tribunal opened, and the
humpbacked jailer made his appearance, leading in Trudaine and Rose.

"You will have to wait here," said the little man, "till the rest of
them have been tried and sentenced; and then you will all go back to
prison in a lump. Ha, citizen," he continued, observing Lomaque at the
other end of the hall, and bustling up to him. "Here still, eh? If you
were going to stop much longer, I should ask a favor of you."

"I am in no hurry," said Lomaque, with a glance at the two prisoners.

"Good!" cried the humpback, drawing his hand across his mouth; "I am
parched with thirst, and dying to moisten my throat at the wine-shop
over the way. Just mind that man and woman while I'm gone, will you?
It's the merest form--there's a guard outside, the windows are barred,
the tribunal is within hail. Do you mind obliging me?"

"On the contrary, I am glad of the opportunity."

"That's a good fellow--and, remember, if I am asked for, you must say
I was obliged to quit the court for a few minutes, and left you in
charge."

With these words, the humpbacked jailer ran off to the wine-shop.

He had scarcely disappeared before Trudaine crossed the room, and caught
Lomaque by the arm.

"Save her," he whispered; "there is an opportunity--save her!" His face
was flushed--his eyes wandered--his breath on the chief agent's cheek,
while he spoke, felt scorching hot. "Save her!" he repeated, shaking
Lomaque by the arm, and dragging him toward the door. "Remember all you
owe to my father--remember our talk on that bench by the river--remember
what you said to me yourself on the night of the arrest--don't wait to
think--save her, and leave me without a word! If I die alone, I can die
as a man should; if she goes to the scaffold by my side, my heart
will fail me--I shall die the death of a coward! I have lived for her
life--let me die for it, and I die happy!"

He tried to say more, but the violence of his agitation forbade it. He
could only shake the arm he held again and again, and point to the
bench on which Rose sat--her head sunk on her bosom, her hands crossed
listlessly on her lap.

"There are two armed sentinels outside--the windows are barred--you are
without weapons--and even if you had them, there is a guard-house within
hail on one side of you, and the tribunal on the other. Escape from this
room is impossible," answered Lomaque.

"Impossible!" repeated the other, furiously. "You traitor! you coward!
can you look at her sitting there helpless, her very life ebbing away
already with every minute that passes, and tell me coolly that escape is
impossible?"

In the frenzy of his grief and despair, he lifted his disengaged hand
threateningly while he spoke. Lomaque caught him by the wrist, and drew
him toward a window open at the top.

"You are not in your right senses," said the chief agent, firmly;
"anxiety and apprehension on your sister's account have shaken your
mind. Try to compose yourself, and listen to me. I have something
important to say--" (Trudaine looked at him incredulously.) "Important,"
continued Lomaque, "as affecting your sister's interests at this
terrible crisis."

That last appeal had an instantaneous effect. Trudaine's outstretched
hand dropped to his side, and a sudden change passed over his
expression.

"Give me a moment," he said, faintly; and turning away, leaned against
the wall and pressed his burning forehead on the chill, damp stone. He
did not raise his head again till he had mastered himself, and could say
quietly, "Speak; I am fit to hear you, and sufficiently in my senses to
ask your forgiveness for what I said just now."

"When I left the tribunal and entered this room," Lomaque began in a
whisper, "there was no thought in my mind that could be turned to good
account, either for your sister or for you. I was fit for nothing but
to deplore the failure of the confession which I came to St. Lazare to
suggest to you as your best plan of defense. Since then, an idea
has struck me, which may be useful--an idea so desperate, so
uncertain--involving a proposal so absolutely dependent, as to its
successful execution, on the merest chance, that I refuse to confide it
to you except on one condition."

"Mention the condition! I submit to it before hand."

"Give me your word of honor that you will not mention what I am about
to say to your sister until I grant you permission to speak. Promise me
that when you see her shrinking before the terrors of death to-night,
you will have self-restraint enough to abstain from breathing a word of
hope to her. I ask this, because there are ten--twenty--fifty chances to
one that there _is_ no hope."

"I have no choice but to promise," answered Trudaine.

Lomaque produced his pocket-book and pencil before he spoke again.

"I will enter into particulars as soon as I have asked a strange
question of you," he said. "You have been a great experimenter in
chemistry in your time--is your mind calm enough, at such a trying
moment as this, to answer a question which is connected with chemistry
in a very humble way? You seem astonished. Let me put the question at
once. Is there any liquid or powder, or combination of more than one
ingredient known, which will remove writing from paper, and leave no
stain behind?"

"Certainly! But is that all the question? Is there no greater
difficulty?"

"None. Write the prescription, whatever it may be, on that leaf,"
said the other, giving him the pocket-book. "Write it down, with
plain directions for use." Trudaine obeyed. "This is the first
step," continued Lomaque, putting the book in his pocket, "toward the
accomplishment of my purpose--my uncertain purpose, remember! Now,
listen; I am going to put my own head in danger for the chance of
saving yours and your sister's by tampering with the death-list. Don't
interrupt me! If I can save one, I can save the other. Not a word about
gratitude! Wait till you know the extent of your obligation. I tell
you plainly, at the outset, there is a motive of despair, as well as a
motive of pity, at the bottom of the action in which I am now about
to engage. Silence! I insist on it. Our time is short; it is for me to
speak, and for you to listen. The president of the tribunal has put the
deathmark against your names on the prison list of to-day. That list,
when the trials are over and it is marked to the end, will be called in
this room before you are taken to St. Lazare. It will then be sent to
Robespierre, who will keep it, having a copy made of it the moment it is
delivered, for circulation among his colleagues--St. Just, and the
rest. It is my business to make a duplicate of this copy in the first
instance. The duplicate will be compared with the original, and possibly
with the copy, too, either by Robespierre himself, or by some one in
whom he can place implicit trust, and will then be sent to St. Lazare
without passing through my hands again. It will be read in public the
moment it is received, at the grating of the prison, and will afterward
be kept by the jailer, who will refer to it, as he goes round in the
evening with a piece of chalk, to mark the cell doors of the prisoners
destined for the guillotine to-morrow. That duty happens, to-day, to
fall to the hunchback whom you saw speaking to me. He is a confirmed
drinker, and I mean to tempt him with such wine as he rarely tastes.
If--after the reading of the list in public, and before the marking of
the cell doors--I can get him to sit down to the bottle, I will answer
for making him drunk, for getting the list out of his pocket, and for
wiping your names out of it with the prescription you have just written
for me. I shall write all the names, one under another, just irregularly
enough in my duplicate to prevent the interval left by the erasure
from being easily observed. If I succeed in this, your door will not
be marked, and your names will not be called to-morrow morning when the
tumbrils come for the guillotine. In the present confusion of prisoners
pouring in every day for trial, and prisoners pouring out every day for
execution, you will have the best possible chance of security against
awkward inquiries, if you play your cards properly, for a good fortnight
or ten days at least. In that time--"

"Well! well!" cried Trudaine, eagerly.

Lomaque looked toward the tribunal door, and lowered his voice to a
fainter whisper before he continued, "In that time Robespierre's own
head may fall into the sack! France is beginning to sicken under the
Reign of Terror. Frenchmen of the Moderate faction, who have lain
hidden for months in cellars and lofts, are beginning to steal out
and deliberate by twos and threes together, under cover of the night.
Robespierre has not ventured for weeks past to face the Convention
Committee. He only speaks among his own friends at the Jacobins. There
are rumors of a terrible discovery made by Carnot, of a desperate
resolution taken by Tallien. Men watching behind the scenes see that
the last days of the Terror are at hand. If Robespierre is beaten in the
approaching struggle, you are saved--for the new reign must be a Reign
of Mercy. If he conquers, I have only put off the date of your death and
your sister's, and have laid my own neck under the axe. Those are your
chances--this is all I can do."

He paused, and Trudaine again endeavored to speak such words as might
show that he was not unworthy of the deadly risk which Lomaque was
prepared to encounter. But once more the chief agent peremptorily and
irritably interposed:

"I tell you, for the third time," he said, "I will listen to no
expressions of gratitude from you till I know when I deserve them. It is
true that I recollect your father's timely kindness to me--true that I
have not forgotten what passed, five years since at your house by the
river-side. I remember everything, down to what you would consider the
veriest trifle--that cup of coffee, for instance, which your sister kept
hot for me. I told you then that you would think better of me some day.
I know that you do now. But this is not all. You want to glorify me to
my face for risking my life for you. I won't hear you, because my risk
is of the paltriest kind. I am weary of my life. I can't look back to it
with pleasure. I am too old to look forward to what is left of it
with hope. There was something in that night at your house before the
wedding--something in what you said, in what your sister did--which
altered me. I have had my days of gloom and self-reproach, from time
to time, since then. I have sickened at my slavery, and subjection, and
duplicity, and cringing, first under one master then under another. I
have longed to look back at my life, and comfort myself with the sight
of some good action, just as a frugal man comforts himself with the
sight of his little savings laid by in an old drawer. I can't do
this, and I want to do it. The want takes me like a fit, at uncertain
intervals--suddenly, under the most incomprehensible influences. A
glance up at the blue sky--starlight over the houses of this great city,
when I look out at the night from my garret window--a child's voice
coming suddenly, I don't know where from--the piping of my neighbor's
linnet in his little cage--now one trifling thing, now another--wakes up
that want in me in a moment. Rascal as I am, those few simple words
your sister spoke to the judge went through and through me like a knife.
Strange, in a man like me, isn't it? I am amazed at it myself. _My_
life? Bah! I've let it out for hire to be kicked about by rascals from
one dirty place to another, like a football! It's my whim to give it
a last kick myself, and throw it away decently before it lodges on the
dunghill forever. Your sister kept a good cup of coffee hot for me, and
I give her a bad life in return for the compliment. You want to thank
me for it? What folly! Thank me when I have done something useful. Don't
thank me for that!"

He snapped his fingers contemptuously as he spoke, and walked away to
the outer door to receive the jailer, who returned at that moment.

"Well," inquired the hunchback, "has anybody asked for me?"

"No," answered Lomaque; "not a soul has entered the room. What sort of
wine did you get?"

"So-so! Good at a pinch, friend--good at a pinch."

"Ah! you should go to my shop and try a certain cask, filled with a
particular vintage."

"What shop? Which vintage?"

"I can't stop to tell you now; but we shall most likely meet again
to-day. I expect to be at the prison this afternoon. Shall I ask for
you? Good! I won't forget!" With those farewell words he went out, and
never so much as looked back at the prisoners before he closed the door.

Trudaine returned to his sister, fearful lest his face should betray
what had passed during the extraordinary interview between Lomaque and
himself. But, whatever change there might be in his expression, Rose
did not seem to notice it. She was still strangely inattentive to all
outward things. That spirit of resignation, which is the courage of
women in all great emergencies, seemed now to be the one animating
spirit that fed the flame of life within her.

When her brother sat down by her, she only took his hand gently and
said: "Let us stop together like this, Louis, till the time comes. I am
not afraid of it, for I have nothing but you to make me love life, and
you, too, are going to die. Do you remember the time when I used to
grieve that I had never had a child to be some comfort to me? I was
thinking, a moment ago, how terrible it would have been now, if my wish
had been granted. It is a blessing for me, in this great misery, that I
am childless. Let us talk of old days, Louis, as long as we can--not of
my husband; or my marriage--only of the old times, before I was a burden
and a trouble to you."



CHAPTER V.

The day wore on. By ones and twos and threes at a time, the condemned
prisoners came from the tribunal, and collected in the waiting-room. At
two o'clock all was ready for the calling over of the death-list. It was
read and verified by an officer of the court; and then the jailer took
his prisoners back to St. Lazare.

Evening came. The prisoners' meal had been served; the duplicate of the
death-list had been read in public at the grate; the cell doors were
all locked. From the day of their arrest, Rose and her brother, partly
through the influence of a bribe, partly through Lomaque's intercession,
had been confined together in one cell; and together they now awaited
the dread event of the morrow.

To Rose that event was death--death, to the thought of which, at least,
she was now resigned. To Trudaine the fast-nearing future was darkening
hour by hour, with the uncertainty which is worse than death; with the
faint, fearful, unpartaken suspense, which keeps the mind ever on the
rack, and wears away the heart slowly. Through the long unsolaced agony
of that dreadful night, but one relief came to him. The tension of every
nerve, the crushing weight of the one fatal oppression that clung to
every thought, relaxed a little when Rose's bodily powers began to sink
under her mental exhaustion--when her sad, dying talk of the happy times
that were passed ceased softly, and she laid her head on his shoulder,
and let the angel of slumber take her yet for a little while, even
though she lay already under the shadow of the angel of death.

The morning came, and the hot summer sunrise. What life was left in the
terror-struck city awoke for the day faintly; and still the suspense of
the long night remained unlightened. It was drawing near the hour when
the tumbrils were to come for the victims doomed on the day before.
Trudaine's ear could detect even the faintest sound in the echoing
prison region outside his cell. Soon, listening near the door, he heard
voices disputing on the other side of it. Suddenly, the bolts were drawn
back, the key turned in the lock, and he found himself standing face
to face with the hunchback and one of the subordinate attendants on the
prisoners.

"Look!" muttered this last man sulkily, "there they are, safe in their
cell, just as I said; but I tell you again they are not down in the
list. What do you mean by bullying me about not chalking their door,
last night, along with the rest? Catch me doing your work for you again,
when you're too drunk to do it yourself!"

"Hold your tongue, and let me have another look at the list!" returned
the hunchback, turning away from the cell door, and snatching a slip of
paper from the other's hand. "The devil take me if I can make head
or tail of it!" he exclaimed, scratching his head, after a careful
examination of the list. "I could swear that I read over their names at
the grate yesterday afternoon with my own lips; and yet, look as long as
I may, I certainly can't find them written down here. Give us a pinch,
friend. Am I awake, or dreaming? drunk or sober this morning?"

"Sober, I hope," said a quiet voice at his elbow. "I have just looked in
to see how you are after yesterday."

"How I am, Citizen Lomaque? Petrified with astonishment. You yourself
took charge of that man and woman for me, in the waiting-room, yesterday
morning; and as for myself, I could swear to having read their names at
the grate yesterday afternoon. Yet this morning here are no such things
as these said names to be found in the list! What do you think of that?"

"And what do you think," interrupted the aggrieved subordinate, "of
his having the impudence to bully me for being careless in chalking the
doors, when he was too drunk to do it himself? too drunk to know his
right hand from his left! If I wasn't the best-natured man in the world,
I should report him to the head jailer."

"Quite right of you to excuse him, and quite wrong of him to bully
you," said Lomaque, persuasively. "Take my advice," he continued,
confidentially, to the hunchback, "and don't trust too implicitly to
that slippery memory of yours, after our little drinking bout yesterday.
You could not really have read their names at the grate, you know, or
of course they would be down on the list. As for the waiting-room at
the tribunal, a word in your ear: chief agents of police know strange
secrets. The president of the court condemns and pardons in public; but
there is somebody else, with the power of ten thousand presidents, who
now and then condemns and pardons in private. You can guess who. I
say no more, except that I recommend you to keep your head on your
shoulders, by troubling it about nothing but the list there in your
hand. Stick to that literally, and nobody can blame you. Make a fuss
about mysteries that don't concern you, and--"

Lomaque stopped, and holding his hand edgewise, let it drop
significantly over the hunchback's head. That action and the hints which
preceded it seemed to bewilder the little man more than ever. He stared
perplexedly at Lomaque; uttered a word or two of rough apology to his
subordinate, and rolling his misshapen head portentously, walked away
with the death-list crumpled up nervously in his hand.

"I should like to have a sight of them, and see if they really are
the same man and woman whom I looked after yesterday morning in the
waiting-room," said Lomaque, putting his hand on the cell door, just as
the deputy-jailer was about to close it again.

"Look in, by all means," said the man. "No doubt you will find that
drunken booby as wrong in what he told you about them as he is about
everything else."

Lomaque made use of the privilege granted to him immediately. He saw
Trudaine sitting with his sister in the corner of the cell furthest from
the door, evidently for the purpose of preventing her from overhearing
the conversation outside. There was an unsettled look, however, in her
eyes, a slowly-heightening color in her cheeks, which showed her to be
at least vaguely aware that something unusual had been taking place in
the corridor.

Lomaque beckoned to Trudaine to leave her, and whispered to him: "The
prescription has worked well. You are safe for to-day. Break the news
to your sister as gently as you can. Danville--" He stopped and
listened till he satisfied himself, by the sound of the deputy-jailer's
footsteps, that the man was lounging toward the further end of the
corridor. "Danville," he resumed, "after having mixed with the people
outside the grate yesterday, and having heard your names read, was
arrested in the evening by secret order from Robespierre, and sent to
the Temple. What charge will be laid to him, or when he will be brought
to trial, it is impossible to say. I only know that he is arrested.
Hush! don't talk now; my friend outside is coming back. Keep quiet--hope
everything from the chances and changes of public affairs; and comfort
yourself with the thought that you are both safe for to-day."

"And to-morrow?" whispered Trudaine.

"Don't think of to-morrow," returned Lomaque, turning away hurriedly to
the door "Let to-morrow take care of itself."




PART THIRD.



CHAPTER 1.

On a spring morning, in the year seventeen hundred and ninety-eight, the
public conveyance then running between Chalons-sur-Marne and Paris sat
down one of its outside passengers at the first post-station beyond
Meaux. The traveler, an old man, after looking about him hesitatingly
for a moment or two, betook himself to a little inn opposite the
post-house, known by the sign of the Piebald Horse, and kept by the
Widow Duval--a woman who enjoyed and deserved the reputation of being
the fastest talker and the best maker of _gibelotte_ in the whole
locality.

Although the traveler was carelessly noticed by the village idlers,
and received without ceremony by the Widow Duval, he was by no means so
ordinary and uninteresting a stranger as the rustics of the place were
pleased to consider him. The time had been when this quiet, elderly,
unobtrusive applicant for refreshment at the Piebald House was trusted
with the darkest secrets of the Reign of Terror, and was admitted at
all times and seasons to speak face to face with Maximilian Robespierre
himself. The Widow Duval and the hangers-on in front of the post-house
would have been all astonished indeed if any well-informed personage
from the metropolis had been present to tell them that the modest old
traveler with the shabby little carpet-bag was an ex-chief agent of the
secret police of Paris!

Between three and four years had elapsed since Lomaque had exercised,
for the last time, his official functions under the Reign of Terror.
His shoulders had contracted an extra stoop, and his hair had all fallen
off, except at the sides and back of his head. In some other respects,
however, advancing age seemed to have improved rather than deteriorated
him in personal appearance. His complexion looked healthier, his
expression cheerfuller, his eyes brighter than they had ever been of
late years. He walked, too, with a brisker step than the step of old
times in the police office; and his dress, although it certainly did not
look like the costume of a man in affluent circumstances, was cleaner
and far more nearly worn than ever it had been in the past days of his
political employment at Paris.

He sat down alone in the inn parlor, and occupied the time, while his
hostess had gone to fetch the half-bottle of wine that he ordered, in
examining a dirty old card which he extricated from a mass of papers in
his pocket-book, and which bore, written on it, these lines:

"When the troubles are over, do not forget those who remember you with
eternal gratitude. Stop at the first post-station beyond Meaux, on the
high-road to Paris, and ask at the inn for Citizen Maurice, whenever you
wish to see us or to hear of us again."

"Pray," inquired Lomaque, putting the card in his pocket when the Widow
Duval brought in the wine, "can you inform me whether a person named
Maurice lives anywhere in this neighborhood?"

"Can I inform you?" repeated the voluble widow. "Of course I can!
Citizen Maurice, and the citoyenne, his amiable sister--who is not to be
passed over because you don't mention her, my honest man--lives within
ten minutes' walk of my house. A charming cottage, in a charming
situation, inhabited by two charming people--so quiet, so retiring,
such excellent pay. I supply them with everything--fowls, eggs, bread,
butter, vegetables (not that they eat much of anything), wine (which
they don't drink half enough of to do them good); in short, I victual
the dear little hermitage, and love the two amiable recluses with all
my heart. Ah! they have had their troubles, poor people, the sister
especially, though they never talk about them. When they first came to
live in our neighborhood--"

"I beg pardon, citoyenne, but if you would only be so kind as to direct
me--"

"Which is three--no, four--no, three years and a half ago--in short,
just after the time when that Satan of a man, Robespierre, had his head
cut off (and serve him right!), I said to my husband (who was on his
last legs then, poor man!) 'She'll die'--meaning the lady. She didn't
though. My fowls, eggs, bread, butter, vegetables, and wine carried her
through--always in combination with the anxious care of Citizen Maurice.
Yes, yes! let us be tenderly conscientious in giving credit where
credit is due; let us never forget that the citizen Maurice contributed
something to the cure of the interesting invalid, as well as the
victuals and drink from the Piebald Horse. There she is now, the
prettiest little woman in the prettiest little cottage--"

"Where? Will you be so obliging as to tell me where?"

"And in excellent health, except that she is subject now and then to
nervous attacks; having evidently, as I believe, been struck with some
dreadful fright--most likely during that accursed time of the Terror;
for they came from Paris--you don't drink, honest man! Why don't you
drink? Very, very pretty in a pale way; figure perhaps too thin--let me
pour it out for you--but an angel of gentleness, and attached in such a
touching way to the citizen Maurice--"

"Citizen hostess, will you, or will you not, tell me where they live?"

"You droll little man, why did you not ask me that before, if you wanted
to know? Finish your wine, and come to the door. There's your change,
and thank you for your custom, though it isn't much. Come to the door, I
say, and don't interrupt me! You're an old man--can you see forty yards
before you? Yes, you can! Don't be peevish--that never did anybody any
good yet. Now look back, along the road where I am pointing. You see
a large heap of stones? Good. On the other side of the heap of stones
there is a little path; you can't see that, but you can remember what I
tell you? Good. You go down the path till you get to a stream; down
the stream till you get to a bridge; down the other bank of the stream
(after crossing the bridge) till you get to an old water-mill--a jewel
of a water-mill, famous for miles round; artists from the four quarters
of the globe are always coming to sketch it. Ah! what, you are getting
peevish again? You won't wait? Impatient old man, what a life your wife
must lead, if you have got one! Remember the bridge. Ah! your poor wife
and children, I pity them; your daughters especially! Pst! pst! Remember
the bridge--peevish old man, remember the bridge!"

Walking as fast as he could out of hearing of the Widow Duval's tongue,
Lomaque took the path by the heap of stones which led out of the
high-road, crossed the stream, and arrived at the old water-mill. Close
by it stood a cottage--a rough, simple building, with a strip of garden
in front. Lomaque's observant eyes marked the graceful arrangement of
the flower-beds, and the delicate whiteness of the curtains that hung
behind the badly-glazed narrow windows. "This must be the place," he
said to himself, as he knocked at the door with his stick. "I can see
the traces of her hand before I cross the threshold."

The door was opened. "Pray, does the citizen Maurice--" Lomaque began,
not seeing clearly, for the first moment, in the dark little passage.

Before he could say any more his hand was grasped, his carpet-bag was
taken from him, and a well-known voice cried, "Welcome! a thousand
thousand times welcome, at last! Citizen Maurice is not at home; but
Louis Trudaine takes his place, and is overjoyed to see once more the
best and dearest of his friends!"

"I hardly know you again. How you are altered for the better!" exclaimed
Lomaque, as they entered the parlor of the cottage.

"Remember that you see me after a long freedom from anxiety. Since I
have lived here, I have gone to rest at night, and have not been afraid
of the morning," replied Trudaine. He went out into the passage while
he spoke, and called at the foot of the one flight of stairs which the
cottage possessed, "Rose! Rose! come down! The friend whom you most
wished to see has arrived at last."

She answered the summons immediately. The frank, friendly warmth of her
greeting; her resolute determination, after the first inquiries were
over, to help the guest to take off his upper coat with her own hands,
so confused and delighted Lomaque, that he hardly knew which way to
turn, or what to say.

"This is even more trying, in a pleasant way, to a lonely old fellow
like me," he was about to add, "than the unexpected civility of the hot
cup of coffee years ago"; but remembering what recollections even that
trifling circumstance might recall, he checked himself.

"More trying than what?" asked Rose, leading him to a chair.

"Ah! I forget. I am in my dotage already!" he answered, confusedly.
"I have not got used just yet to the pleasure of seeing your kind
face again." It was indeed a pleasure to look at that face now, after
Lomaque's last experience of it. Three years of repose, though they
had not restored to Rose those youthful attractions which she had lost
forever in the days of the Terror, had not passed without leaving kindly
outward traces of their healing progress. Though the girlish roundness
had not returned to her cheeks, or the girlish delicacy of color to her
complexion, her eyes had recovered much of their old softness, and her
expression all of its old winning charm. What was left of latent sadness
in her face, and of significant quietness in her manner, remained gently
and harmlessly--remained rather to show what had been once than what was
now.

When they were all seated, there was, however, something like a
momentary return to the suspense and anxiety of past days in their
faces, as Trudaine, looking earnestly at Lomaque, asked, "Do you bring
any news from Paris?"

"None," he replied; "but excellent news, instead, from Rouen. I have
heard, accidentally, through the employer whom I have been serving since
we parted, that your old house by the river-side is to let again."

Rose started from her chair. "Oh, Louis, if we could only live there
once more! My flower-garden?" she continued to Lomaque.

"Cultivated throughout," he answered, "by the late proprietor."

"And the laboratory?" added her brother.

"Left standing," said Lomaque. "Here is a letter with all the
particulars. You may depend upon them, for the writer is the person
charged with the letting of the house."

Trudaine looked over the letter eagerly.

"The price is not beyond our means," he said. "After our three years'
economy here, we can afford to give something for a great pleasure."

"Oh, what a day of happiness it will be when we go home again!" cried
Rose. "Pray write to your friend at once," she added, addressing
Lomaque, "and say we take the house, before any one else is beforehand
with us!"

He nodded, and folding up the letter mechanically in the old official
form, made a note on it in the old official manner. Trudaine observed
the action, and felt its association with past times of trouble and
terror. His face grew grave again as he said to Lomaque, "And is this
good news really all the news of importance you have to tell us?"

Lomaque hesitated, and fidgeted in his chair. "What other news I have
will bear keeping," he replied. "There are many questions I should like
to ask first, about your sister and yourself. Do you mind allowing me to
refer for a moment to the time when we last met?"

He addressed this inquiry to Rose, who answered in the negative; but her
voice seemed to falter, even in saying the one word "No." She turned her
head away when she spoke; and Lomaque noticed that her hands trembled
as she took up some work lying on a table near, and hurriedly occupied
herself with it.

"We speak as little about that time as possible," said Trudaine, looking
significantly toward his sister; "but we have some questions to ask you
in our turn; so the allusion, for this once, is inevitable. Your sudden
disappearance at the very crisis of that time of danger has not yet
been fully explained to us. The one short note which you left behind you
helped us to guess at what had happened rather than to understand it."

"I can easily explain it now," answered Lomaque. "The sudden overthrow
of the Reign of Terror, which was salvation to you, was destruction to
me. The new republican reign was a reign of mercy, except for the tail
of Robespierre, as the phrase ran then. Every man who had been so wicked
or so unfortunate as to be involved, even in the meanest capacity, with
the machinery of the government of Terror, was threatened, and justly,
with the fate of Robespierre. I, among others, fell under this menace
of death. I deserved to die, and should have resigned myself to the
guillotine but for you. From the course taken by public events, I
knew you would be saved; and although your safety was the work of
circumstances, still I had a hand in rendering it possible at the
outset; and a yearning came over me to behold you both free again with
my own eyes--a selfish yearning to see in you a living, breathing, real
result of the one good impulse of my heart, which I could look back
on with satisfaction. This desire gave me a new interest in life. I
resolved to escape death if it were possible. For ten days I lay hidden
in Paris. After that--thanks to certain scraps of useful knowledge which
my experience in the office of secret police had given me--I succeeded
in getting clear of Paris and in making my way safely to Switzerland.
The rest of my story is so short and so soon told that I may as well get
it over at once. The only relation I knew of in the world to apply to
was a cousin of mine (whom I had never seen before), established as a
silk-mercer at Berne. I threw myself on this man's mercy. He discovered
that I was likely, with my business habits, to be of some use to him,
and he took me into his house. I worked for what he pleased to give me,
traveled about for him in Switzerland, deserved his confidence, and won
it. Till within the last few months I remained with him; and only left
my employment to enter, by my master's own desire, the house of his
brother, established also as a silk-mercer, at Chalons-sur-Marne. In the
counting-house of this merchant I am corresponding clerk, and am only
able to come and see you now by offering to undertake a special business
mission for my employer at Paris. It is drudgery, at my time of life,
after all I have gone through--but my hard work is innocent work. I
am not obliged to cringe for every crown-piece I put in my pocket--not
bound to denounce, deceive, and dog to death other men, before I can
earn my bread, and scrape together money enough to bury me. I am ending
a bad, base life harmlessly at last. It is a poor thing to do, but it is
something done--and even that contents a man at my age. In short, I am
happier than I used to be, or at least less ashamed when I look people
like you in the face."

"Hush! hush!" interrupted Rose, laying her hand on his arm. "I cannot
allow you to talk of yourself in that way, even in jest."

"I was speaking in earnest," answered Lomaque, quietly; "but I won't
weary you with any more words about myself. My story is told."

"All?" asked Trudaine. He looked searchingly, almost suspiciously, at
Lomaque, as he put the question. "All?" he repeated. "Yours is a short
story, indeed, my good friend! Perhaps you have forgotten some of it?"

Again Lomaque fidgeted and hesitated.

"Is it not a little hard on an old man to be always asking questions
of him, and never answering one of his inquiries in return?" he said to
Rose, very gayly as to manner, but rather uneasily as to look.

"He will not speak out till we two are alone," thought Trudaine. "It is
best to risk nothing, and to humor him."

"Come, come," he said aloud; "no grumbling. I admit that it is your turn
to hear our story now; and I will do my best to gratify you. But before
I begin," he added, turning to his sister, "let me suggest, Rose, that
if you have any household matters to settle upstairs--"

"I know what you mean," she interrupted, hurriedly, taking up the work
which, during the last few minutes, she had allowed to drop into her
lap; "but I am stronger than you think; I can face the worst of our
recollections composedly. Go on, Louis; pray go on--I am quite fit to
stop and hear you."

"You know what we suffered in the first days of our suspense, after the
success of your stratagem," said Trudaine, turning to Lomaque. "I think
it was on the evening after we had seen you for the last time at St.
Lazare that strange, confused rumors of an impending convulsion in Paris
first penetrated within our prison walls. During the next few days the
faces of our jailers were enough to show us that those rumors were true,
and that the Reign of Terror was actually threatened with overthrow at
the hands of the Moderate Party. We had hardly time to hope everything
from this blessed change before the tremendous news of Robespierre's
attempted suicide, then of his condemnation and execution, reached us.
The confusion produced in the prison was beyond all description. The
accused who had been tried and the accused who had not been tried got
mingled together. From the day of Robespierre's arrest, no orders came
to the authorities, no death-lists reached the prison. The jailers,
terrified by rumors that the lowest accomplices of the tyrant would be
held responsible, and be condemned with him, made no attempt to maintain
order. Some of them--that hunchback man among the rest--deserted their
duties altogether. The disorganization was so complete, that when the
commissioners from the new Government came to St. Lazare, some of us
were actually half starving from want of the bare necessities of
life. To inquire separately into our cases was found to be impossible.
Sometimes the necessary papers were lost; sometimes what documents
remained were incomprehensible to the new commissioners. They were
obliged, at last, to make short work of it by calling us up before them
in dozens. Tried or not tried, we had all been arrested by the tyrant,
had all been accused of conspiracy against him, and were all ready to
hail the new Government as the salvation of France. In nine cases out
of ten, our best claim to be discharged was derived from these
circumstances. We were trusted by Tallien and the men of the Ninth
Thermidor, because we had been suspected by Robespierre, Couthon, and
St. Just. Arrested informally, we were now liberated informally. When
it came to my sister's turn and mine, we were not under examination
five minutes. No such thing as a searching question was asked of us; I
believe we might even have given our own names with perfect impunity.
But I had previously instructed Rose that we were to assume our mother's
maiden name--Maurice. As the citizen and citoyenne Maurice, accordingly,
we passed out of prison--under the same name we have lived ever since
in hiding here. Our past repose has depended, our future happiness will
depend, on our escape from death being kept the profoundest secret among
us three. For one all sufficient reason, which you can easily guess at,
the brother and sister Maurice must still know nothing of Louis Trudaine
and Rose Danville, except that they were two among the hundreds of
victims guillotined during the Reign of Terror."

He spoke the last sentence with a faint smile, and with the air of a man
trying, in spite of himself, to treat a grave subject lightly. His face
clouded again, however, in a moment, when he looked toward his sister,
as he ceased. Her work had once more dropped on her lap, her face was
turned away so that he could not see it; but he knew by the trembling
of her clasped hands, as they rested on her knee, and by the slight
swelling of the veins on her neck which she could not hide from him,
that her boasted strength of nerve had deserted her. Three years of
repose had not yet enabled her to hear her marriage name uttered, or to
be present when past times of deathly suffering and terror were referred
to, without betraying the shock in her face and manner. Trudaine looked
saddened, but in no way surprised by what he saw. Making a sign to
Lomaque to say nothing, he rose and took up his sister's hood, which lay
on a window-seat near him.

"Come, Rose," he said, "the sun is shining, the sweet spring air is
inviting us out. Let us have a quiet stroll along the banks of the
stream. Why should we keep our good friend here cooped up in this narrow
little room, when we have miles and miles of beautiful landscape to
show him on the other side of the threshold? Come, it is high treason to
Queen Nature to remain indoors on such a morning as this."

Without waiting for her to reply, he put on her hood, drew her arm
through his, and led the way out. Lomaque's face grew grave as he
followed them.

"I am glad I only showed the bright side of my budget of news in her
presence," thought he. "She is not well at heart yet. I might have hurt
her, poor thing! I might have hurt her again sadly, if I had not held my
tongue!"

They walked for a little while down the banks of the stream, talking of
indifferent matters; then returned to the cottage. By that time Rose had
recovered her spirits, and could listen with interest and amusement
to Lomaque's dryly-humorous description of his life as a clerk at
Chalons-sur-Marne. They parted for a little while at the cottage door.
Rose retired to the upstairs room from which she had been summoned by
her brother. Trudaine and Lomaque returned to wander again along the
banks of the stream.

With one accord, and without a word passing between them, they left the
neighborhood of the cottage hurriedly; then stopped on a sudden, and
attentively looked each other in the face--looked in silence for an
instant. Trudaine spoke first.

"I thank you for having spared her," he began, abruptly. "She is not
strong enough yet to bear hearing of a new misfortune, unless I break
the tidings to her first."

"You suspect me, then, of bringing bad news?" said Lomaque.

"I know you do. When I saw your first look at her, after we were all
seated in the cottage parlor, I knew it. Speak without fear, without
caution, without one useless word of preface. After three years of
repose, if it pleases God to afflict us again, I can bear the trial
calmly; and, if need be, can strengthen her to bear it calmly, too. I
say again, Lomaque, speak at once, and speak out! I know your news is
bad, for I know beforehand that it is news of Danville."

"You are right; my bad news is news of him."

"He has discovered the secret of our escape from the guillotine?"

"No--he has not a suspicion of it. He believes--as his mother, as every
one does--that you were both executed the day after the Revolutionary
Tribunal sentenced you to death."

"Lomaque, you speak positively of that belief of his--but you cannot be
certain of it."

"I can, on the most indisputable, the most startling evidence--on the
authority of Danville's own act. You have asked me to speak out--"

"I ask you again--I insist on it! Your news, Lomaque--your news, without
another word of preface!"

"You shall have it without another word of preface. Danville is on the
point of being married."

As the answer was given they both stopped by the bank of the stream, and
again looked each other in the face. There was a minute of dead silence
between them. During that minute, the water bubbling by happily over its
bed of pebbles seemed strangely loud, the singing of birds in a little
wood by the stream-side strangely near and shrill, in both their ears.
The light breeze, for all its midday warmth, touched their cheeks
coldly; and the spring sunlight pouring on their faces felt as if it
were glimmering on them through winter clouds.

"Let us walk on," said Trudaine, in a low voice. "I was prepared for bad
news, yet not for that. Are you certain of what you have just told me?"

"As certain as that the stream here is flowing by our side. Hear how
I made the discovery, and you will doubt no longer. Before last week
I knew nothing of Danville, except that his arrest on suspicion by
Robespierre's order was, as events turned out, the saving of his life.
He was imprisoned, as I told you, on the evening after he had heard
your names read from the death-list at the prison grate. He remained
in confinement at the Temple, unnoticed in the political confusion
out-of-doors, just as you remained unnoticed at St. Lazare, and he
profited precisely in the same manner that you profited by the timely
insurrection which overthrew the Reign of Terror. I knew this, and
I knew that he walked out of prison in the character of a persecuted
victim of Robespierre's--and, for better than three years past, I knew
no more. Now listen. Last week I happened to be waiting in the shop
of my employer, Citizen Clairfait, for some papers to take into the
counting-house, when an old man enters with a sealed parcel, which he
hands to one of the shopmen, saying:

"'Give that to Citizen Clairfait.'

"'Any name?' says the shopman.

"'The name is of no consequence,' answers the old man; 'but if you
please, you can give mine. Say the parcel came from Citizen Dubois;' and
then he goes out. His name, in connection with his elderly look, strikes
me directly.

"'Does that old fellow live at Chalons?' I ask.

"'No,' says the shopman. 'He is here in attendance on a customer of
ours--an old ex-aristocrat named Danville. She is on a visit in our
town.'

"I leave you to imagine how that reply startles and amazes me. The
shopman can answer none of the other questions I put to him; but the
next day I am asked to dinner by my employer (who, for his brother's
sake, shows me the utmost civility). On entering the room, I find his
daughter just putting away a lavender-colored silk scarf, on which she
has been embroidering in silver what looks to me very like a crest and
coat-of-arms.

"'I don't mind your seeing what I am about, Citizen Lomaque,' says she;
'for I know my father can trust you. That scarf is sent back to us by
the purchaser, an ex-emigrant lady of the old aristocratic school, to
have her family coat-of-arms embroidered on it.'

"'Rather a dangerous commission even in these mercifully democratic
times, is it not?' says I.

"'The old lady, you must know,' says she, 'is as proud as Lucifer;
and having got back safely to France in these days of moderate
republicanism, thinks she may now indulge with impunity in all her
old-fashioned notions. She has been an excellent customer of ours, so
my father thought it best to humor her, without, however, trusting her
commission to any of the workroom women to execute. We are not living
under the Reign of Terror now, certainly; still there is nothing like
being on the safe side.'

"'Nothing,' I answer. 'Pray what is this ex-emigrant's name?'

"'Danville,' replies the citoyenne Clairfait. 'She is going to appear
in that fine scarf at her son's marriage.'

"'Marriage!' I exclaim, perfectly thunderstruck.

"'Yes,' says she. 'What is there so amazing in that? By all accounts,
the son, poor man, deserves to make a lucky marriage this time. His
first wife was taken away from him in the Reign of Terror by the
guillotine.'

"'Who is he going to marry?' I inquire, still breathless.

"'The daughter of General Berthelin--an ex-aristocrat by family, like
the old lady; but by principle as good a republican as ever lived--a
hard-drinking, loud-swearing, big-whiskered old soldier, who snaps his
fingers at his ancestors and says we are all descended from Adam, the
first genuine sans-culotte in the world.'

"In this way the citoyenne Clairfait gossips on all dinner-time, but
says nothing more of any importance. I, with my old police-office
habits, set to the next day, and try to make some discoveries for
myself. The sum of what I find out is this: Danville's mother is staying
with General Berthelin's sister and daughter at Chalons, and Danville
himself is expected to arrive every day to escort them all three to
Paris, where the marriage-contract is to be signed at the general's
house. Discovering this, and seeing that prompt action is now of
the most vital importance, I undertake, as I told you, my employer's
commission for Paris, depart with all speed, and stop here on my way.
Wait! I have not done yet. All the haste I can make is not haste enough
to give me a good start of the wedding party. On my road here, the
diligence by which I travel is passed by a carriage, posting along
at full speed. I cannot see inside that carriage; but I look at the
box-seat, and recognize on it the old man Dubois. He whirls by in a
cloud of dust, but I am certain of him; and I say to myself what I now
say again to you, no time is to be lost!"

"No time _shall_ be lost," answers, Trudaine, firmly. "Three years have
passed," he continued, in a lower voice, speaking to himself rather than
to Lomaque; "three years since the day when I led my sister out of the
gates of the prison--three years since I said in my heart, 'I will be
patient, and will not seek to avenge myself. Our wrongs cry from earth
to heaven; from man who inflicts to God who redresses. When the day of
reckoning comes, let it be the day of his vengeance, not of mine.' In my
heart I said those words--I have been true to them--I have waited. The
day has come, and the duty it demands of me shall be fulfilled."

There was a moment's silence before Lomaque spoke again. "Your sister?"
he began, hesitatingly.

"It is there only that my purpose falters," said the other, earnestly.
"If it were but possible to spare her all knowledge of this last trial,
and to leave the accomplishment of the terrible task to me alone?"

"I think it is possible," interposed Lomaque. "Listen to what I advise.
We must depart for Paris by the diligence to-morrow morning, and we must
take your sister with us--to-morrow will be time enough; people don't
sign marriage-contracts on the evening after a long day's journey. We
must go then, and we must take your sister. Leave the care of her in
Paris, and the responsibility of keeping her in ignorance of what you
are doing, to me. Go to this General Berthelin's house at a time when
you know Danville is there (we can get that knowledge through the
servants); confront him without a moment's previous warning; confront
him as a man risen from the dead; confront him before every soul in the
room though the room should be full of people--and leave the rest to
the self-betrayal of a panic-stricken man. Say but three words, and your
duty will be done; you may return to your sister, and may depart with
her in safety to your old retreat at Rouen, or where else you please, on
the very day when you have put it out of her infamous husband's power to
add another to the list of his crimes."

"You forget the suddenness of the journey to Paris," said Trudaine.
"How are we to account for it without the risk of awakening my sister's
suspicions?"

"Trust that to me," answered Lomaque. "Let us return to the cottage at
once. No, not you," he added, suddenly, as they turned to retrace their
steps. "There is that in your face which would betray us. Leave me to
go back alone--I will say that you have gone to give some orders at
the inn. Let us separate immediately. You will recover your
self-possession--you will get to look yourself again sooner--if you are
left alone. I know enough of you to know that. We will not waste another
minute in explanations; even minutes are precious to us on such a day
as this. By the time you are fit to meet your sister again, I shall have
had time to say all I wish to her, and shall be waiting at the cottage
to tell you the result."

He looked at Trudaine, and his eyes seemed to brighten again with
something of the old energy and sudden decision of the days when he was
a man in office under the Reign of Terror. "Leave it to me," he said;
and, waving his hand, turned away quickly in the direction of the
cottage.

Nearly an hour passed before Trudaine ventured to follow him. When he at
length entered the path which led to the garden gate, he saw his sister
waiting at the cottage door. Her face looked unusually animated; and she
ran forward a step or two to meet him.

"Oh, Louis!" she said, "I have a confession to make, and I must beg you
to hear it patiently to the end. You must know that our good Lomaque,
though he came in tired from his walk, occupied himself the first thing,
at my request, in writing the letter which is to secure to us our dear
old home by the banks of the Seine. When he had done, he looked at me,
and said, 'I should like to be present at your happy return to the house
where I first saw you.' 'Oh, come, come with us!' I said directly. 'I am
not an independent man,' he answered; 'I have a margin of time allowed
me at Paris, certainly, but it is not long--if I were only my own
master--' and then he stopped. Louis, I remembered all we owed to him;
I remembered that there was no sacrifice we ought not to be too glad to
make for his sake; I felt the kindness of the wish he had expressed; and
perhaps I was a little influenced by my own impatience to see once more
my flower-garden and the rooms where we used to be so happy. So I said
to him, 'I am sure Louis will agree with me that our time is yours, and
that we shall be only too glad to advance our departure so as to make
traveling leisure enough for you to come with us to Rouen. We should be
worse than ungrateful--' He stopped me. 'You have always been good to
me,' he said. 'I must not impose on your kindness now. No, no, you have
formalities to settle before you can leave this place.' 'Not one,' I
said--for we have not, as you know, Louis? 'Why, here is your furniture
to begin with,' he said. 'A few chairs and tables hired from the inn,' I
answered; 'we have only to give the landlady our key, to leave a letter
for the owner of the cottage, and then--' He laughed. 'Why, to hear you
talk, one would think you were as ready to travel as I am!' 'So we are,'
I said, 'quite as ready, living in the way we do here.' He shook his
head; but you will not shake yours, Louis, I am sure, now you have heard
all my long story? You can't blame me can you?"

Before Trudaine could answer, Lomaque looked out of the cottage window.

"I have just been telling my brother every thing," said Rose, turning
round toward him.

"And what does he say?" asked Lomaque.

"He says what I say," replied Rose, answering for her brother; "that our
time is your time--the time of our best and dearest friend."

"Shall it be done, then?" asked Lomaque, with a meaning look at
Trudaine.

Rose glanced anxiously at her brother; his face was much graver than she
had expected to see it, but his answer relieved her from all suspense.

"You are quite right, love, to speak as you did," he said, gently. Then,
turning to Lomaque, he added, in a firmer voice, "It shall be done!"



CHAPTER II.

Two days after the traveling-carriage described by Lomaque had
passed the diligence on the road to Paris, Madame Danville sat in the
drawing-room of an apartment in the Rue de Grenelle, handsomely dressed
for driving out. After consulting a large gold watch that hung at
her side, and finding that it wanted a quarter of an hour only to
two o'clock, she rang her hand-bell, and said to the maid-servant who
answered the summons, "I have five minutes to spare. Send Dubois here
with my chocolate."

The old man made his appearance with great alacrity. After handing the
cup of chocolate to his mistress, he ventured to use the privilege of
talking, to which his long and faithful services entitled him, and paid
the old lady a compliment. "I am rejoiced to see madame looking so young
and in such good spirits this morning," he said, with a low bow and a
mild, deferential smile.

"I think I have some reason for being in good spirits on the day when my
son's marriage-contract is to be signed," said Madame Danville, with a
gracious nod of the head. "Ha, Dubois, I shall live yet to see him with
a patent of nobility in his hand. The mob has done its worst; the end
of this infamous revolution is not far off; our order will have its turn
again soon, and then who will have such a chance at court as my son? He
is noble already through his mother, he will then be noble also
through his wife. Yes, yes; let that coarse-mannered, passionate, old
soldier-father of hers be as unnaturally republican as he pleases, he
has inherited a name which will help my son to a peerage! The Vicomte
D'Anville (D with an apostrophe, Dubois, you understand?), the Vicomte
D'Anville--how prettily it sounds!"

"Charmingly, madame--charmingly. Ah! this second marriage of my young
master's begins under much better auspices than the first."

The remark was an unfortunate one. Madame Danville frowned portentously,
and rose in a great hurry from her chair.

"Are your wits failing you, you old fool?" she exclaimed, indignantly.
"What do you mean by referring to such a subject as that, on this day,
of all others? You are always harping on those two wretched people who
were guillotined, as if you thought I could have saved their lives. Were
you not present when my son and I met, after the time of the Terror? Did
you not hear my first words to him, when he told me of the catastrophe?
Were they not 'Charles, I love you; but if I thought you had let those
two unfortunates, who risked themselves to save me, die without risking
your life in return to save them, I would break my heart rather than
ever look at you or speak to you again!' Did I not say that? And did he
not answer, 'Mother, my life was risked for them. I proved my devotion
by exposing myself to arrest--I was imprisoned for my exertions--and
then I could do no more!' Did you not stand by and hear him give that
answer, overwhelmed while he spoke by generous emotion? Do you not know
that he really was imprisoned in the Temple? Do you dare to think that
we are to blame after that? I owe you much, Dubois, but if you are to
take liberties with me--"

"Oh, madame! I beg pardon a thousand times. I was thoughtless--only
thoughtless--"

"Silence! Is my coach at the door? Very well. Get ready to accompany me.
Your master will not have time to return here. He will meet me, for the
signing of the contract, at General Berthelin's house at two precisely.
Stop! Are there many people in the street? I can't be stared at by the
mob as I go to my carriage."

Dubois hobbled penitently to the window and looked out, while his
mistress walked to the door.

"The street is almost empty, madame," he said. "Only a man with a woman
on his arm, stopping and admiring your carriage. They seem like decent
people, as well as I can tell without my spectacles. Not mob, I should
say, madame; certainly not mob!"

"Very well. Attend me downstairs; and bring some loose silver with you,
in case those two decent people should be fit objects for charity.
No orders for the coachman, except that he is to go straight to the
general's house."

The party assembled at General Berthelin's to witness the signature
of the marriage-contract, comprised, besides the persons immediately
interested in the ceremony of the day, some young ladies, friends of the
bride, and a few officers, who had been comrades of her father's in past
years. The guests were distributed, rather unequally, in two handsome
apartments opening into each other--one called in the house the
drawing-room, and the other the library. In the drawing-room were
assembled the notary, with the contract ready, the bride, the young
ladies, and the majority of General Berthelin's friends. In the library,
the remainder of the military guests were amusing themselves at a
billiard-table until the signing of the contract should take place,
while Danville and his future father-in-law walked up and down the room
together, the first listening absently, the last talking with all
his accustomed energy, and with more than his accustomed allowance
of barrack-room expletives. The general had taken it into his head to
explain some of the clauses in the marriage-contract to the bridegroom,
who, though far better acquainted with their full scope and meaning than
his father-in-law, was obliged to listen for civility's sake. While the
old soldier was still in the midst of his long and confused harangue, a
clock struck on the library mantel-piece.

"Two o'clock!" exclaimed Danville, glad of any pretext for interrupting
the talk about the contract. "Two o'clock; and my mother not here yet!
What can be delaying her?"

"Nothing," cried the general. "When did you ever know a woman punctual,
my lad? If we wait for your mother--and she's such a rabid aristocrat
that she would never forgive us for not waiting--we shan't sign the
contract yet this half-hour. Never mind! let's go on with what we were
talking about. Where the devil was I when that cursed clock struck and
interrupted us? Now then, Black Eyes, what's the matter?"

This last question was addressed to Mademoiselle Berthelin, who at that
moment hastily entered the library from the drawing-room. She was a tall
and rather masculine-looking girl, with superb black eyes, dark hair
growing low on her forehead, and something of her father's decision and
bluntness in her manner of speaking.

"A stranger in the other room, papa, who wants to see you. I suppose the
servants showed him upstairs, thinking he was one of the guests. Ought I
to have had him shown down again?"

"A nice question! How should I know? Wait till I have seen him, miss,
and then I'll tell you!" With these words the general turned on his
heel, and went into the drawing-room.

His daughter would have followed him, but Danville caught her by the
hand.

"Can you be hard-hearted enough to leave me here alone?" he asked.

"What is to become of all my bosom friends in the next room, you selfish
man, if I stop here with you?" retorted mademoiselle, struggling to free
herself.

"Call them in here," said Danville gayly, making himself master of her
other hand.

She laughed, and drew him away toward the drawing-room.

"Come," she cried, "and let all the ladies see what a tyrant I am
going to marry. Come, and show them what an obstinate, unreasonable,
wearisome--"

Her voice suddenly failed her; she shuddered, and turned faint.
Danville's hand had in one instant grown cold as death in hers; the
momentary touch of his fingers, as she felt their grasp loosen, struck
some mysterious chill through her from head to foot. She glanced
round at him affrightedly, and saw his eyes looking straight into the
drawing-room. They were fixed in a strange, unwavering, awful stare,
while, from the rest of his face, all expression, all character, all
recognizable play and movement of feature, had utterly gone. It was
a breathless, lifeless mask--a white blank. With a cry of terror, she
looked where he seemed to be looking; and could see nothing but the
stranger standing in the middle of the drawing-room. Before she could
ask a question--before she could speak even a single word--her father
came to her, caught Danville by the arm, and pushed her roughly back
into the library.

"Go there, and take the women with you," he said, in a quick, fierce
whisper. "Into the library!" he continued, turning to the ladies,
and raising his voice. "Into the library, all of you, along with my
daughter."

The women, terrified by his manner, obeyed him in the greatest
confusion. As they hurried past him into the library, he signed to the
notary to follow; and then closed the door of communication between the
two rooms.

"Stop where you are!" he cried, addressing the old officers, who had
risen from their chairs. "Stay, I insist on it! Whatever happens,
Jacques Berthelin has done nothing to be ashamed of in the presence of
his old friends and companions. You have seen the beginning, now stay
and see the end."

While he spoke, he walked into the middle of the room. He had never
quitted his hold of Danville's arm; step by step they advanced together
to the place where Trudaine was standing.

"You have come into my house, and asked me for my daughter in
marriage--and I have given her to you," said the general, addressing
Danville, quietly. "You told me that your first wife and her brother
were guillotined three years ago in the time of the Terror--and I
believed you. Now look at that man--look him straight in the face. He
has announced himself to me as the brother of your wife, and he asserts
that his sister is alive at this moment. One of you two has deceived me.
Which is it?"

Danville tried to speak, but no sound passed his lips; tried to wrench
his arm from the grasp that was on it, but could not stir the old
soldier's steady hand.

"Are you afraid? are you a coward? Can't you look him in the face?"
asked the general, tightening his hold sternly.

"Stop! stop!" interposed one of the old officers, coming forward. "Give
him time. This may be a case of strange accidental resemblance, which
would be enough, under the circumstances, to discompose any man. You
will excuse me, citizen," he continued, turning to Trudaine; "but you
are a stranger. You have given us no proof of your identity."

"There is the proof," said Trudaine, pointing to Danville's face.

"Yes, yes," pursued the other; "he looks pale and startled enough,
certainly. But I say again, let us not be too hasty; there are strange
cases on record of accidental resemblances, and this may be one of
them!"

As he repeated those words, Danville looked at him with a faint,
cringing gratitude, stealing slowly over the blank terror of his face.
He bowed his head, murmured something, and gesticulated confusedly with
the hand that he was free to use.

"Look!" cried the old officer; "look, Berthelin; he denies the man's
identity."

"Do you hear that?" said the general, appealing to Trudaine. "Have you
proofs to confute him? If you have, produce them instantly."

Before the answer could be given the door leading into the drawing-room
from the staircase was violently flung open, and Madame Danville--her
hair in disorder, her face in its colorless terror looking like the very
counterpart of her son's--appeared on the threshold, with the old man
Dubois and a group of amazed and startled servants behind her.

"For God's sake, don't sign! for God's sake, come away!" she cried.
"I have seen your wife--in the spirit, or in the flesh, I know not
which--but I have seen her. Charles! Charles! as true as Heaven is above
us, I have seen your wife!"

"You have seen her in the flesh, living and breathing as you see her
brother yonder," said a firm, quiet voice, from among the servants on
the landing outside.

"Let that man enter, whoever he is!" cried the general.

Lomaque passed Madame Danville on the threshold. She trembled as he
brushed by her; then, supporting herself by the wall, followed him a
few paces into the room. She looked first at her son--after that, at
Trudaine--after that back again at her son. Something in her presence
silenced every one. There fell a sudden stillness over all the
assembly--a stillness so deep that the eager, frightened whispering, and
sharp rustling of dresses among the women in the library, became audible
from the other side of the closed door.

"Charles," she said, slowly advancing; "why do you look--" She stopped,
and fixed her eyes again on her son more earnestly than before; then
turned them suddenly on Trudaine. "You are looking at my son, sir," she
said, "and I see contempt in your face. By what right do you insult a
man whose grateful sense of his mother's obligations to you made him
risk his life for the saving of yours and your sister's? By what
right have you kept the escape of my son's wife from death by the
guillotine--an escape which, for all I know to the contrary, his
generous exertions were instrumental in effecting--a secret from my son?
By what right, I demand to know, has your treacherous secrecy placed us
in such a position as we now stand in before the master of this house?"

An expression of sorrow and pity passed over Trudaine's face while
she spoke. He retired a few steps, and gave her no answer. The general
looked at him with eager curiosity, and, dropping his hold of Danville's
arm, seemed about to speak; but Lomaque stepped forward at the same
time, and held up his hand to claim attention.

"I think I shall express the wishes of Citizen Trudaine," he said,
addressing Madame Danville, "if I recommend this lady not to press for
too public an answer to her questions."

"Pray who are you, sir, who take it on yourself to advise me?" she
retorted, haughtily. "I have nothing to say to you, except that I repeat
those questions, and that I insist on their being answered."

"Who is this man?" asked the general, addressing Trudaine, and pointing
to Lomaque.

"A man unworthy of credit," cried Danville, speaking audibly for the
first time, and darting a look of deadly hatred at Lomaque. "An agent of
police under Robespierre."

"And in that capacity capable of answering questions which refer to the
transactions of Robespierre's tribunals," remarked the ex-chief agent,
with his old official self-possession.

"True!" exclaimed the general; "the man is right--let him be heard."

"There is no help for it," said Lomaque, looking at Trudaine; "leave it
to me--it is fittest that I should speak. I was present," he continued,
in a louder voice, "at the trial of Citizen Trudaine and his sister.
They were brought to the bar through the denunciation of Citizen
Danville. Till the confession of the male prisoner exposed the fact,
I can answer for Danville's not being aware of the real nature of the
offenses charged against Trudaine and his sister. When it became known
that they had been secretly helping this lady to escape from France, and
when Danville's own head was consequently in danger, I myself heard
him save it by a false assertion that he had been aware of Trudaine's
conspiracy from the first--"

"Do you mean to say," interrupted the general, "that he proclaimed
himself in open court as having knowingly denounced the man who was on
trial for saving his mother?"

"I do," answered Lomaque. (A murmur of horror and indignation rose from
all the strangers present at that reply.) "The reports of the Tribunal
are existing to prove the truth of what I say," he went on. "As to the
escape of Citizen Trudaine and the wife of Danville from the guillotine,
it was the work of political circumstances, which there are persons
living to speak to if necessary; and of a little stratagem of mine,
which need not be referred to now. And, last, with reference to the
concealment which followed the escape, I beg to inform you that it was
abandoned the moment we knew of what was going on here; and that it was
only persevered in up to this time, as a natural measure of precaution
on the part of Citizen Trudaine. From a similar motive we now abstain
from exposing his sister to the shock and the peril of being present
here. What man with an atom of feeling would risk letting her even look
again on such a husband as that?"

He glanced round him, and pointed to Danville, as he put the question.
Before a word could be spoken by any one else in the room, a low wailing
cry of "My mistress! my dear, dear mistress!" directed all eyes first on
the old man Dubois, then on Madame Danville.

She had been leaning against the wall, before Lomaque began to speak;
but she stood perfectly upright now. She neither spoke nor moved. Not
one of the light gaudy ribbons flaunting on her disordered head-dress
so much as trembled. The old servant Dubois was crouched on his knees
at her side, kissing her cold right hand, chafing it in his, reiterating
his faint, mournful cry, "Oh! my mistress! my dear, dear mistress!" but
she did not appear to know that he was near her. It was only when her
son advanced a step or two toward her that she seemed to awaken suddenly
from that death-trance of mental pain. Then she slowly raised the hand
that was free, and waved him back from her. He stopped in obedience to
the gesture, and endeavored to speak. She waved her hand again, and the
deathly stillness of her face began to grow troubled. Her lips moved a
little--she spoke.

"Oblige me, sir, for the last time, by keeping silence. You and I have
henceforth nothing to say to each other. I am the daughter of a race of
nobles, and the widow of a man of honor. You are a traitor and a false
witness--a thing from which all true men and true women turn with
contempt. I renounce you! Publicly, in the presence of these gentlemen,
I say it--I have no son."

She turned her back on him; and, bowing to the other persons in the
room with the old formal courtesy of by-gone times, walked slowly and
steadily to the door. Stopping there, she looked back; and then the
artificial courage of the moment failed her. With a faint, suppressed
cry she clutched at the hand of the old servant, who still kept
faithfully at her side; he caught her in his arms, and her head sank on
his shoulder.

"Help him!" cried the general to the servants near the door. "Help him
to take her into the next room!"

The old man looked up suspiciously from his mistress to the persons who
were assisting him to support her. With a strange, sudden jealousy he
shook his hand at them. "Home," he cried; "she shall go home, and I will
take care of her. Away! you there--nobody holds her head but Dubois.
Downstairs! downstairs to her carriage! She has nobody but me now, and I
say that she shall be taken home."

As the door closed, General Berthelin approached Trudaine, who had
stood silent and apart, from the time when Lomaque first appeared in the
drawing-room.

"I wish to ask your pardon," said the old soldier, "because I have
wronged you by a moment of unjust suspicion. For my daughter's sake,
I bitterly regret that we did not see each other long ago; but I thank
you, nevertheless, for coming here, even at the eleventh hour."

While he was speaking, one of his friends came up, and touching him on
the shoulder, said: "Berthelin, is that scoundrel to be allowed to go?"

The general turned on his heel directly, and beckoned contemptuously to
Danville to follow him to the door. When they were well out of ear-shot,
he spoke these words:

"You have been exposed as a villain by your brother-in-law, and
renounced as a liar by your mother. They have done their duty by you,
and now it only remains for me to do mine. When a man enters the house
of another under false pretenses, and compromises the reputation of
his daughter, we old army men have a very expeditious way of making him
answer for it. It is just three o'clock now; at five you will find me
and one of my friends--"

He stopped, and looked round cautiously--then whispered the rest in
Danville's ear--threw open the door, and pointed downstairs.

"Our work here is done," said Lomaque, laying his hand on Trudaine's
arm. "Let us give Danville time to get clear of the house, and then
leave it too."

"My sister! where is she?" asked Trudaine, eagerly.

"Make your mind easy about her. I will tell you more when we get out."

"You will excuse me, I know," said General Berthelin, speaking to all
the persons present, with his hand on the library door, "if I leave you.
I have bad news to break to my daughter, and private business after that
to settle with a friend."

He saluted the company, with his usual bluff nod of the head, and
entered the library. A few minutes afterward, Trudaine and Lomaque left
the house.

"You will find your sister waiting for you in our apartment at the
hotel," said the latter. "She knows nothing, absolutely nothing, of what
has passed."

"But the recognition?" asked Trudaine, amazedly. "His mother saw her.
Surely she--"

"I managed it so that she should be seen, and should not see. Our former
experience of Danville suggested to me the propriety of making the
experiment, and my old police-office practice came in useful in carrying
it out. I saw the carriage standing at the door, and waited till the old
lady came down. I walked your sister away as she got in, and walked her
back again past the window as the carriage drove off. A moment did it,
and it turned out as useful as I thought it would. Enough of that! Go
back now to your sister. Keep indoors till the night mail starts for
Rouen. I have had two places taken for you on speculation. Go! resume
possession of your house, and leave me here to transact the business
which my employer has intrusted to me, and to see how matters end with
Danville and his mother. I will make time somehow to come and bid you
good-by at Rouen, though it should be only for a single day. Bah! no
thanks. Give us your hand. I was ashamed to take it eight years ago--I
can give it a hearty shake now! There is your way; here is mine. Leave
me to my business in silks and satins, and go you back to your sister,
and help her to pack up for the night mail."



CHAPTER III.

Three more days have passed. It is evening. Rose, Trudaine and Lomaque
are seated together on the bench that overlooks the windings of
the Seine. The old familiar scene spreads before them, beautiful as
ever--unchanged, as if it was but yesterday since they had all looked on
it for the last time.

They talk together seriously and in low voices. The same recollections
fill their hearts--recollections which they refrain from acknowledging,
but the influence of which each knows by instinct that the other
partakes. Sometimes one leads the conversation, sometimes another; but
whoever speaks, the topic chosen is always, as if by common consent, a
topic connected with the future.

The evening darkens in, and Rose is the first to rise from the bench. A
secret look of intelligence passes between her and her brother, and then
she speaks to Lomaque.

"Will you follow me into the house," she asks, "with as little delay as
possible? I have something that I very much wish to show you."

Her brother waits till she is out of hearing, then inquires anxiously
what has happened at Paris since the night when he and Rose left it.

"Your sister is free," Lomaque answers.

"The duel took place, then?"

"The same day. They were both to fire together. The second of his
adversary asserts that he was paralyzed with terror; his own second
declares that he was resolved, however he might have lived, to confront
death courageously by offering his life at the first fire to the man
whom he had injured. Which account is true, I know not. It is only
certain that he did not discharge his pistol, that he fell by his
antagonist's first bullet, and that he never spoke afterward."

"And his mother?"

"It is hard to gain information. Her doors are closed; the old servant
guards her with jealous care. A medical man is in constant attendance,
and there are reports in the house that the illness from which she is
suffering affects her mind more than her body. I could ascertain no
more."

After that answer they both remain silent for a little while, then rise
from the bench and walk toward the house.

"Have you thought yet about preparing your sister to hear of all that
has happened?" Lomaque asks, as he sees the lamp-light glimmering in the
parlor window.

"I shall wait to prepare her till we are settled again here--till
the first holiday pleasure of our return has worn off, and the quiet
realities of our every-day life of old have resumed their way," answers
Trudaine.

They enter the house. Rose beckons to Lomaque to sit down near her, and
places pen and ink and an open letter before him.

"I have a last favor to ask of you," she says, smiling.

"I hope it will not take long to grant," he rejoins; "for I have only
to-night to be with you. To-morrow morning, before you are up, I must be
on my way back to Chalons."

"Will you sign that letter?" she continues, still smiling, "and then
give it to me to send to the post? It was dictated by Louis, and written
by me, and it will be quite complete, if you will put your name at the
end of it."

"I suppose I may read it?"

She nods, and Lomaque reads these lines:


"CITIZEN--I beg respectfully to apprise you that the commission you
intrusted to me at Paris has been performed.

"I have also to beg that you will accept my resignation of the place
I hold in your counting-house. The kindness shown me by you and your
brother before you, emboldens me to hope that you will learn with
pleasure the motive of my withdrawal. Two friends of mine, who consider
that they are under some obligations to me, are anxious that I should
pass the rest of my days in the quiet and protection of their home.
Troubles of former years have knit us together as closely as if we were
all three members of one family. I need the repose of a happy fireside
as much as any man, after the life I have led; and my friends assure
me so earnestly that their whole hearts are set on establishing the old
man's easy-chair by their hearth, that I cannot summon resolution enough
to turn my back on them and their offer.

"Accept, then, I beg of you, the resignation which this letter contains,
and with it the assurance of my sincere gratitude and respect.

"To Citizen Clairfait, Silk-mercer,

"Chalons-sur-Marne."


After reading these lines, Lomaque turned round to Trudaine and
attempted to speak; but the words would not come at command. He looked
up at Rose, and tried to smile; but his lip only trembled. She dipped
the pen in the ink, and placed it in his hand. He bent his head down
quickly over the paper, so that she could not see his face; but still
he did not write his name. She put her hand caressingly on his shoulder,
and whispered to him:

"Come, come, humor 'Sister Rose.' She must have her own way now she is
back again at home."

He did not answer--his head sank lower--he hesitated for an
instant--then signed his name in faint, trembling characters, at the end
of the letter.

She drew it away from him gently. A few tear-drops lay on the paper. As
she dried them with her handkerchief she looked at her brother.

"They are the last he shall ever shed, Louis; you and I will take care
of that!"




EPILOGUE TO THE THIRD STORY.

I have now related all that is eventful in the history of SISTER ROSE.
To the last the three friends dwelt together happily in the cottage
on the river bank. Mademoiselle Clairfait was fortunate enough to know
them, before Death entered the little household and took away, in the
fullness of time, the eldest of its members. She describes Lomaque,
in her quaint foreign English, as "a brave, big heart"; generous,
affectionate, and admirably free from the small obstinacies and
prejudices of old age, except on one point: he could never be induced
to take his coffee, of an evening, from any other hand than the hand of
Sister Rose.

I linger over these final particulars with a strange unwillingness to
separate myself from them, and give my mind to other thoughts. Perhaps
the persons and events that have occupied my attention for so many
nights past have some peculiar interest for me that I cannot analyze.
Perhaps the labor and time which this story has cost me have especially
endeared it to my sympathies, now that I have succeeded in completing
it. However that may be, I have need of some resolution to part at last
with Sister Rose, and return, in the interests of my next and Fourth
Story, to English ground.

I have experienced so much difficulty, let me add, in deciding on the
choice of a new narrative out of my collection, that my wife has lost
all patience, and has undertaken, on her own responsibility, to relieve
me of my unreasonable perplexities. By her advice--given, as usual,
without a moment's hesitation--I cannot do better than tell the story of

THE LADY OF GLENWITH GRANGE.




PROLOGUE TO THE FOURTH STORY.

My practice in the art of portrait-painting, if it has done nothing
else, has at least fitted me to turn my talents (such as they are) to
a great variety of uses. I have not only taken the likenesses of men,
women, and children, but have also extended the range of my brush, under
stress of circumstances, to horses, dogs, houses, and in one case even
to a bull--the terror and glory of his parish, and the most truculent
sitter I ever had. The beast was appropriately named "Thunder and
Lightning," and was the property of a gentleman-farmer named Garthwaite,
a distant connection of my wife's family.

How it was that I escaped being gored to death before I had finished my
picture is more than I can explain to this day. "Thunder and Lightning"
resented the very sight of me and my color-box, as if he viewed the
taking of his likeness in the light of a personal insult. It required
two men to coax him, while a third held him by a ring in his nostrils,
before I could venture on beginning to work. Even then he always lashed
his tail, and jerked his huge head, and rolled his fiery eyes with a
devouring anxiety to have me on his horns for daring to sit down quietly
and look at him. Never, I can honestly say, did I feel more heartily
grateful for the blessings of soundness of limb and wholeness of skin,
than when I had completed the picture of the bull!

One morning, when I had but little more than half done my unwelcome
task, my friend and I were met on our way to the bull's stable by the
farm bailiff, who informed us gravely that "Thunder and Lightning" was
just then in such an especially surly state of temper as to render it
quite unsafe for me to think of painting him. I looked inquiringly at
Mr. Garthwaite, who smiled with an air of comic resignation, and said,
"Very well, then, we have nothing for it but to wait till to-morrow.
What do you say to a morning's fishing, Mr. Kerby, now that my bull's
bad temper has given us a holiday?"

I replied, with perfect truth, that I knew nothing about fishing. But
Mr. Garthwaite, who was as ardent an angler in his way as Izaak Walton
himself, was not to be appeased even by the best of excuses. "It is
never too late to learn," cried he. "I will make a fisherman of you in
no time, if you will only attend to my directions." It was impossible
for me to make any more apologies, without the risk of appealing
discourteous. So I thanked my host for his friendly intentions, and,
with some secret misgivings, accepted the first fishing-rod that he put
into my hands.

"We shall soon get there," said Mr. Garthwaite. "I am taking you to the
best mill-stream in the neighborhood." It was all one to me whether we
got there soon or late and whether the stream was good or bad. However,
I did my best to conceal my unsportsman-like apathy; and tried to look
quite happy and very impatient to begin, as we drew near to the mill,
and heard louder and louder the gushing of many waters all round it.

Leading the way immediately to a place beneath the falling stream, where
there was a deep, eddying pool, Mr. Garthwaite baited and threw in
his line before I had fixed the joints of my fishing-rod. This first
difficulty overcome, I involuntarily plunged into some excellent, but
rather embarrassing, sport with my line and hook. I caught every one
of my garments, from head to foot; I angled for my own clothes with
the dexterity and success of Izaak Walton himself. I caught my hat, my
jacket, my waistcoat, my trousers, my fingers, and my thumbs--some devil
possessed my hook; some more than eel-like vitality twirled and twisted
in every inch of my line. By the time my host arrived to assist me,
I had attached myself to my fishing-rod, apparently for life. All
difficulties yielded, however, to his patience and skill; my hook was
baited for me, and thrown in; my rod was put into my hand; my friend
went back to his place; and we began at last to angle in earnest.

We certainly caught a few fish (in _my_ case, I mean, of course, that
the fish caught themselves); but they were scanty in number and light
in weight. Whether it was the presence of the miller's foreman--a
gloomy personage, who stood staring disastrously upon us from a little
flower-garden on the opposite bank--that cast adverse influence over our
sport; or whether my want of faith and earnestness as an angler acted
retributively on my companion as well as myself, I know not; but it is
certain that he got almost as little reward for his skill as I got for
my patience. After nearly two hours of intense expectation on my part,
and intense angling on his, Mr. Garthwaite jerked his line out of the
water in a rage, and bade me follow him to another place, declaring that
the stream must have been netted by poachers in the night, who had taken
all the large fish away with them, and had thrown in the small ones
to grow until their next visit. We moved away, further down the bank,
leaving the imperturbable foreman still in the flower-garden, staring at
us speechlessly on our departure, exactly as he had already stared at us
on our approach.

"Stop a minute," said Mr. Garthwaite suddenly, after we had walked some
distance in silence by the side of the stream, "I have an idea. Now we
are out for a day's angling, we won't be balked. Instead of trying
the water here again, we will go where I know, by experience, that the
fishing is excellent. And what is more, you shall be introduced to a
lady whose appearance is sure to interest you, and whose history, I can
tell you beforehand, is a very remarkable one."

"Indeed," I said. "May I ask in what way?"

"She is connected," answered Mr. Garthwaite, "with an extraordinary
story, which relates to a family once settled in an old house in this
neighborhood. Her name is Miss Welwyn; but she is less formally known
an among the poor people about here, who love her dearly, and honor her
almost superstitiously, as the Lady of Glenwith Grange. Wait till you
have seen her before you ask me to say anything more. She lives in the
strictest retirement; I am almost the only visitor who is admitted.
Don't say you had rather not go in. Any friend of mine will be welcome
at the Grange (the scene of the story, remember), for my sake--the more
especially because I have never abused my privilege of introduction. The
place is not above two miles from here, and the stream (which we call,
in our county dialect, Glenwith Beck) runs through the ground."

As we walked on, Mr. Garthwaite's manner altered. He became unusually
silent and thoughtful. The mention of Miss Welwyn's name had evidently
called up some recollections which were not in harmony with his
every-day mood. Feeling that to talk to him on any indifferent subject
would be only to interrupt his thoughts to no purpose, I walked by his
side in perfect silence, looking out already with some curiosity and
impatience for a first view of Glenwith Grange. We stopped at last close
by an old church, standing on the outskirts of a pretty village. The low
wall of the churchyard was bounded on one side by a plantation, and was
joined by a park paling, in which I noticed a small wicket-gate. Mr.
Garthwaite opened it, and led me along a shrubbery path, which conducted
us circuitously to the dwelling-house.

We had evidently entered by a private way, for we approached the
building by the back. I looked up at it curiously, and saw standing at
one of the windows on the lower floor a little girl watching us as we
advanced. She seemed to be about nine or ten years old. I could not help
stopping a moment to look up at her, her clear complexion and her
long dark hair were so beautiful. And yet there was something in her
expression--a dimness and vacancy in her large eyes--a changeless,
unmeaning smile on her parted lips--which seemed to jar with all that
was naturally attractive in her face; which perplexed, disappointed, and
even shocked me, though I hardy knew why. Mr. Garthwaite, who had been
walking along thoughtfully, with his eyes on the ground, turned back
when he found me lingering behind him; looked up where I was looking;
started a little, I thought; then took my arm, whispered rather
impatiently, "Don't say anything about having seen that poor child when
you are introduced to Miss Welwyn; I'll tell you why afterward," and led
me round hastily to the front of the building.

It was a very dreary old house, with a lawn in front thickly sprinkled
with flower-beds, and creepers of all sorts climbing in profusion about
the heavy stone porch and the mullions of the lower windows. In spite
of these prettiest of all ornaments clustering brightly round the
building--in spite of the perfect repair in which it was kept from top
to bottom--there was something repellent to me in the aspect of the
whole place: a deathly stillness hung over it, which fell oppressively
on my spirits. When my companion rang the loud, deep-toned bell, the
sound startled me as if we had been committing a crime in disturbing the
silence. And when the door was opened by an old female servant (while
the hollow echo of the bell was still vibrating in the air), I could
hardly imagine it possible that we should be let in. We were admitted,
however, without the slightest demur. I remarked that there was the
same atmosphere of dreary repose inside the house which I had already
observed, or rather felt, outside it. No dogs barked at our approach--no
doors banged in the servants' offices--no heads peeped over the
banisters--not one of the ordinary domestic consequences of an
unexpected visit in the country met either eye or ear. The large
shadowy apartment, half library, half breakfast-room, into which we were
ushered, was as solitary as the hall of entrance; unless I except such
drowsy evidences of life as were here presented to us in the shape of
an Angola cat and a gray parrot--the first lying asleep in a chair, the
second sitting ancient, solemn, and voiceless, in a large cage.

Mr. Garthwaite walked to the window when we entered, without saying a
word. Determining to let his taciturn humor have its way, I asked him no
questions, but looked around the room to see what information it would
give me (and rooms often do give such information) about the character
and habits of the owner of the house.

Two tables covered with books were the first objects that attracted me.
On approaching them, I was surprised to find that the all-influencing
periodical literature of the present day--whose sphere is already almost
without limit; whose readers, even in our time, may be numbered by
millions--was entirely unrepresented on Miss Welwyn's table. Nothing
modern, nothing contemporary, in the world of books, presented itself.
Of all the volumes beneath my hand, not one bore the badge of the
circulating library, or wore the flaring modern livery of gilt cloth.
Every work that I took up had been written at least fifteen or twenty
years since. The prints hanging round the walls (toward which I next
looked) were all engraved from devotional subjects by the old masters;
the music-stand contained no music of later date than the compositions
of Haydn and Mozart. Whatever I examined besides, told me, with the same
consistency, the same strange tale. The owner of these possessions
lived in the by-gone time; lived among old recollections and old
associations--a voluntary recluse from all that was connected with the
passing day. In Miss Welwyn's house, the stir, the tumult, the "idle
business" of the world evidently appealed in vain to sympathies which
grew no longer with the growing hour.

As these thoughts were passing through my mind, the door opened and the
lady herself appeared.

She looked certainly past the prime of life; longer past it, as I
afterward discovered, than she really was. But I never remember, in any
other face, to have seen so much of the better part of the beauty of
early womanhood still remaining, as I saw in hers. Sorrow had evidently
passed over the fair, calm countenance before me, but had left
resignation there as its only trace. Her expression was still
youthful--youthful in its kindness and its candor especially. It was
only when I looked at her hair, that was now growing gray--at her
wan, thin hands--at the faint lines marked round her mouth--at the sad
serenity of her eyes, that I fairly detected the mark of age; and, more
than that, the token of some great grief, which had been conquered, but
not banished. Even from her voice alone--from the peculiar uncertainty
of its low, calm tones when she spoke--it was easy to conjecture that
she must have passed through sufferings, at some time of her life, which
had tried to the quick the noble nature that they could not subdue.

Mr. Garthwaite and she met each other almost like brother and sister; it
was plain that the friendly intimacy between them had been of very long
duration. Our visit was a short one. The conversation never advanced
beyond the commonplace topics suited to the occasion. It was, therefore,
from what I saw, and not from what I heard, that I was enabled to form
my judgment of Miss Welwyn. Deeply as she had interested me--far more
deeply than I at all know how to explain in fitting words--I cannot
say that I was unwilling to depart when we rose to take leave. Though
nothing could be more courteous and more kind than her manner toward me
during the whole interview, I could still perceive that it cost her some
effort to repress in my presence the shades of sadness and reserve which
seemed often ready to steal over her. And I must confess that when I
once or twice heard the half-sigh stifled, and saw the momentary
relapse into thoughtfulness suddenly restrained, I felt an indefinable
awkwardness in my position which made me ill at ease; which set me
doubting whether, as a perfect stranger, I had done right in suffering
myself to be introduced where no new faces could awaken either interest
or curiosity; where no new sympathies could ever be felt, no new
friendships ever be formed.

As soon as we had taken leave of Miss Welwyn, and were on our way to
the stream in her grounds, I more than satisfied Mr. Garthwaite that
the impression the lady had produced on me was of no transitory kind,
by overwhelming him with questions about her--not omitting one or two
incidental inquiries on the subject of the little girl whom I had seen
at the back window. He only rejoined that his story would answer all my
questions; and that he would begin to tell it as soon as we had arrived
at Glenwith Beck, and were comfortably settled to fishing.

Five minutes more of walking brought us to the bank of the stream, and
showed us the water running smoothly and slowly, tinged with the softest
green luster from the reflections of trees which almost entirely arched
it over. Leaving me to admire the view at my ease, Mr. Garthwaite
occupied himself with the necessary preparations for angling, baiting my
hook as well as his own. Then, desiring me to sit near him on the bank,
he at last satisfied my curiosity by beginning his story. I shall relate
it in his own manner, and, as nearly as possible, in his own words.




THE ANGLER'S STORY of THE LADY OF GLENWITH GRANGE.

I have known Miss Welwyn long enough to be able to bear personal
testimony to the truth of many of the particulars which I am now about
to relate. I knew her father, and her younger sister Rosamond; and I was
acquainted with the Frenchman who became Rosamond's husband. These are
the persons of whom it will be principally necessary for me to speak.
They are the only prominent characters in my story.

Miss Welwyn's father died some years since. I remember him very
well--though he never excited in me, or in any one else that I ever
heard of, the slightest feeling of interest. When I have said that he
inherited a very large fortune, amassed during his father's time, by
speculations of a very daring, very fortunate, but not always very
honorable kind, and that he bought this old house with the notion of
raising his social position, by making himself a member of our landed
aristocracy in these parts, I have told you as much about him, I
suspect, as you would care to hear. He was a thoroughly commonplace man,
with no great virtues and no great vices in him. He had a little heart,
a feeble mind, an amiable temper, a tall figure, and a handsome face.
More than this need not, and cannot, be said on the subject of Mr.
Welwyn's character.

I must have seen the late Mrs. Welwyn very often as a child; but I
cannot say that I remember anything more of her than that she was tall
and handsome, and very generous and sweet-tempered toward me when I
was in her company. She was her husband's superior in birth, as in
everything else; was a great reader of books in all languages; and
possessed such admirable talents as a musician, that her wonderful
playing on the organ is remembered and talked of to this day among the
old people in our country houses about here. All her friends, as I have
heard, were disappointed when she married Mr. Welwyn, rich as he was;
and were afterward astonished to find her preserving the appearance, at
least, of being perfectly happy with a husband who, neither in mind nor
heart, was worthy of her.

It was generally supposed (and I have no doubt correctly) that she
found her great happiness and her great consolation in her little girl
Ida--now the lady from whom we have just parted. The child took after
her mother from the first--inheriting her mother's fondness for books,
her mother's love of music, her mother's quick sensibilities, and, more
than all, her mother's quiet firmness, patience, and loving kindness of
disposition. From Ida's earliest years, Mrs. Welwyn undertook the whole
superintendence of her education. The two were hardly ever apart, within
doors or without. Neighbors and friends said that the little girl
was being brought up too fancifully, and was not enough among other
children, was sadly neglected as to all reasonable and practical
teaching, and was perilously encouraged in those dreamy and imaginative
tendencies of which she had naturally more than her due share. There
was, perhaps, some truth in this; and there might have been still more,
if Ida had possessed an ordinary character, or had been reserved for
an ordinary destiny. But she was a strange child from the first, and a
strange future was in store for her.

Little Ida reached her eleventh year without either brother or sister to
be her playfellow and companion at home. Immediately after that period,
however, her sister Rosamond was born. Though Mr. Welwyn's own desire
was to have had a son, there were, nevertheless, great rejoicings yonder
in the old house on the birth of this second daughter. But they were all
turned, only a few months afterward, to the bitterest grief and despair:
the Grange lost its mistress. While Rosamond was still an infant in
arms, her mother died.

Mrs. Welwyn had been afflicted with some disorder after the birth of
her second child, the name of which I am not learned enough in medical
science to be able to remember. I only know that she recovered from it,
to all appearance, in an unexpectedly short time; that she suffered a
fatal relapse, and that she died a lingering and a painful death. Mr.
Welwyn (who, in after years, had a habit of vaingloriously describing
his marriage as "a love-match on both sides") was really fond of his
wife in his own frivolous, feeble way, and suffered as acutely as such
a man could suffer, during the latter days of her illness, and at the
terrible time when the doctors, one and all, confessed that her life
was a thing to be despaired of. He burst into irrepressible passions
of tears, and was always obliged to leave the sick-room whenever Mrs.
Welwyn spoke of her approaching end. The last solemn words of the dying
woman, the tenderest messages that she could give, the dearest parting
wishes that she could express, the most earnest commands that she could
leave behind her, the gentlest reasons for consolation that she could
suggest to the survivors among those who loved her, were not poured into
her husband's ear, but into her child's. From the first period of
her illness, Ida had persisted in remaining in the sick-room, rarely
speaking, never showing outwardly any signs of terror or grief, except
when she was removed from it; and then bursting into hysterical passions
of weeping, which no expostulations, no arguments, no commands--nothing,
in short, but bringing her back to the bedside--ever availed to calm.
Her mother had been her playfellow, her companion her dearest and most
familiar friend; and there seemed something in the remembrance of this
which, instead of overwhelming the child with despair, strengthened her
to watch faithfully and bravely by her dying parent to the very last.

When the parting moment was over, and when Mr. Welwyn, unable to bear
the shock of being present in the house of death at the time of his
wife's funeral, left home and went to stay with one of his relations in
a distant part of England, Ida, whom it had been his wish to take away
with him, petitioned earnestly to be left behind. "I promised mamma
before she died that I would be as good to my little sister Rosamond as
she had been to me," said the child, simply; "and she told me in return
that I might wait here and see her laid in her grave." There happened
to be an aunt of Mrs. Welwyn, and an old servant of the family, in the
house at this time, who understood Ida much better than her father did,
and they persuaded him not to take her away. I have heard my mother say
that the effect of the child's appearance at the funeral on her, and
on all who went to see it, was something that she could never think of
without the tears coming into her eyes, and could never forget to the
last day of her life.

It must have been very shortly after this period that I saw Ida for the
first time.

I remember accompanying my mother on a visit to the old house we have
just left, in the summer, when I was at home for the holidays. It was
a lovely, sunshiny morning. There was nobody indoors, and we walked out
into the garden. As we approached that lawn yonder, on the other side
of the shrubbery, I saw, first, a young woman in mourning (apparently
a servant) sitting reading; then a little girl, dressed all in black,
moving toward us slowly over the bright turf, and holding up before her
a baby, whom she was trying to teach to walk. She looked, to my ideas,
so very young to be engaged in such an occupation as this, and her
gloomy black frock appeared to be such an unnaturally grave garment for
a mere child of her age, and looked so doubly dismal by contrast with
the brilliant sunny lawn on which she stood, that I quite started when
I first saw her, and eagerly asked my mother who she was. The answer
informed me of the sad family story, which I have been just relating to
you. Mrs. Welwyn had then been buried about three months; and Ida,
in her childish way, was trying, as she had promised, to supply her
mother's place to her infant sister Rosamond.

I only mention this simple incident, because it is necessary, before
I proceed to the eventful part of my narrative, that you should know
exactly in what relation the sisters stood toward one another from the
first. Of all the last parting words that Mrs. Welwyn had spoken to her
child, none had been oftener repeated, none more solemnly urged, than
those which had commended the little Rosamond to Ida's love and care.
To other persons, the full, the all-trusting dependence which the dying
mother was known to have placed in a child hardly eleven years old,
seemed merely a proof of that helpless desire to cling even to the
feeblest consolations, which the approach of death so often brings with
it. But the event showed that the trust so strangely placed had not been
ventured vainly when it was committed to young and tender hands. The
whole future existence of the child was one noble proof that she had
been worthy of her mother's dying confidence, when it was first reposed
in her. In that simple incident which I have just mentioned the new life
of the two motherless sisters was all foreshadowed.

Time passed. I left school--went to college--traveled in Germany, and
stayed there some time to learn the language. At every interval when I
came home, and asked about the Welwyns, the answer was, in substance,
almost always the same. Mr. Welwyn was giving his regular dinners,
performing his regular duties as a county magistrate, enjoying his
regular recreations as an a amateur farmer and an eager sportsman. His
two daughters were never separate. Ida was the same strange, quiet,
retiring girl, that she had always been; and was still (as the phrase
went) "spoiling" Rosamond in every way in which it was possible for an
elder sister to spoil a younger by too much kindness.

I myself went to the Grange occasionally, when I was in this
neighborhood, in holiday and vacation time; and was able to test the
correctness of the picture of life there which had been drawn for me. I
remember the two sisters, when Rosamond was four or five years old; and
when Ida seemed to me, even then, to be more like the child's mother
than her sister. She bore with her little caprices as sisters do not
bear with one another. She was so patient at lesson-time, so anxious to
conceal any weariness that might overcome her in play hours, so proud
when Rosamond's beauty was noticed, so grateful for Rosamond's kisses
when the child thought of bestowing them, so quick to notice all
that Rosamond did, and to attend to all that Rosamond said, even when
visitors were in the room, that she seemed, to my boyish observation,
altogether different from other elder sisters in other family circles
into which I was then received.

I remember then, again, when Rosamond was just growing to womanhood, and
was in high spirits at the prospect of spending a season in London,
and being presented at court. She was very beautiful at that time--much
handsomer than Ida. Her "accomplishments" were talked of far and near in
our country circles. Few, if any, of the people, however, who applauded
her playing and singing, who admired her water-color drawings, who were
delighted at her fluency when she spoke French, and amazed at her ready
comprehension when she read German, knew how little of all this elegant
mental cultivation and nimble manual dexterity she owed to her governess
and masters, and how much to her elder sister. It was Ida who really
found out the means of stimulating her when she was idle; Ida who helped
her through all her worst difficulties; Ida who gently conquered her
defects of memory over her books, her inaccuracies of ear at the piano,
her errors of taste when she took the brush and pencil in hand. It was
Ida alone who worked these marvels, and whose all-sufficient reward for
her hardest exertions was a chance word of kindness from her sister's
lips. Rosamond was not unaffectionate, and not ungrateful; but she
inherited much of her father's commonness and frivolity of character.
She became so accustomed to owe everything to her sister--to resign all
her most trifling difficulties to Ida's ever-ready care--to have all
her tastes consulted by Ida's ever-watchful kindness--that she never
appreciated, as it deserved, the deep, devoted love of which she was the
object. When Ida refused two good offers of marriage, Rosamond was as
much astonished as the veriest strangers, who wondered why the elder
Miss Welwyn seemed bent on remaining single all her life.

When the journey to London, to which I have already alluded, took place,
Ida accompanied her father and sister. If she had consulted her own
tastes, she would have remained in the country; but Rosamond declared
that she should feel quite lost and helpless twenty times a day, in
town, without her sister. It was in the nature of Ida to sacrifice
herself to any one whom she loved, on the smallest occasions as well
as the greatest. Her affection was as intuitively ready to sanctify
Rosamond's slightest caprices as to excuse Rosamond's most thoughtless
faults. So she went to London cheerfully, to witness with pride all the
little triumphs won by her sister's beauty; to hear, and never tire of
hearing, all that admiring friends could say in her sister's praise.

At the end of the season Mr. Welwyn and his daughters returned for a
short time to the country; then left home again to spend the latter part
of the autumn and the beginning of the winter in Paris.

They took with them excellent letters of introduction, and saw a great
deal of the best society in Paris, foreign as well as English. At one of
the first of the evening parties which they attended, the general topic
of conversation was the conduct of a certain French nobleman, the Baron
Franval, who had returned to his native country after a long absence,
and who was spoken of in terms of high eulogy by the majority of the
guests present. The history of who Franval was, and of what he had
done, was readily communicated to Mr. Welwyn and his daughters, and was
briefly this:

The baron inherited little from his ancestors besides his high rank
and his ancient pedigree. On the death of his parents, he and his
two unmarried sisters (their only surviving children) found the small
territorial property of the Franvals, in Normandy, barely productive
enough to afford a comfortable subsistence for the three. The baron,
then a young man of three-and-twenty endeavored to obtain such military
or civil employment as might become his rank; but, although the Bourbons
were at that time restored to the throne of France, his efforts were
ineffectual. Either his interest at court was bad, or secret enemies
were at work to oppose his advancement. He failed to obtain even the
slightest favor; and, irritated by undeserved neglect, resolved to leave
France, and seek occupation for his energies in foreign countries, where
his rank would be no bar to his bettering his fortunes, if he pleased,
by engaging in commercial pursuits.

An opportunity of the kind that he wanted unexpectedly offered itself.
He left his sisters in care of an old male relative of the family at
the chateau in Normandy, and sailed, in the first instance, to the West
Indies; afterward extending his wanderings to the continent of South
America, and there engaging in mining transactions on a very large
scale. After fifteen years of absence (during the latter part of which
time false reports of his death had reached Normandy), he had just
returned to France, having realized a handsome independence, with which
he proposed to widen the limits of his ancestral property, and to give
his sisters (who were still, like himself, unmarried) all the luxuries
and advantages that affluence could bestow. The baron's independent
spirit and generous devotion to the honor of his family and the
happiness of his surviving relatives were themes of general admiration
in most of the social circles of Paris. He was expected to arrive in
the capital every day; and it was naturally enough predicted that his
reception in society there could not fail to be of the most flattering
and most brilliant kind.

The Welwyns listened to this story with some little interest; Rosamond,
who was very romantic, being especially attracted by it, and openly
avowing to her father and sister, when they got back to their hotel,
that she felt as ardent a curiosity as anybody to see the adventurous
and generous baron. The desire was soon gratified. Franval came to
Paris, as had been anticipated--was introduced to the Welwyns--met them
constantly in society--made no favorable impression on Ida, but won the
good opinion of Rosamond from the first; and was regarded with such
high approval by their father, that when he mentioned his intentions of
visiting England in the spring of the new year, he was cordially invited
to spend the hunting season at Glenwith Grange.

I came back from Germany about the same time that the Welwyns returned
from Paris, and at once set myself to improve my neighborly intimacy
with the family. I was very fond of Ida; more fond, perhaps, than my
vanity will now allow me to--; but that is of no consequence. It is much
more to the purpose to tell you that I heard the whole of the baron's
story enthusiastically related by Mr. Welwyn and Rosamond; that he came
to the Grange at the appointed time; that I was introduced to him; and
that he produced as unfavorable an impression upon me as he had already
produced upon Ida.

It was whimsical enough; but I really could not tell why I disliked him,
though I could account very easily, according to my own notions, for
his winning the favor and approval of Rosamond and her father. He was
certainly a handsome man as far as features went; he had a winning
gentleness and graceful respect in his manner when he spoke to women;
and he sang remarkably well, with one of the sweetest tenor voices I
ever heard. These qualities alone were quite sufficient to attract any
girl of Rosamond's disposition; and I certainly never wondered why he
was a favorite of hers.

Then, as to her father, the baron was not only fitted to win his
sympathy and regard in the field, by proving himself an ardent sportsman
and an excellent rider; but was also, in virtue of some of his minor
personal peculiarities, just the man to gain the friendship of his host.
Mr. Welwyn was as ridiculously prejudiced as most weak-headed Englishmen
are, on the subject of foreigners in general. In spite of his visit to
Paris, the vulgar notion of a Frenchman continued to be _his_ notion,
both while he was in France and when he returned from it. Now, the baron
was as unlike the traditional "Mounseer" of English songs, plays, and
satires, as a man could well be; and it was on account of this very
dissimilarity that Mr. Welwyn first took a violent fancy to him, and
then invited him to his house. Franval spoke English remarkably well;
wore neither beard, mustache, nor whiskers; kept his hair cut almost
unbecomingly short; dressed in the extreme of plainness and modest good
taste; talked little in general society; uttered his words, when he did
speak, with singular calmness and deliberation; and, to crown all,
had the greater part of his acquired property invested in English
securities. In Mr. Welwyn's estimation, such a man as this was a perfect
miracle of a Frenchman, and he admired and encouraged him accordingly.

I have said that I disliked him, yet could not assign a reason for my
dislike; and I can only repeat it now. He was remarkably polite to me;
we often rode together in hunting, and sat near each other at the Grange
table; but I could never become familiar with him. He always gave me
the idea of a man who had some mental reservation in saying the most
trifling thing. There was a constant restraint, hardly perceptible to
most people, but plainly visible, nevertheless, to me, which seemed
to accompany his lightest words, and to hang about his most familiar
manner. This, however, was no just reason for my secretly disliking and
distrusting him as I did. Ida said as much to me, I remember, when
I confessed to her what my feelings toward him were, and tried (but
vainly) to induce her to be equally candid with me in return. She seemed
to shrink from the tacit condemnation of Rosamond's opinion which such
a confidence on her part would have implied. And yet she watched the
growth of that opinion--or, in other words, the growth of her sister's
liking for the baron--with an apprehension and sorrow which she tried
fruitlessly to conceal. Even her father began to notice that her spirits
were not so good as usual, and to suspect the cause of her melancholy.
I remember he jested, with all the dense insensibility of a stupid man,
about Ida having invariably been jealous, from a child, if Rosamond
looked kindly upon anybody except her elder sister.

The spring began to get far advanced toward summer. Franval paid a visit
to London; came back in the middle of the season to Glenwith Grange;
wrote to put off his departure for France; and at last (not at all to
the surprise of anybody who was intimate with the Welwyns) proposed to
Rosamond, and was accepted. He was candor and generosity itself when the
preliminaries of the marriage-settlement were under discussion. He quite
overpowered Mr. Welwyn and the lawyers with references, papers, and
statements of the distribution and extent of his property, which were
found to be perfectly correct. His sisters were written to, and returned
the most cordial answers; saying that the state of their health would
not allow them to come to England for the marriage; but adding a warm
invitation to Normandy for the bride and her family. Nothing, in
short, could be more straightforward and satisfactory than the baron's
behavior, and the testimonies to his worth and integrity which the news
of the approaching marriage produced from his relatives and his friends.

The only joyless face at the Grange now was Ida's. At any time it would
have been a hard trial to her to resign that first and foremost place
which she had held since childhood in her sister's heart, as she knew
she must resign it when Rosamond married. But, secretly disliking and
distrusting Franval as she did, the thought that he was soon to become
the husband of her beloved sister filled her with a vague sense of
terror which she could not explain to herself; which it was imperatively
necessary that she should conceal; and which, on those very accounts,
became a daily and hourly torment to her that was almost more than she
could bear.

One consolation alone supported her: Rosamond and she were not to be
separated. She knew that the baron secretly disliked her as much as she
disliked him; she knew that she must bid farewell to the brighter and
happier part of her life on the day when she went to live under the same
roof with her sister's husband; but, true to the promise made years and
years ago by her dying mother's bed--true to the affection which was the
ruling and beautiful feeling of her whole existence--she never
hesitated about indulging Rosamond's wish, when the girl, in her bright,
light-hearted way, said that she could never get on comfortably in the
marriage state unless she had Ida to live with her and help her just the
same as ever. The baron was too polite a man even to _look_ dissatisfied
when he heard of the proposed arrangement; and it was therefore settled
from the beginning that Ida was always to live with her sister.

The marriage took place in the summer, and the bride and bridegroom
went to spend their honeymoon in Cumberland. On their return to Glenwith
Grange, a visit to the baron's sisters, in Normandy, was talked of; but
the execution of this project was suddenly and disastrously suspended by
the death of Mr. Welwyn, from an attack of pleurisy.

In consequence of this calamity, the projected journey was of course
deferred; and when autumn and the shooting season came, the baron was
unwilling to leave the well-stocked preserves of the Grange. He seemed,
indeed, to grow less and less inclined, as time advanced, for the trip
to Normandy; and wrote excuse after excuse to his sisters, when
letters arrived from them urging him to pay the promised visit. In the
winter-time, he said he would not allow his wife to risk a long journey.
In the spring, his health was pronounced to be delicate. In the
genial summer-time, the accomplishment of the proposed visit would be
impossible, for at that period the baroness expected to become a mother.
Such were the apologies which Franval seemed almost glad to be able to
send to his sisters in France.

The marriage was, in the strictest sense of the term, a happy one. The
baron, though he never altogether lost the strange restraint and reserve
of his manner, was, in his quiet, peculiar way, the fondest and kindest
of husbands. He went to town occasionally on business, but always seemed
glad to return to the baroness; he never varied in the politeness of
his bearing toward his wife's sister; he behaved with the most courteous
hospitality toward all the friends of the Welwyns; in short, he
thoroughly justified the good opinion which Rosamond and her father had
formed of him when they first met at Paris. And yet no experience of
his character thoroughly re-assured Ida. Months passed on quietly
and pleasantly; and still that secret sadness, that indefinable,
unreasonable apprehension on Rosamond's account, hung heavily on her
sister's heart.

At the beginning of the first summer months, a little domestic
inconvenience happened, which showed the baroness, for the first time,
that her husband's temper could be seriously ruffled--and that by the
veriest trifle. He was in the habit of taking in two French provincial
newspapers--one published at Bordeaux and the other at Havre. He always
opened these journals the moment they came, looked at one particular
column of each with the deepest attention, for a few minutes, then
carelessly threw them aside into his waste-paper basket. His wife and
her sister were at first rather surprised at the manner in which he read
his two papers; but they thought no more of it when he explained that he
only took them in to consult them about French commercial intelligence,
which might be, occasionally, of importance to him.

These papers were published weekly. On the occasion to which I have just
referred, the Bordeaux paper came on the proper day, as usual; but the
Havre paper never made its appearance. This trifling circumstance seemed
to make the baron seriously uneasy. He wrote off directly to the country
post-office and to the newspaper agent in London. His wife, astonished
to see his tranquillity so completely overthrown by so slight a cause,
tried to restore his good humor by jesting with him about the missing
newspaper. He replied by the first angry and unfeeling words that she
had heard issue from his lips. She was then within about six weeks
of her confinement, and very unfit to bear harsh answers from
anybody--least of all from her husband.

On the second day no answer came. On the afternoon of the third, the
baron rode off to the post town to make inquiries. About an hour after
he had gone, a strange gentleman came to the Grange and asked to see
the baroness. On being informed that she was not well enough to receive
visitors, he sent up a message that his business was of great importance
and that he would wait downstairs for a second answer.

On receiving this message, Rosamond turned, as usual, to her elder
sister for advice. Ida went downstairs immediately to see the stranger.
What I am now about to tell you of the extraordinary interview which
took place between them, and of the shocking events that followed it, I
have heard from Miss Welwyn's own lips.

She felt unaccountably nervous when she entered the room. The stranger
bowed very politely, and asked, in a foreign accent, if she were the
Baroness Franval. She set him right on this point, and told him she
attended to all matters of business for the baroness; adding that, if
his errand at all concerned her sister's husband, the baron was not then
at home.

The stranger answered that he was aware of it when he called, and that
the unpleasant business on which he came could not be confided to the
baron--at least, in the first instance.

She asked why. He said he was there to explain; and expressed himself as
feeling greatly relieved at having to open his business to her, because
she would, doubtless, be best able to prepare her sister for the bad
news that he was, unfortunately, obliged to bring. The sudden faintness
which overcame her, as he spoke those words, prevented her from
addressing him in return. He poured out some water for her from a bottle
which happened to be standing on the table, and asked if he might depend
on her fortitude. She tried to say "Yes"; but the violent throbbing
of her heart seemed to choke her. He took a foreign newspaper from his
pocket, saying that he was a secret agent of the French police--that the
paper was the Havre _Journal_, for the past week, and that it had been
expressly kept from reaching the baron, as usual, through his (the
agent's) interference. He then opened the newspaper, and begged that she
would nerve herself sufficiently (for her sister's sake) to read certain
lines, which would give her some hint of the business that brought him
there. He pointed to the passage as he spoke. It was among the "Shipping
Entries," and was thus expressed:

"Arrived, the _Berenice_, from San Francisco, with a valuable cargo of
hides. She brings one passenger, the Baron Franval, of Chateau Franval,
in Normandy."

As Miss Welwyn read the entry, her heart, which had been throbbing
violently but the moment before, seemed suddenly to cease from all
action, and she began to shiver, though it was a warm June evening. The
agent held the tumbler to her lips, and made her drink a little of the
water, entreating her very earnestly to take courage and listen to him.
He then sat down, and referred again to the entry, every word he uttered
seeming to burn itself in forever (as she expressed it) on her memory
and her heart.

He said: "It has been ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt that
there is no mistake about the name in the lines you have just read. And
it is as certain as that we are here, that there is only _one_ Baron
Franval now alive. The question, therefore, is, whether the passenger by
the _Berenice_ is the true baron, or--I beg you most earnestly to bear
with me and to compose yourself--or the husband of your sister. The
person who arrived last week at Havre was scouted as an impostor by
the ladies at the chateau, the moment he presented himself there as
the brother, returning to them after sixteen years of absence. The
authorities were communicated with, and I and my assistants were
instantly sent for from Paris.

"We wasted no time in questioning the supposed impostor. He either was,
or affected to be, in a perfect frenzy of grief and indignation. We just
ascertained, from competent witnesses, that he bore an extraordinary
resemblance to the real baron, and that he was perfectly familiar with
places and persons in and about the chateau; we just ascertained that,
and then proceeded to confer with the local authorities, and to examine
their private entries of suspected persons in their jurisdiction,
ranging back over a past period of twenty years or more. One of the
entries thus consulted contained these particulars: 'Hector Auguste
Monbrun, son of a respectable proprietor in Normandy. Well educated;
gentleman-like manners. On bad terms with his family. Character: bold,
cunning, unscrupulous, self-possessed. Is a clever mimic. May be easily
recognized by his striking likeness to the Baron Franval. Imprisoned at
twenty for theft and assault.'"

Miss Welwyn saw the agent look up at her after he had read this extract
from the police-book, to ascertain if she was still able to listen to
him. He asked, with some appearance of alarm, as their eyes met, if
she would like some more water. She was just able to make a sign in the
negative. He took a second extract from his pocket-book, and went on.

He said: "The next entry under the same name was dated four years later,
and ran thus, 'H. A. Monbrun, condemned to the galleys for life, for
assassination, and other crimes not officially necessary to be
here specified. Escaped from custody at Toulon. Is known, since the
expiration of his first term of imprisonment, to have allowed his beard
to grow, and to have worn his hair long, with the intention of rendering
it impossible for those acquainted with him in his native province to
recognize him, as heretofore, by his likeness to the Baron Franval.'
There were more particulars added, not important enough for extract. We
immediately examined the supposed impostor; for, if he was Monbrun, we
knew that we should find on his shoulder the two letters of the convict
brand, 'T. F.,' standing for _Travaux Forces_. After the minutest
examination with the mechanical and chemical tests used on such
occasions, not the slightest trace of the brand was to be found. The
moment this astounding discovery was made, I started to lay an embargo
on the forthcoming numbers of the Havre _Journal_ for that week, which
were about to be sent to the English agent in London. I arrived at Havre
on Saturday (the morning of publication), in time to execute my design.
I waited there long enough to communicate by telegraph with my superiors
in Paris, then hastened to this place. What my errand here is, you
may--"

He might have gone on speaking for some moments longer; but Miss Welwyn
heard no more.

Her first sensation of returning consciousness was the feeling that
water was being sprinkled on her face. Then she saw that all the windows
in the room had been set wide open, to give her air; and that she and
the agent were still alone. At first she felt bewildered, and hardly
knew who he was; but he soon recalled to her mind the horrible realities
that had brought him there, by apologizing for not having summoned
assistance when she fainted. He said it was of the last importance, in
Franval's absence, that no one in the house should imagine that anything
unusual was taking place in it. Then, after giving her an interval of
a minute or two to collect what little strength she had left, he added
that he would not increase her sufferings by saying anything more, just
then, on the shocking subject of the investigation which it was his duty
to make--that he would leave her to recover herself, and to consider
what was the best course to be taken with the baroness in the present
terrible emergency--and that he would privately return to the house
between eight and nine o'clock that evening, ready to act as Miss Welwyn
wished, and to afford her and her sister any aid and protection of which
they might stand in need. With these words he bowed, and noiselessly
quitted the room.

For the first few awful minutes after she was left alone, Miss Welwyn
sat helpless and speechless; utterly numbed in heart, and mind, and
body--then a sort of instinct (she was incapable of thinking) seemed
to urge her to conceal the fearful news from her sister as long as
possible. She ran upstairs to Rosamond's sitting-room, and called
through the door (for she dared not trust herself in her sister's
presence) that the visitor had come on some troublesome business from
their late father's lawyers, and that she was going to shut herself up,
and write some long letters in connection with that business. After
she had got into her own room, she was never sensible of how time was
passing--never conscious of any feeling within her, except a baseless,
helpless hope that the French police might yet be proved to have made
some terrible mistake--until she heard a violent shower of rain come
on a little after sunset. The noise of the rain, and the freshness it
brought with it in the air, seemed to awaken her as if from a painful
and a fearful sleep. The power of reflection returned to her; her
heart heaved and bounded with an overwhelming terror, as the thought of
Rosamond came back vividly to it; her memory recurred despairingly to
the long-past day of her mother's death, and to the farewell promise she
had made by her mother's bedside. She burst into an hysterical passion
of weeping that seemed to be tearing her to pieces. In the midst of it
she heard the clatter of a horse's hoofs in the courtyard, and knew that
Rosamond's husband had come back.

Dipping her handkerchief in cold water, and passing it over her eyes as
she left the room, she instantly hastened to her sister.

Fortunately the daylight was fading in the old-fashioned chamber that
Rosamond occupied. Before they could say two words to each other,
Franval was in the room. He seemed violently irritated; said that he had
waited for the arrival of the mail--that the missing newspaper had not
come by it--that he had got wet through--that he felt a shivering fit
coming on--and that he believed he had caught a violent cold. His wife
anxiously suggested some simple remedies. He roughly interrupted her,
saying there was but one remedy, the remedy of going to bed; and so left
them without another word. She just put her handkerchief to her eyes,
and said softly to her sister, "How he is changed!" then spoke no more.
They sat silent for half an hour or longer. After that, Rosamond went
affectionately and forgivingly to see how her husband was. She returned,
saying that he was in bed, and in a deep, heavy sleep; and predicting
hopefully that he would wake up quite well the next morning. In a few
minutes more the clock stuck nine; and Ida heard the servant's step
ascending the stairs. She suspected what his errand was, and went out
to meet him. Her presentiment had not deceived her; the police agent had
arrived, and was waiting for her downstairs.

He asked her if she had said anything to her sister, or had thought of
any plan of action, the moment she entered the room; and, on receiving
a reply in the negative, inquired, further, if "the baron" had come home
yet. She answered that he had; that he was ill and tired, and vexed, and
that he had gone to bed. The agent asked in an eager whisper if she knew
that he was asleep, and alone in bed? and, when he received her reply,
said that he must go up into the bedroom directly.

She began to feel the faintness coming over her again, and with it
sensations of loathing and terror that she could neither express to
others nor define to herself. He said that if she hesitated to let him
avail himself of this unexpected opportunity, her scruples might lead
to fatal results. He reminded her that if "the baron" were really the
convict Monbrun, the claims of society and of justice demanded that he
should be discovered by the first available means; and that if he were
not--if some inconceivable mistake had really been committed--then such
a plan for getting immediately at the truth as was now proposed would
insure the delivery of an innocent man from suspicion; and at the same
time spare him the knowledge that he had ever been suspected. This last
argument had its effect on Miss Welwyn. The baseless, helpless hope that
the French authorities might yet be proved to be in error, which she
had already felt in her own room, returned to her now. She suffered the
agent to lead her upstairs.

He took the candle from her hand when she pointed to the door; opened it
softly; and, leaving it ajar, went into the room.

She looked through the gap with a feverish, horror-struck curiosity.
Franval was lying on his side in a profound sleep, with his back
turned toward the door. The agent softly placed the candle upon a small
reading-table between the door and the bedside, softly drew down the
bed-clothes a little away from the sleeper's back, then took a pair of
scissors from the toilet-table, and very gently and slowly began to cut
away, first the loose folds, then the intervening strips of linen, from
the part of Franval's night-gown that was over his shoulders. When the
upper part of his back had been bared in this way, the agent took the
candle and held it near the flesh. Miss Welwyn heard him ejaculate
some word under his breath, then saw him looking round to where she was
standing, and beckoning to her to come in.

Mechanically she obeyed; mechanically she looked down where his finger
was pointing. It was the convict Monbrun--there, just visible under the
bright light of the candle, were the fatal letters "T. F." branded on
the villain's shoulder!

Though she could neither move nor speak, the horror of this discovery
did not deprive her of her consciousness. She saw the agent softly
draw up the bed-clothes again into their proper position, replace
the scissors on the toilet-table, and take from it a bottle of
smelling-salts. She felt him removing her from the bedroom, and helping
her quickly downstairs, giving her the salts to smell to by the way.
When they were alone again, he said, with the first appearance of
agitation that he had yet exhibited, "Now, madam, for God's sake,
collect all your courage, and be guided by me. You and your sister
had better leave the house immediately. Have you any relatives in the
neighborhood with whom you could take refuge?" They had none. "What is
the name of the nearest town where you could get good accommodation for
the night?" Harleybrook (he wrote the name down on his tablets). "How
far off is it?" Twelve miles. "You had better have the carriage out at
once, to go there with as little delay as possible, leaving me to pass
the night here. I will communicate with you to-morrow at the principal
hotel. Can you compose yourself sufficiently to be able to tell the head
servant, if I ring for him, that he is to obey my orders till further
notice?" The servant was summoned, and received his instructions, the
agent going out with him to see that the carriage was got ready quietly
and quickly. Miss Welwyn went upstairs to her sister.

How the fearful news was first broken to Rosamond, I cannot relate
to you. Miss Welwyn has never confided to me, has never confided to
anybody, what happened at the interview between her sister and herself
that night. I can tell you nothing of the shock they both suffered,
except that the younger and the weaker died under it; that the elder and
the stronger has never recovered from it, and never will.

They went away the same night, with one attendant, to Harleybrook, as
the agent had advised. Before daybreak Rosamond was seized with the
pains of premature labor. She died three days after, unconscious of the
horror of her situation, wandering in her mind about past times, and
singing old tunes that Ida had taught her as she lay in her sister's
arms.

The child was born alive, and lives still. You saw her at the window as
we came in at the back way to the Grange. I surprised you, I dare say,
by asking you not to speak of her to Miss Welwyn. Perhaps you noticed
something vacant in the little girl's expression. I am sorry to say that
her mind is more vacant still. If "idiot" did not sound like a mocking
word, however tenderly and pityingly one may wish to utter it, I should
tell you that the poor thing had been an idiot from her birth.

You will, doubtless, want to hear now what happened at Glenwith Grange
after Miss Welwyn and her sister had left it. I have seen the letter
which the police agent sent the next morning to Harleybrook; and,
speaking from my recollection of that, I shall be able to relate all you
can desire to know.

First, as to the past history of the scoundrel Monbrun, I need only tell
you that he was identical with an escaped convict, who, for a long term
of years, had successfully eluded the vigilance of the authorities
all over Europe, and in America as well. In conjunction with two
accomplices, he had succeeded in possessing himself of large sums of
money by the most criminal means. He also acted secretly as the "banker"
of his convict brethren, whose dishonest gains were all confided to
his hands for safe-keeping. He would have been certainly captured, on
venturing back to France, along with his two associates, but for the
daring imposture in which he took refuge; and which, if the true
Baron Franval had really died abroad, as was reported, would, in all
probability, never have been found out.

Besides his extraordinary likeness to the baron, he had every other
requisite for carrying on his deception successfully. Though his parents
were not wealthy, he had received a good education. He was so notorious
for his gentleman-like manners among the villainous associates of his
crimes and excesses, that they nicknamed him "the Prince." All his early
life had been passed in the neighborhood of the Chateau Franval. He knew
what were the circumstances which had induced the baron to leave it. He
had been in the country to which the baron had emigrated. He was able
to refer familiarly to persons and localities, at home and abroad,
with which the baron was sure to be acquainted. And, lastly, he had an
expatriation of fifteen years to plead for him as his all-sufficient
excuse, if he made any slight mistakes before the baron's sisters,
in his assumed character of their long-absent brother. It will be, of
course, hardly necessary for me to tell you, in relation to this part
of the subject, that the true Franval was immediately and honorably
reinstated in the family rights of which the impostor had succeeded for
a time in depriving him.

According to Monbrun's own account, he had married poor Rosamond purely
for love; and the probabilities certainly are, that the pretty, innocent
English girl had really struck the villain's fancy for the time; and
that the easy, quiet life he was leading at the Grange pleased him, by
contrast with his perilous and vagabond existence of former days. What
might have happened if he had had time enough to grow wearied of his
ill-fated wife and his English home, it is now useless to inquire. What
really did happen on the morning when he awoke after the flight of Ida
and her sister can be briefly told.

As soon as his eyes opened they rested on the police agent, sitting
quietly by the bedside, with a loaded pistol in his hand. Monbrun knew
immediately that he was discovered; but he never for an instant lost the
self-possession for which he was famous. He said he wished to have five
minutes allowed him to deliberate quietly in bed, whether he should
resist the French authorities on English ground, and so gain time by
obliging the one Government to apply specially to have him delivered up
by the other--or whether he should accept the terms officially offered
to him by the agent, if he quietly allowed himself to be captured.
He chose the latter course--it was suspected, because he wished to
communicate personally with some of his convict associates in France,
whose fraudulent gains were in his keeping, and because he felt
boastfully confident of being able to escape again, whenever he pleased.
Be his secret motives, however, what they might, he allowed the agent to
conduct him peaceably from the Grange; first writing a farewell
letter to poor Rosamond, full of heartless French sentiment and glib
sophistries about Fate and Society. His own fate was not long in
overtaking him. He attempted to escape again, as it had been expected
he would, and was shot by the sentinel on duty at the time. I remember
hearing that the bullet entered his head and killed him on the spot.

My story is done. It is ten years now since Rosamond was buried in the
churchyard yonder; and it is ten years also since Miss Welwyn returned
to be the lonely inhabitant of Glenwith Grange. She now lives but in
the remembrances that it calls up before her of her happier existence of
former days. There is hardly an object in the old house which does not
tenderly and solemnly remind her of the mother, whose last wishes she
lived to obey; of the sister, whose happiness was once her dearest
earthly care. Those prints that you noticed on the library walls
Rosamond used to copy in the past time, when her pencil was often guided
by Ida's hand. Those music-books that you were looking over, she and her
mother have played from together through many a long and quiet summer's
evening. She has no ties now to bind her to the present but the poor
child whose affliction it is her constant effort to lighten, and the
little peasant population around her, whose humble cares and wants
and sorrows she is always ready to relieve. Far and near her modest
charities have penetrated among us; and far and near she is heartily
beloved and blessed in many a laborer's household. There is no poor
man's hearth, not in this village only, but for miles away from it as
well, at which you would not be received with the welcome given to an
old friend, if you only told the cottagers that you knew the Lady of
Glenwith Grange!

PROLOGUE TO THE FIFTH STORY.

The next piece of work which occupied my attention after taking leave
of Mr. Garthwaite, offered the strongest possible contrast to the task
which had last engaged me. Fresh from painting a bull at a farmhouse,
I set forth to copy a Holy Family, by Correggio, at a convent of nuns.
People who go to the Royal Academy Exhibition, and see pictures by
famous artists, painted year after year in the same marked style which
first made them celebrated, would be amazed indeed if they knew what
a Jack-of-all-trades a poor painter must become before he can gain his
daily bread.

The picture by Correggio which I was now commissioned to copy had been
lent to the nuns by a Catholic gentleman of fortune, who prized it as
the gem of his collection, and who had never before trusted it out of
his own hands. My copy, when completed, was to be placed over the high
altar of the convent chapel; and my work throughout its progress was
to be pursued entirely in the parlor of the nunnery, and always in the
watchful presence of one or other of the inmates of the house. It was
only on such conditions that the owner of the Correggio was willing to
trust his treasure out of his own hands, and to suffer it to be copied
by a stranger. The restrictions he imposed, which I thought sufficiently
absurd, and perhaps offensively suspicious as well, were communicated
to me politely enough before I was allowed to undertake the commission.
Unless I was inclined to submit to precautionary regulations which would
affect any other artist exactly as they affected me, I was told not
to think of offering to make the copy; and the nuns would then address
themselves to some other person in my profession. After a day's
consideration, I submitted to the restrictions, by my wife's advice,
and saved the nuns the trouble of making application for a copier of
Correggio in any other quarter.

I found the convent was charmingly situated in a quiet little valley
in the West of England. The parlor in which I was to paint was a large,
well-lighted apartment; and the village inn, about half a mile off,
afforded me cheap and excellent quarters for the night. Thus far,
therefore, there was nothing to complain of. As for the picture, which
was the next object of interest to me, I was surprised to find that
the copying of it would be by no means so difficult a task as I had
anticipated. I am rather of a revolutionary spirit in matters of art,
and am bold enough to think that the old masters have their faults
as well as their beauties. I can give my opinion, therefore, on the
Correggio at the convent independently at least. Looked at technically,
the picture was a fine specimen of coloring and execution; but looked
at for the higher merits of delicacy, elevation, and feeling for the
subject, it deserved copying as little as the most commonplace work that
any unlucky modern artist ever produced. The faces of the Holy
Family not only failed to display the right purity and tenderness of
expression, but absolutely failed to present any expression at all. It
is flat heresy to say so, but the valuable Correggio was nevertheless
emphatically, and, in so many words, a very uninteresting picture.

So much for the convent and the work that I was to do in it. My next
anxiety was to see how the restrictions imposed on me were to be carried
out. The first day, the Mother Superior herself mounted guard in the
parlor--a stern, silent, fanatical-looking woman, who seemed determined
to awe me and make me uncomfortable, and who succeeded thoroughly in
the execution of her purpose. The second day she was relieved by the
officiating priest of the convent--a mild, melancholy, gentleman-like
man, with whom I got on tolerably well. The third day, I had for
overlooker the portress of the house--a dirty, dismal, deaf, old woman,
who did nothing but knit stockings and chew orris-root. The fourth day,
a middle-aged nun, whom I heard addressed as Mother Martha, occupied the
post of guardian to the precious Correggio; and with her the number of
my overlookers terminated. She, and the portress, and the priest, and
the Mother Superior, relieved each other with military regularity, until
I had put the last touch to my copy. I found them ready for me every
morning on entering the parlor, and I left them in the chair of
observation every evening on quitting it. As for any young and beautiful
nuns who might have been in the building, I never so much as set eyes
on the ends of their veils. From the door to the parlor, and from the
parlor to the door, comprised the whole of my experience of the inside
of the convent.

The only one of my superintending companions with whom I established
anything like a familiar acquaintance was Mother Martha. She had no
outward attractions to recommend her; but she was simple, good-humored,
ready to gossip, and inquisitive to a perfectly incredible degree. Her
whole life had been passed in the nunnery; she was thoroughly accustomed
to her seclusion, thoroughly content with the monotonous round of her
occupations; not at all anxious to see the world for herself; but, on
the other hand, insatiably curious to know all about it from others.
There was no question connected with myself, my wife, my children, my
friends, my profession, my income, my travels, my favorite amusements,
and even my favorite sins, which a woman could ask a man, that Mother
Martha did not, in the smallest and softest of voices, ask of me. Though
an intelligent, well-informed person in all that related to her
own special vocation, she was a perfect child in everything else. I
constantly caught myself talking to her, just as I should have talked at
home to one of my own little girls.

I hope no one will think that, in expressing myself thus, I am writing
disparagingly of the poor nun. On two accounts, I shall always feel
compassionately and gratefully toward Mother Martha. She was the only
person in the convent who seemed sincerely anxious to make her presence
in the parlor as agreeable to me as possible; and she good-humoredly
told me the story which it is my object in these pages to introduce to
the reader. In both ways I am deeply indebted to her; and I hope always
to remember the obligation.

The circumstances under which the story came to be related to me may be
told in very few words.

The interior of a convent parlor being a complete novelty to me, I
looked around with some interest on first entering my painting-room at
the nunnery. There was but little in it to excite the curiosity of any
one. The floor was covered with common matting, and the ceiling with
plain whitewash. The furniture was of the simplest kind; a low
chair with a praying-desk fixed to the back, and a finely carved oak
book-case, studded all over with brass crosses, being the only useful
objects that I could discern which had any conventional character about
them. As for the ornaments of the room, they were entirely beyond my
appreciation. I could feel no interest in the colored prints of saints,
with gold platters at the backs of their heads, that hung on the wall;
and I could see nothing particularly impressive in the two plain little
alabaster pots for holy water, fastened, one near the door, the other
over the chimney-piece. The only object, indeed, in the whole room which
in the slightest degree attracted my curiosity was an old worm-eaten
wooden cross, made in the rudest manner, hanging by itself on a slip
of wall between two windows. It was so strangely rough and misshapen
a thing to exhibit prominently in a neat room, that I suspected some
history must be attached to it, and resolved to speak to my friend the
nun about it at the earliest opportunity.

"Mother Martha," said I, taking advantage of the first pause in the
succession of quaintly innocent questions which she was as usual
addressing to me, "I have been looking at that rough old cross
hanging between the windows, and fancying that it must surely be some
curiosity--"

"Hush! hush!" exclaimed the nun, "you must not speak of that as a
'curiosity'; the Mother Superior calls it a Relic."

"I beg your pardon," said I; "I ought to have chosen my expressions more
carefully--"

"Not," interposed Mother Martha, nodding to show me that my apology need
not be finished--"not that it is exactly a relic in the strict Catholic
sense of the word; but there were circumstances in the life of the
person who made it--" Here she stopped, and looked at me doubtfully.

"Circumstances, perhaps, which it is not considered advisable to
communicate to strangers," I suggested.

"Oh, no!" answered the nun, "I never heard that they were to be kept a
secret. They were not told as a secret to me."

"Then you know all about them?" I asked.

"Certainly. I could tell you the whole history of the wooden cross; but
it is all about Catholics, and you are a Protestant."

"That, Mother Martha, does not make it at all less interesting to me."

"Does it not, indeed?" exclaimed the nun, innocently. "What a strange
man you are! and what a remarkable religion yours must be! What do your
priests say about ours? Are they learned men, your priests?"

I felt that my chance of hearing Mother Martha's story would be a poor
one indeed, if I allowed her to begin a fresh string of questions.
Accordingly, I dismissed the inquiries about the clergy of the
Established Church with the most irreverent briefness, and recalled her
attention forthwith to the subject of the wooden cross.

"Yes, yes," said the good-natured nun; "surely you shall hear all I can
tell you about it; but--" she hesitated timidly, "but I must ask the
Mother Superior's leave first."

Saying these words, she summoned the portress, to my great amusement, to
keep guard over the inestimable Correggio in her absence, and left the
room. In less than five minutes she came back, looking quite happy and
important in her innocent way.

"The Mother Superior," she said, "has given me leave to tell all I know
about the wooden cross. She says it may do you good, and improve your
Protestant opinion of us Catholics."

I expressed myself as being both willing and anxious to profit by what I
heard; and the nun began her narrative immediately.

She related it in her own simple, earnest, minute way; dwelling as
long on small particulars as on important incidents; and making moral
reflections for my benefit at every place where it was possible to
introduce them. In spite, however, of these drawbacks in the telling of
it, the story interested and impressed me in no ordinary degree; and
I now purpose putting the events of it together as skillfully and
strikingly as I can, in the hope that this written version of the
narrative may appeal as strongly to the reader's sympathies as the
spoken version did to mine.




THE NUN'S STORY OF GABRIEL'S MARRIAGE



CHAPTER I.

One night, during the period of the first French Revolution, the family
of Francois Sarzeau, a fisherman of Brittany, were all waking and
watching at a late hour in their cottage on the peninsula of Quiberon.
Francois had gone out in his boat that evening, as usual, to fish.
Shortly after his departure, the wind had risen, the clouds had
gathered; and the storm, which had been threatening at intervals
throughout the whole day, burst forth furiously about nine o'clock.
It was now eleven; and the raging of the wind over the barren, heathy
peninsula still seemed to increase with each fresh blast that tore its
way out upon the open sea; the crashing of the waves on the beach was
awful to hear; the dreary blackness of the sky terrible to behold. The
longer they listened to the storm, the oftener they looked out at it,
the fainter grew the hopes which the fisherman's family still strove to
cherish for the safety of Francois Sarzeau and of his younger son who
had gone with him in the boat.

There was something impressive in the simplicity of the scene that was
now passing within the cottage.

On one side of the great, rugged, black fire-place crouched two little
girls; the younger half asleep, with her head in her sister's lap. These
were the daughters of the fisherman; and opposite to them sat their
eldest brother, Gabriel. His right arm had been badly wounded in a
recent encounter at the national game of the _Soule_, a sport resembling
our English foot-ball; but played on both sides in such savage earnest
by the people of Brittany as to end always in bloodshed, often in
mutilation, sometimes even in loss of life. On the same bench with
Gabriel sat his betrothed wife--a girl of eighteen--clothed in the
plain, almost monastic black-and-white costume of her native district.
She was the daughter of a small farmer living at some little distance
from the coast. Between the groups formed on either side of the
fire-place, the vacant space was occupied by the foot of a truckle-bed.
In this bed lay a very old man, the father of Francois Sarzeau. His
haggard face was covered with deep wrinkles; his long white hair flowed
over the coarse lump of sacking which served him for a pillow, and
his light gray eyes wandered incessantly, with a strange expression of
terror and suspicion, from person to person, and from object to object,
in all parts of the room. Whenever the wind and sea whistled and roared
at their loudest, he muttered to himself and tossed his hands fretfully
on his wretched coverlet. On these occasions his eyes always fixed
themselves intently on a little delf image of the Virgin placed in
a niche over the fire-place. Every time they saw him look in this
direction Gabriel and the young girls shuddered and crossed themselves;
and even the child, who still kept awake, imitated their example.
There was one bond of feeling at least between the old man and his
grandchildren, which connected his age and their youth unnaturally and
closely together. This feeling was reverence for the superstitions
which had been handed down to them by their ancestors from centuries
and centuries back, as far even as the age of the Druids. The spirit
warnings of disaster and death which the old man heard in the wailing
of the wind, in the crashing of the waves, in the dreary, monotonous
rattling of the casement, the young man and his affianced wife and the
little child who cowered by the fireside heard too. All differences in
sex, in temperament, in years, superstition was strong enough to strike
down to its own dread level, in the fisherman's cottage, on that stormy
night.

Besides the benches by the fireside and the bed, the only piece of
furniture in the room was a coarse wooden table, with a loaf of black
bread, a knife, and a pitcher of cider placed on it. Old nets, coils
of rope, tattered sails, hung, about the walls and over the wooden
partition which separated the room into two compartments. Wisps of straw
and ears of barley drooped down through the rotten rafters and gaping
boards that made the floor of the granary above.

These different objects, and the persons in the cottage, who composed
the only surviving members of the fisherman's family, were strangely and
wildly lit up by the blaze of the fire and by the still brighter glare
of a resin torch stuck into a block of wood in the chimney-corner. The
red and yellow light played full on the weird face of the old man as
he lay opposite to it, and glanced fitfully on the figures of the young
girl, Gabriel, and the two children; the great, gloomy shadows rose
and fell, and grew and lessened in bulk about the walls like visions
of darkness, animated by a supernatural specter-life, while the dense
obscurity outside spreading before the curtainless window seemed as a
wall of solid darkness that had closed in forever around the fisherman's
house. The night scene within the cottage was almost as wild and as
dreary to look upon as the night scene without.

For a long time the different persons in the room sat together without
speaking, even without looking at each other. At last the girl turned
and whispered something into Gabriel's ear:

"Perrine, what were you saying to Gabriel?" asked the child opposite,
seizing the first opportunity of breaking the desolate silence--doubly
desolate at her age--which was preserved by all around her.

"I was telling him," answered Perrine, simply, "that it was time to
change the bandages on his arm; and I also said to him, what I have
often said before, that he must never play at that terrible game of the
_Soule_ again."

The old man had been looking intently at Perrine and his grandchild as
they spoke. His harsh, hollow voice mingled with the last soft tones of
the young girl, repeating over and over again the same terrible words,
"Drowned! drowned! Son and grandson, both drowned! both drowned!"

"Hush, grandfather," said Gabriel, "we must not lose all hope for them
yet. God and the Blessed Virgin protect them!" He looked at the little
delf image, and crossed himself; the others imitated him, except the old
man. He still tossed his hands over the coverlet, and still repeated,
"Drowned! drowned!"

"Oh, that accursed _Soule!_" groaned the young man. "But for this wound
I should have been with my father. The poor boy's life might at least
have been saved; for we should then have left him here."

"Silence!" exclaimed the harsh voice from the bed. "The wail of dying
men rises louder than the loud sea; the devil's psalm-singing roars
higher than the roaring wind! Be silent, and listen! Francois drowned!
Pierre drowned! Hark! Hark!"

A terrific blast of wind burst over the house as he spoke, shaking it to
its center, overpowering all other sounds, even to the deafening crash
of the waves. The slumbering child awoke, and uttered a scream of
fear. Perrine, who had been kneeling before her lover binding the fresh
bandages on his wounded arm, paused in her occupation, trembling from
head to foot. Gabriel looked toward the window; his experience told him
what must be the hurricane fury of that blast of wind out at sea, and
he sighed bitterly as he murmured to himself, "God help them both--man's
help will be as nothing to them now!"

"Gabriel!" cried the voice from the bed in altered tones--very faint and
trembling.

He did not hear or did not attend to the old man. He was trying to
soothe and encourage the young girl at his feet.

"Don't be frightened, love," he said, kissing her very gently and
tenderly on the forehead. "You are as safe here as anywhere. Was I not
right in saying that it would be madness to attempt taking you back to
the farmhouse this evening? You can sleep in that room, Perrine, when
you are tired--you can sleep with the two girls."

"Gabriel! brother Gabriel!" cried one of the children. "Oh, look at
grandfather!"

Gabriel ran to the bedside. The old man had raised himself into a
sitting position; his eyes were dilated, his whole face was rigid with
terror, his hands were stretched out convulsively toward his grandson.
"The White Women!" he screamed. "The White Women; the grave-diggers of
the drowned are out on the sea!"

The children, with cries of terror, flung themselves into Perrine's
arms; even Gabriel uttered an exclamation of horror, and started back
from the bedside.

Still the old man reiterated, "The White Women! The White Women! Open
the door, Gabriel! look-out westward, where the ebb-tide has left the
sand dry. You'll see them bright as lightning in the darkness, mighty
as the angels in stature, sweeping like the wind over the sea, in their
long white garments, with their white hair trailing far behind them!
Open the door, Gabriel! You'll see them stop and hover over the place
where your father and your brother have been drowned; you'll see them
come on till they reach the sand, you'll see them dig in it with their
naked feet and beckon awfully to the raging sea to give up its dead.
Open the door, Gabriel--or, though it should be the death of me, I will
get up and open it myself!"

Gabriel's face whitened even to his lips, but he made a sign that he
would obey. It required the exertion of his whole strength to keep the
door open against the wind while he looked out.

"Do you see them, grandson Gabriel? Speak the truth, and tell me if you
see them," cried the old man.

"I see nothing but darkness--pitch darkness," answered Gabriel, letting
the door close again.

"Ah! woe! woe!" groaned his grandfather, sinking back exhausted on the
pillow. "Darkness to _you;_ but bright as lightning to the eyes that
are allowed to see them. Drowned! drowned! Pray for their souls,
Gabriel--_I_ see the White Women even where I lie, and dare not pray for
them. Son and grandson drowned! both drowned!"

The young man went back to Perrine and the children.

"Grandfather is very ill to-night," he whispered. "You had better all go
into the bedroom, and leave me alone to watch by him."

They rose as he spoke, crossed themselves before the image of the
Virgin, kissed him one by one, and, without uttering a word, softly
entered the little room on the other side of the partition. Gabriel
looked at his grandfather, and saw that he lay quiet now, with his eyes
closed as if he were already dropping asleep. The young man then heaped
some fresh logs on the fire, and sat down by it to watch till morning.

Very dreary was the moaning of the night storm; but it was not
more dreary than the thoughts which now occupied him in his
solitude--thoughts darkened and distorted by the terrible superstitions
of his country and his race. Ever since the period of his mother's death
he had been oppressed by the conviction that some curse hung over the
family. At first they had been prosperous, they had got money, a little
legacy had been left them. But this good fortune had availed only for
a time; disaster on disaster strangely and suddenly succeeded. Losses,
misfortunes, poverty, want itself had overwhelmed them; his father's
temper had become so soured, that the oldest friends of Francois Sarzeau
declared he was changed beyond recognition. And now, all this past
misfortune--the steady, withering, household blight of many years--had
ended in the last, worst misery of all--in death. The fate of his
father and his brother admitted no longer of a doubt; he knew it, as he
listened to the storm, as he reflected on his grandfather's words, as
he called to mind his own experience of the perils of the sea. And this
double bereavement had fallen on him just as the time was approaching
for his marriage with Perrine; just when misfortune was most ominous of
evil, just when it was hardest to bear! Forebodings, which he dared not
realize, began now to mingle with the bitterness of his grief, whenever
his thoughts wandered from the present to the future; and as he sat by
the lonely fireside, murmuring from time to time the Church prayer for
the repose of the dead, he almost involuntarily mingled with it another
prayer, expressed only in his own simple words, for the safety of the
living--for the young girl whose love was his sole earthly treasure; for
the motherless children who must now look for protection to him alone.

He had sat by the hearth a long, long time, absorbed in his thoughts,
not once looking round toward the bed, when he was startled by hearing
the sound of his grandfather's voice once more.

"Gabriel," whispered the old man, trembling and shrinking as he spoke,
"Gabriel, do you hear a dripping of water--now slow, now quick again--on
the floor at the foot of my bed?"

"I hear nothing, grandfather, but the crackling of the fire, and the
roaring of the storm outside."

"Drip, drip, drip! Faster and faster; plainer and plainer. Take the
torch, Gabriel; look down on the floor--look with all your eyes. Is the
place wet there? Is it the rain from heaven that is dropping through the
roof?"

Gabriel took the torch with trembling fingers and knelt down on the
floor to examine it closely. He started back from the place, as he saw
that it was quite dry--the torch dropped upon the hearth--he fell on his
knees before the statue of the Virgin and hid his face.

"Is the floor wet? Answer me, I command you--is the floor wet?" asked
the old man, quickly and breathlessly.

Gabriel rose, went back to the bedside, and whispered to him that no
drop of rain had fallen inside the cottage. As he spoke the words, he
saw a change pass over his grandfather's face--the sharp features
seemed to wither up on a sudden; the eager expression to grow vacant
and death-like in an instant. The voice, too, altered; it was harsh and
querulous no more; its tones became strangely soft, slow, and solemn,
when the old man spoke again.

"I hear it still," he said, "drip! drip! faster and plainer than ever.
That ghostly dropping of water is the last and the surest of the
fatal signs which have told of your father's and your brother's deaths
to-night, and I know from the place where I hear it--the foot of the
bed I lie on--that it is a warning to me of my own approaching end. I am
called where my son and my grandson have gone before me; my weary time
in this world is over at last. Don't let Perrine and the children come
in here, if they should awake--they are too young to look at death."

Gabriel's blood curdled when he heard these words--when he touched his
grandfather's hand, and felt the chill that it struck to his own--when
he listened to the raging wind, and knew that all help was miles and
miles away from the cottage. Still, in spite of the storm, the darkness,
and the distance, he thought not for a moment of neglecting the duty
that had been taught him from his childhood--the duty of summoning the
priest to the bedside of the dying. "I must call Perrine," he said, "to
watch by you while I am away."

"Stop!" cried the old man. "Stop, Gabriel; I implore, I command you not
to leave me!"

"The priest, grandfather--your confession--"

"It must be made to you. In this darkness and this hurricane no man can
keep the path across the heath. Gabriel, I am dying--I should be dead
before you got back. Gabriel, for the love of the Blessed Virgin, stop
here with me till I die--my time is short--I have a terrible secret that
I must tell to somebody before I draw my last breath! Your ear to my
mouth--quick! quick!"

As he spoke the last words, a slight noise was audible on the other
side of the partition, the door half opened, and Perrine appeared at
it, looking affrightedly into the room. The vigilant eyes of the old
man--suspicious even in death--caught sight of her directly.

"Go back!" he exclaimed faintly, before she could utter a word; "go
back--push her back, Gabriel, and nail down the latch in the door, if
she won't shut it of herself!"

"Dear Perrine! go in again," implored Gabriel. "Go in, and keep the
children from disturbing us. You will only make him worse--you can be of
no use here!"

She obeyed without speaking, and shut the door again.

While the old man clutched him by the arm, and repeated, "Quick! quick!
your ear close to my mouth," Gabriel heard her say to the children (who
were both awake), "Let us pray for grandfather." And as he knelt down
by the bedside, there stole on his ear the sweet, childish tones of his
little sisters, and the soft, subdued voice of the young girl who was
teaching them the prayer, mingling divinely with the solemn wailing
of wind and sea, rising in a still and awful purity over the hoarse,
gasping whispers of the dying man.

"I took an oath not to tell it, Gabriel--lean down closer! I'm weak, and
they mustn't hear a word in that room--I took an oath not to tell it;
but death is a warrant to all men for breaking such an oath as that.
Listen; don't lose a word I'm saying! Don't look away into the room: the
stain of blood-guilt has defiled it forever! Hush! hush! hush! Let me
speak. Now your father's dead, I can't carry the horrid secret with me
into the grave. Just remember, Gabriel--try if you can't remember the
time before I was bedridden, ten years ago and more--it was about six
weeks, you know, before your mother's death; you can remember it by
that. You and all the children were in that room with your mother; you
were asleep, I think; it was night, not very late--only nine o'clock.
Your father and I were standing at the door, looking out at the heath in
the moonlight. He was so poor at that time, he had been obliged to sell
his own boat, and none of the neighbors would take him out fishing with
them--your father wasn't liked by any of the neighbors. Well; we saw
a stranger coming toward us; a very young man, with a knapsack on his
back. He looked like a gentleman, though he was but poorly dressed. He
came up, and told us he was dead tired, and didn't think he could reach
the town that night and asked if we would give him shelter till morning.
And your father said yes, if he would make no noise, because the wife
was ill, and the children were asleep. So he said all he wanted was
to go to sleep himself before the fire. We had nothing to give him
but black bread. He had better food with him than that, and undid his
knapsack to get at it, and--and--Gabriel! I'm sinking--drink! something
to drink--I'm parched with thirst."

Silent and deadly pale, Gabriel poured some of the cider from the
pitcher on the table into a drinking-cup, and gave it to the old man.
Slight as the stimulant was, its effect on him was almost instantaneous.
His dull eyes brightened a little, and he went on in the same whispering
tones as before:

"He pulled the food out of his knapsack rather in a hurry, so that some
of the other small things in it fell on the floor. Among these was a
pocketbook, which your father picked up and gave him back; and he put
it in his coat-pocket--there was a tear in one of the sides of the book,
and through the hole some bank-notes bulged out. I saw them, and so did
your father (don't move away, Gabriel; keep close, there's nothing in me
to shrink from). Well, he shared his food, like an honest fellow,
with us; and then put his hand in his pocket, and gave me four or five
livres, and then lay down before the fire to go to sleep. As he shut
his eyes, your father looked at me in a way I didn't like. He'd been
behaving very bitterly and desperately toward us for some time past,
being soured about poverty, and your mother's illness, and the constant
crying out of you children for more to eat. So when he told me to go and
buy some wood, some bread, and some wine with money I had got, I
didn't like, somehow, to leave him alone with the stranger; and so made
excuses, saying (which was true) that it was too late to buy things in
the village that night. But he told me in a rage to go and do as he bid
me, and knock the people up if the shop was shut. So I went out,
being dreadfully afraid of your father--as indeed we all were at that
time--but I couldn't make up my mind to go far from the house; I was
afraid of something happening, though I didn't dare to think what. I
don't know how it was, but I stole back in about ten minutes on tiptoe
to the cottage; I looked in at the window, and saw--O God! forgive him!
O God! forgive me!--I saw--I--more to drink, Gabriel! I can't speak
again--more to drink!"

The voices in the next room had ceased; but in the minute of silence
which now ensued, Gabriel heard his sisters kissing Perrine, and wishing
her good-night. They were all three trying to go asleep again.

"Gabriel, pray yourself, and teach your children after you to pray,
that your father may find forgiveness where he is now gone. I saw him as
plainly as I now see you, kneeling with his knife in one hand over the
sleeping man. He was taking the little book with the notes in it out of
the stranger's pocket. He got the book into his possession, and held it
quite still in his hand for an instant, thinking. I believe--oh no! no!
I'm sure--he was repenting; I'm sure he was going to put the book back;
but just at that moment the stranger moved, and raised one of his arms,
as if he was waking up. Then the temptation of the devil grew too strong
for your father--I saw him lift the hand with the knife in it--but saw
nothing more. I couldn't look in at the window--I couldn't move
away--I couldn't cry out; I stood with my back turned toward the house,
shivering all over, though it was a warm summer-time, and hearing no
cries, no noises at all, from the room behind me. I was too frightened
to know how long it was before the opening of the cottage door made me
turn round; but when I did, I saw your father standing before me in the
yellow moonlight, carrying in his arms the bleeding body of the poor
lad who had shared his food with us and slept on our hearth. Hush! hush!
Don't groan and sob in that way! Stifle it with the bedclothes. Hush!
you'll wake them in the next room!"

"Gabriel--Gabriel!" exclaimed a voice from behind the partition. "What
has happened? Gabriel! let me come out and be with you!"

"No! no!" cried the old man, collecting the last remains of his strength
in the attempt to speak above the wind, which was just then howling at
the loudest; "stay where you are--don't speak, don't come out--I command
you! Gabriel" (his voice dropped to a faint whisper), "raise me up in
bed--you must hear the whole of it now; raise me; I'm choking so that
I can hardly speak. Keep close and listen--I can't say much more. Where
was I?--Ah, your father! He threatened to kill me if I didn't swear to
keep it secret; and in terror of my life I swore. He made me help him to
carry the body--we took it all across the heath--oh! horrible, horrible,
under the bright moon--(lift me higher, Gabriel). You know the great
stones yonder, set up by the heathens; you know the hollow place under
the stones they call 'The Merchant's Table'; we had plenty of room to
lay him in that, and hide him so; and then we ran back to the cottage. I
never dared to go near the place afterward; no, nor your father either!
(Higher, Gabriel! I'm choking again.) We burned the pocket-book and the
knapsack--never knew his name--we kept the money to spend. (You're not
lifting me; you're not listening close enough!) Your father said it was
a legacy, when you and your mother asked about the money. (You hurt me,
you shake me to pieces, Gabriel, when you sob like that.) It brought
a curse on us, the money; the curse has drowned your father and your
brother; the curse is killing me; but I've confessed--tell the priest I
confessed before I died. Stop her; stop Perrine! I hear her getting up.
Take his bones away from the Merchant's Table, and bury them for the
love of God! and tell the priest (lift me higher, lift me till I am
on my knees)--if your father was alive, he'd murder me; but tell the
priest--because of my guilty soul--to pray, and--remember the Merchant's
Table--to bury, and to pray--to pray always for--"

As long as Perrine heard faintly the whispering of the old man, though
no word that he said reached her ear, she shrank from opening the door
in the partition. But, when the whispering sounds, which terrified her
she knew not how or why, first faltered, then ceased altogether; when
she heard the sobs that followed them; and when her heart told her who
was weeping in the next room--then, she began to be influenced by a new
feeling which was stronger than the strongest fear, and she opened the
door without hesitation, almost without trembling.

The coverlet was drawn up over the old man; Gabriel was kneeling by
the bedside, with his face hidden. When she spoke to him, he neither
answered nor looked at her. After a while the sobs that shook him
ceased; but still he never moved, except once when she touched him, and
then he shuddered--shuddered under _her_ hand! She called in his little
sisters, and they spoke to him, and still he uttered no word in reply.
They wept. One by one, often and often, they entreated him with loving
words; but the stupor of grief which held him speechless and motionless
was beyond the power of human tears, stronger even than the strength of
human love.

It was near daybreak, and the storm was lulling, but still no change
occurred at the bedside. Once or twice, as Perrine knelt near Gabriel,
still vainly endeavoring to arouse him to a sense of her presence, she
thought she heard the old man breathing feebly, and stretched out her
hand toward the coverlet; but she could not summon courage to touch him
or to look at him. This was the first time she had ever been present at
a death-bed; the stillness in the room, the stupor of despair that had
seized on Gabriel, so horrified her, that she was almost as helpless as
the two children by her side. It was not till the dawn looked in at the
cottage window--so coldly, so drearily, and yet so re-assuringly--that
she began to recover her self-possession at all. Then she knew that her
best resource would be to summon assistance immediately from the nearest
house. While she was trying to persuade the two children to remain
alone in the cottage with Gabriel during her temporary absence, she was
startled by the sound of footsteps outside the door. It opened, and a
man appeared on the threshold, standing still there for a moment in the
dim, uncertain light.

She looked closer--looked intently at him. It was Francois Sarzeau
himself.



CHAPTER II.

The fisherman was dripping with wet; but his face, always pale and
inflexible, seemed to be but little altered in expression by the perils
through which he must have passed during the night. Young Pierre lay
almost insensible in his arms. In the astonishment and fright of the
first moment, Perrine screamed as she recognized him.

"There, there, there!" he said, peevishly, advancing straight to the
hearth with his burden; "don't make a noise. You never expected to
see us alive again, I dare say. We gave ourselves up as lost, and only
escaped after all by a miracle."

He laid the boy down where he could get the full warmth of the fire; and
then, turning round, took a wicker-covered bottle from his pocket,
and said, "If it hadn't been for the brandy--" He stopped
suddenly--started--put down the bottle on the bench near him--and
advanced quickly to the bedside.

Perrine looked after him as he went; and saw Gabriel, who had risen when
the door was opened, moving back from the bed as Francois approached.
The young man's face seemed to have been suddenly struck to stone--its
blank, ghastly whiteness was awful to look at. He moved slowly backward
and backward till he came to the cottage wall--then stood quite still,
staring on his father with wild, vacant eyes, moving his hands to and
fro before him, muttering, but never pronouncing one audible word.

Francois did not appear to notice his son; he had the coverlet of the
bed in his hand.

"Anything the matter here?" he asked, as he drew it down.

Still Gabriel could not speak. Perrine saw it, and answered for him.

"Gabriel is afraid that his poor grandfather is dead," she whispered,
nervously.

"Dead!" There was no sorrow in the tone as he echoed the word. "Was he
very bad in the night before his death happened? Did he wander in his
mind? He has been rather light-headed lately."

"He was very restless, and spoke of the ghostly warnings that we all
know of; he said he saw and heard many things which told him from
the other world that you and Pierre--Gabriel!" she screamed, suddenly
interrupting herself, "look at him! Look at his face! Your grandfather
is not dead!"

At this moment, Francois was raising his father's head to look closely
at him. A faint spasm had indeed passed over the deathly face; the lips
quivered, the jaw dropped. Francois shuddered as he looked, and moved
away hastily from the bed. At the same instant Gabriel started from the
wall; his expression altered, his pale cheeks flushed suddenly, as he
snatched up the wicker-cased bottle, and poured all the little brandy
that was left in it down his grandfather's throat.

The effect was nearly instantaneous; the sinking vital forces rallied
desperately. The old man's eyes opened again, wandered round the room,
then fixed themselves intently on Francois as he stood near the fire.
Trying and terrible as his position was at that moment, Gabriel still
retained self-possession enough to whisper a few words in Perrine's ear.
"Go back again into the bedroom, and take the children with you," he
said. "We may have something to speak about which you had better not
hear."

"Son Gabriel, your grandfather is trembling all over," said Francois.
"If he is dying at all, he is dying of cold; help me to lift him, bed
and all, to the hearth."

"No, no! don't let him touch me!" gasped the old man. "Don't let him
look at me in that way! Don't let him come near me, Gabriel! Is it his
ghost? or is it himself?"

As Gabriel answered he heard a knocking at the door. His father opened
it, and disclosed to view some people from the neighboring fishing
village, who had come--more out of curiosity than sympathy--to inquire
whether Francois and the boy Pierre had survived the night. Without
asking any one to enter, the fisherman surlily and shortly answered the
various questions addressed to him, standing in his own doorway. While
he was thus engaged, Gabriel heard his grandfather muttering vacantly to
himself, "Last night--how about last night, grandson? What was I talking
about last night? Did I say your father was drowned? Very foolish to say
he was drowned, and then see him come back alive again! But it wasn't
that--I'm so weak in my head, I can't remember. What was it, Gabriel?
Something too horrible to speak of? Is that what you're whispering and
trembling about? I said nothing horrible. A crime! Bloodshed! I know
nothing of any crime or bloodshed here--I must have been frightened out
of my wits to talk in that way! The Merchant's Table? Only a big heap
of old stones! What with the storm, and thinking I was going to die,
and being afraid about your father, I must have been light-headed. Don't
give another thought to that nonsense, Gabriel! I'm better now. We shall
all live to laugh at poor grandfather for talking nonsense about
crime and bloodshed in his sleep. Ah, poor old man--last
night--light-headed--fancies and nonsense of an old man--why don't you
laugh at it? I'm laughing--so light-headed, so light--"

He stopped suddenly. A low cry, partly of terror and partly of pain,
escaped him; the look of pining anxiety and imbecile cunning which had
distorted his face while he had been speaking, faded from it forever.
He shivered a little, breathed heavily once or twice, then became quite
still.

Had he died with a falsehood on his lips?

Gabriel looked round and saw that the cottage door was closed, and
that his father was standing against it. How long he had occupied that
position, how many of the old man's last words he had heard, it was
impossible to conjecture, but there was a lowering suspicion in his
harsh face as he now looked away from the corpse to his son, which made
Gabriel shudder; and the first question that he asked, on once more
approaching the bedside, was expressed in tones which, quiet as they
were, had a fearful meaning in them.

"What did your grandfather talk about last night?" he asked.

Gabriel did not answer. All that he had heard, all that he had seen, all
the misery and horror that might yet be to come, had stunned his mind.
The unspeakable dangers of his present position were too tremendous to
be realized. He could only feel them vaguely in the weary torpor that
oppressed his heart; while in every other direction the use of his
faculties, physical and mental, seemed to have suddenly and totally
abandoned him.

"Is your tongue wounded, son Gabriel, as well as your arm?" his father
went on, with a bitter laugh. "I come back to you, saved by a miracle;
and you never speak to me. Would you rather I had died than the old man
there? He can't hear you now--why shouldn't you tell me what nonsense
he was talking last night? You won't? I say you shall!" (He crossed
the room and put his back to the door.) "Before either of us leave this
place, you shall confess it! You know that my duty to the Church bids
me to go at once and tell the priest of your grandfather's death. If I
leave that duty unfulfilled, remember it is through your fault! _You_
keep me here--for here I stop till I'm obeyed. Do you hear that, idiot?
Speak! Speak instantly, or you shall repeat it to the day of your death!
I ask again--what did your grandfather say to you when he was wandering
in his mind last night?"

"He spoke of a crime committed by another, and guiltily kept secret by
him," answered Gabriel, slowly and sternly. "And this morning he denied
his own words with his last living breath. But last night, if he spoke
the truth--"

"The truth!" echoed Francois. "What truth?"

He stopped, his eyes fell, then turned toward the corpse. For a few
minutes he stood steadily contemplating it; breathing quickly, and
drawing his hand several times across his forehead. Then he faced
his son once more. In that short interval he had become in outward
appearance a changed man; expression, voice, and manner, all were
altered.

"Heaven forgive me!" he went on, "but I could almost laugh at myself, at
this solemn moment, for having spoken and acted just now so much like a
fool! Denied his words, did he? Poor old man! they say sense often comes
back to light-headed people just before death; and he is a proof of it.
The fact is, Gabriel, my own wits must have been a little shaken--and no
wonder--by what I went through last night, and what I have come home
to this morning. As if you, or anybody, could ever really give serious
credit to the wandering speeches of a dying old man! (Where is Perrine?
Why did you send her away?) I don't wonder at your still looking a
little startled, and feeling low in your mind, and all that--for you've
had a trying night of it, trying in every way. He must have been a good
deal shaken in his wits last night, between fears about himself and
fears about me. (To think of my being angry with you, Gabriel, for being
a little alarmed--very naturally--by an old man's queer fancies!) Come
out, Perrine--come out of the bedroom whenever you are tired of it:
you must learn sooner or later to look at death calmly. Shake hands,
Gabriel; and let us make it up, and say no more about what has passed.
You won't? Still angry with me for what I said to you just now? Ah!
you'll think better about it by the time I return. Come out, Perrine;
we've no secrets here."

"Where are you going to?" asked Gabriel, as he saw his father hastily
open the door.

"To tell the priest that one of his congregation is dead, and to have
the death registered," answered Francois. "These are _my_ duties, and
must be performed before I take any rest."

He went out hurriedly as he said these words. Gabriel almost trembled
at himself when he found that he breathed more freely, that he felt less
horribly oppressed both in mind and body, the moment his father's back
was turned. Fearful as thought was now, it was still a change for the
better to be capable of thinking at all. Was the behavior of his father
compatible with innocence? Could the old man's confused denial of his
own words in the morning, and in the presence of his son, be set for one
instant against the circumstantial confession that he had made during
the night alone with his grandson? These were the terrible questions
which Gabriel now asked himself, and which he shrank involuntarily from
answering. And yet that doubt, the solution of which would, one way or
the other, irrevocably affect the whole future of his life, must sooner
or later be solved at any hazard!

Was there any way of setting it at rest? Yes, one way--to go instantly,
while his father was absent, and examine the hollow place under the
Merchant's Table. If his grandfather's confession had really been made
while he was in possession of his senses, this place (which Gabriel knew
to be covered in from wind and weather) had never been visited since
the commission of the crime by the perpetrator, or by his unwilling
accomplice; though time had destroyed all besides, the hair and the
bones of the victim would still be left to bear witness to the truth--if
truth had indeed been spoken. As this conviction grew on him, the young
man's cheek paled; and he stopped irresolute half-way between the hearth
and the door. Then he looked down doubtfully at the corpse on the bed;
and then there came upon him suddenly a revulsion of feeling. A wild,
feverish impatience to know the worst without another instant of delay
possessed him. Only telling Perrine that he should be back soon, and
that she must watch by the dead in his absence, he left the cottage at
once, without waiting to hear her reply, even without looking back as he
closed the door behind him.

There were two tracks to the Merchant's Table. One, the longer of the
two, by the coast cliffs; the other across the heath. But this latter
path was also, for some little distance, the path which led to the
village and the church. He was afraid of attracting his father's
attention here, so he took the direction of the coast. At one spot the
track trended inland, winding round some of the many Druid monuments
scattered over the country. This place was on high ground, and commanded
a view, at no great distance, of the path leading to the village, just
where it branched off from the heathy ridge which ran in the direction
of the Merchant's Table. Here Gabriel descried the figure of a man
standing with his back toward the coast.

This figure was too far off to be identified with absolute certainty,
but it looked like, and might well be, Francois Sarzeau. Whoever he was,
the man was evidently uncertain which way he should proceed. When
he moved forward, it was first to advance several paces toward the
Merchant's Table; then he went back again toward the distant cottages
and the church. Twice he hesitated thus; the second time pausing long
before he appeared finally to take the way that led to the village.

Leaving the post of observation among the stones, at which he had
instinctively halted for some minutes past, Gabriel now proceeded on his
own path. Could this man really be his father? And if it were so, why
did Francois Sarzeau only determine to go to the village where his
business lay, after having twice vainly attempted to persevere in taking
the exactly opposite direction of the Merchant's Table? Did he really
desire to go there? Had he heard the name mentioned, when the old man
referred to it in his dying words? And had he failed to summon courage
enough to make all safe by removing--This last question was too horrible
to be pursued; Gabriel stifled it affrightedly in his own heart as he
went on.

He reached the great Druid monument without meeting a living soul on his
way. The sun was rising, and the mighty storm-clouds of the night were
parting asunder wildly over the whole eastward horizon. The waves still
leaped and foamed gloriously: but the gale had sunk to a keen, fresh
breeze. As Gabriel looked up, and saw how brightly the promise of a
lovely day was written in the heavens, he trembled as he thought of
the search which he was now about to make. The sight of the fair, fresh
sunrise jarred horribly with the suspicions of committed murder that
were rankling foully in his heart. But he knew that his errand must be
performed, and he nerved himself to go through with it; for he dared not
return to the cottage until the mystery had been cleared up at once and
forever.

The Merchant's Table was formed by two huge stones resting horizontally
on three others. In the troubled times of more than half a century ago,
regular tourists were unknown among the Druid monuments of Brittany; and
the entrance to the hollow place under the stones--since often visited
by strangers--was at this time nearly choked up by brambles and weeds.
Gabriel's first look at this tangled nook of briers convinced him that
the place had not been entered perhaps for years, by any living being.
Without allowing himself to hesitate (for he felt that the slightest
delay might be fatal to his resolution), he passed as gently as possible
through the brambles, and knelt down at the low, dusky, irregular
entrance of the hollow place under the stones.

His heart throbbed violently, his breath almost failed him; but he
forced himself to crawl a few feet into the cavity, and then groped with
his hand on the ground about him.

He touched something! Something which it made his flesh creep to handle;
something which he would fain have dropped, but which he grasped tight
in spite of himself. He drew back into the outer air and sunshine. Was
it a human bone? No! he had been the dupe of his own morbid terror--he
had only taken up a fragment of dried wood!

Feeling shame at such self-deception as this, he was about to throw the
wood from him before he re-entered the place, when another idea occurred
to him.

Though it was dimly lighted through one or two chinks in the stones, the
far part of the interior of the cavity was still too dusky to admit
of perfect examination by the eye, even on a bright sunshiny morning.
Observing this, he took out the tinder-box and matches, which, like the
other inhabitants of the district, he always carried about with him for
the purpose of lighting his pipe, determining to use the piece of wood
as a torch which might illuminate the darkest corner of the place when
he next entered it. Fortunately the wood had remained so long and had
been preserved so dry in its sheltered position, that it caught fire
almost as easily as a piece of paper. The moment it was fairly aflame
Gabriel went into the cavity, penetrating at once--this time--to its
furthest extremity.

He remained among the stones long enough for the wood to burn down
nearly to his hand. When he came out, and flung the burning fragment
from him, his face was flushed deeply, his eyes sparkled. He leaped
carelessly on to the heath, over the bushes through which he had
threaded his way so warily but a few minutes before, exclaiming, "I may
marry Perrine with a clear conscience now; I am the son of as honest a
man as there is in Brittany!"

He had closely examined the cavity in every corner, and not the
slightest sign that any dead body had ever been laid there was visible
in the hollow place under the Merchant's Table.



CHAPTER III.

"I may marry Perrine with a clear conscience now!"

There are some parts of the world where it would be drawing no natural
picture of human nature to represent a son as believing conscientiously
that an offense against life and the laws of hospitality, secretly
committed by his father, rendered him, though innocent of all
participation in it, unworthy to fulfill his engagement with his
affianced wife. Among the simple inhabitants of Gabriel's province,
however, such acuteness of conscientious sensibility as this was no
extraordinary exception to all general rules. Ignorant and superstitious
as they might be, the people of Brittany practiced the duties of
hospitality as devoutly as they practiced the duties of the national
religion. The presence of the stranger-guest, rich or poor, was a sacred
presence at their hearths. His safety was their especial charge, his
property their especial responsibility. They might be half starved, but
they were ready to share the last crust with him, nevertheless, as they
would share it with their own children.

Any outrage on the virtue of hospitality, thus born and bred in the
people, was viewed by them with universal disgust, and punished with
universal execration. This ignominy was uppermost in Gabriel's thoughts
by the side of his grandfather's bed; the dread of this worst dishonor,
which there was no wiping out, held him speechless before Perrine,
shamed and horrified him so that he felt unworthy to look her in the
face; and when the result of his search at the Merchant's Table proved
the absence there of all evidence of the crime spoken of by the old
man, the blessed relief, the absorbing triumph of that discovery, was
expressed entirely in the one thought which had prompted his first
joyful words: He could marry Perrine with a clear conscience, for he was
the son of an honest man!

When he returned to the cottage, Francois had not come back. Perrine
was astonished at the change in Gabriel's manner; even Pierre and the
children remarked it. Rest and warmth had by this time so far recovered
the younger brother, that he was able to give some account of the
perilous adventures of the night at sea. They were still listening to
the boy's narrative when Francois at last returned. It was now
Gabriel who held out his hand, and made the first advances toward
reconciliation.

To his utter amazement, his father recoiled from him. The variable
temper of Francois had evidently changed completely during his absence
at the village. A settled scowl of distrust darkened his face as he
looked at his son.

"I never shake hands with people who have once doubted me," he
exclaimed, loudly and irritably; "for I always doubt them forever after.
You are a bad son! You have suspected your father of some infamy that
you dare not openly charge him with, on no other testimony than the
rambling nonsense of a half-witted, dying old man. Don't speak to me!
I won't hear you! An innocent man and a spy are bad company. Go and
denounce me, you Judas in disguise! I don't care for your secret or for
you. What's that girl Perrine doing here still? Why hasn't she gone home
long ago? The priest's coming; we don't want strangers in the house of
death. Take her back to the farmhouse, and stop there with her, if you
like; nobody wants you here!"

There was something in the manner and look of the speaker as he uttered
these words, so strange, so sinister, so indescribably suggestive of his
meaning much more than he said, that Gabriel felt his heart sink within
him instantly; and almost at the same moment this fearful question
forced itself irresistibly on his mind: might not his father have
followed him to the Merchant's Table?

Even if he had been desired to speak, he could not have spoken now,
while that question and the suspicion that it brought with it were
utterly destroying all the re-assuring hopes and convictions of the
morning. The mental suffering produced by the sudden change from
pleasure to pain in all his thoughts, reacted on him physically. He felt
as if he were stifling in the air of the cottage, in the presence of his
father; and when Perrine hurried on her walking attire, and with a face
which alternately flushed and turned pale with every moment, approached
the door, he went out with her as hastily as if he had been flying
from his home. Never had the fresh air and the free daylight felt like
heavenly and guardian influences to him until now!

He could comfort Perrine under his father's harshness, he could assure
her of his own affection, which no earthly influence could change, while
they walked together toward the farmhouse; but he could do no more. He
durst not confide to her the subject that was uppermost in his mind; of
all human beings she was the last to whom he could reveal the terrible
secret that was festering at his heart. As soon as they got within sight
of the farmhouse, Gabriel stopped; and, promising to see her again soon,
took leave of Perrine with assumed ease in his manner and with real
despair in his heart. Whatever the poor girl might think of it, he felt,
at that moment, that he had not courage to face her father, and hear him
talk happily and pleasantly, as his custom was, of Perrine's approaching
marriage.

Left to himself, Gabriel wandered hither and thither over the open
heath, neither knowing nor caring in what direction he turned his steps.
The doubts about his father's innocence which had been dissipated by his
visit to the Merchant's Table, that father's own language and manner had
now revived--had even confirmed, though he dared not yet acknowledge so
much to himself. It was terrible enough to be obliged to admit that the
result of his morning's search was, after all, not conclusive--that
the mystery was, in very truth, not yet cleared up. The violence of his
father's last words of distrust; the extraordinary and indescribable
changes in his father's manner while uttering them--what did these
things mean? Guilt or innocence? Again, was it any longer reasonable to
doubt the death-bed confession made by his grandfather? Was it not, on
the contrary, far more probable that the old man's denial in the morning
of his own words at night had been made under the influence of a
panic terror, when his moral consciousness was bewildered, and his
intellectual faculties were sinking? The longer Gabriel thought of these
questions, the less competent--possibly also the less willing--he felt
to answer them. Should he seek advice from others wiser than he? No;
not while the thousandth part of a chance remained that his father was
innocent.

This thought was still in his mind, when he found himself once more in
sight of his home. He was still hesitating near the door, when he saw it
opened cautiously. His brother Pierre looked out, and then came running
toward him. "Come in, Gabriel; oh, do come in!" said the boy, earnestly.
"We are afraid to be alone with father. He's been beating us for talking
of you."

Gabriel went in. His father looked up from the hearth where he was
sitting, muttered the word "Spy!" and made a gesture of contempt but did
not address a word directly to his son. The hours passed on in silence;
afternoon waned into evening, and evening into night; and still he never
spoke to any of his children. Soon after it was dark, he went out, and
took his net with him, saying that it was better to be alone on the sea
than in the house with a spy.

When he returned the next morning there was no change in him. Days
passed--weeks, months, even elapsed, and still, though his manner
insensibly became what it used to be toward his other children, it never
altered toward his eldest son. At the rare periods when they now met,
except when absolutely obliged to speak, he preserved total silence in
his intercourse with Gabriel. He would never take Gabriel out with him
in the boat; he would never sit alone with Gabriel in the house; he
would never eat a meal with Gabriel; he would never let the other
children talk to him about Gabriel; and he would never hear a word in
expostulation, a word in reference to anything his dead father had said
or done on the night of the storm, from Gabriel himself.

The young man pined and changed, so that even Perrine hardly knew him
again, under this cruel system of domestic excommunication; under the
wearing influence of the one unchanging doubt which never left him; and,
more than all, under the incessant reproaches of his own conscience,
aroused by the sense that he was evading a responsibility which it was
his solemn, his immediate duty to undertake. But no sting of conscience,
no ill treatment at home, and no self-reproaches for failing in his
duty of confession as a good Catholic, were powerful enough in their
influence over Gabriel to make him disclose the secret, under the
oppression of which his very life was wasting away. He knew that if he
once revealed it, whether his father was ultimately proved to be guilty
or innocent, there would remain a slur and a suspicion on the family,
and on Perrine besides, from her approaching connection with it, which
in their time and in their generation could never be removed. The
reproach of the world is terrible even in the crowded city, where many
of the dwellers in our abiding-place are strangers to us--but it is far
more terrible in the country, where none near us are strangers, where
all talk of us and know of us, where nothing intervenes between us and
the tyranny of the evil tongue. Gabriel had not courage to face this,
and dare the fearful chance of life-long ignominy--no, not even to serve
the sacred interests of justice, of atonement, and of truth.



CHAPTER IV.

While Gabriel still remained prostrated under the affliction that was
wasting his energies of body and mind, Brittany was visited by a great
public calamity, in which all private misfortunes were overwhelmed for a
while.

It was now the time when the ever-gathering storm of the French
Revolution had risen to its hurricane climax. Those chiefs of the new
republic were in power whose last, worst madness it was to decree the
extinction of religion and the overthrow of everything that outwardly
symbolized it throughout the whole of the country that they governed.
Already this decree had been executed to the letter in and around Paris;
and now the soldiers of the Republic were on their way to Brittany,
headed by commanders whose commission was to root out the Christian
religion in the last and the surest of the strongholds still left to it
in France.

These men began their work in a spirit worthy of the worst of their
superiors who had sent them to do it. They gutted churches, they
demolished chapels, they overthrew road-side crosses wherever they found
them. The terrible guillotine devoured human lives in the villages of
Brittany as it had devoured them in the streets of Paris; the musket and
the sword, in highway and byway, wreaked havoc on the people--even
on women and children kneeling in the act of prayer; the priests were
tracked night and day from one hiding-place, where they still offered
up worship, to another, and were killed as soon as overtaken--every
atrocity was committed in every district; but the Christian religion
still spread wider than the widest bloodshed; still sprang up with
ever-renewed vitality from under the very feet of the men whose vain
fury was powerless to trample it down. Everywhere the people remained
true to their Faith; everywhere the priests stood firm by them in their
sorest need. The executioners of the Republic had been sent to make
Brittany a country of apostates; they did their worst, and left it a
country of martyrs.

One evening, while this frightful persecution was still raging, Gabriel
happened to be detained unusually late at the cottage of Perrine's
father. He had lately spent much of his time at the farm house; it was
his only refuge now from that place of suffering, of silence, and of
secret shame, which he had once called home! Just as he had taken leave
of Perrine for the night, and was about to open the farmhouse door, her
father stopped him, and pointed to a chair in the chimney-corner.

"Leave us alone, my dear," said the old man to his daughter; "I want to
speak to Gabriel. You can go to your mother in the next room."

The words which Pere Bonan--as he was called by the neighbors--had now
to say in private were destined to lead to very unexpected events. After
referring to the alteration which had appeared of late in Gabriel's
manner, the old man began by asking him, sorrowfully but not
suspiciously, whether he still preserved his old affection for Perrine.
On receiving an eager answer in the affirmative, Pere Bonan then
referred to the persecution still raging through the country, and to the
consequent possibility that he, like others of his countrymen, might yet
be called to suffer, and perhaps to die, for the cause of his religion.
If this last act of self-sacrifice were required of him, Perrine would
be left unprotected, unless her affianced husband performed his promise
to her, and assumed, without delay, the position of her lawful guardian.
"Let me know that you will do this," concluded the old man; "I shall be
resigned to all that may be required of me, if I can only know that
I shall not die leaving Perrine unprotected." Gabriel gave the
promise--gave it with his whole heart. As he took leave of Pere Bonan,
the old man said to him:

"Come here to-morrow; I shall know more then than I know now--I shall
be able to fix with certainty the day for the fulfillment of your
engagement with Perrine."

Why did Gabriel hesitate at the farmhouse door, looking back on Pere
Bonan as though he would fain say something, and yet not speaking a
word? Why, after he had gone out and had walked onward several paces,
did he suddenly stop, return quickly to the farmhouse, stand irresolute
before the gate, and then retrace his steps, sighing heavily as he went,
but never pausing again on his homeward way? Because the torment of his
horrible secret had grown harder to bear than ever, since he had given
the promise that had been required of him. Because, while a strong
impulse moved him frankly to lay bare his hidden dread and doubt to the
father whose beloved daughter was soon to be his wife, there was a yet
stronger passive influence which paralyzed on his lips the terrible
confession that he knew not whether he was the son of an honest man, or
the son of an assassin, and a robber. Made desperate by his situation,
he determined, while he hastened homeward, to risk the worst, and ask
that fatal question of his father in plain words. But this supreme
trial for parent and child was not to be. When he entered the cottage,
Francois was absent. He had told the younger children that he should not
be home again before noon on the next day.

Early in the morning Gabriel repaired to the farmhouse, as he had been
bidden. Influenced, by his love for Perrine, blindly confiding in the
faint hope (which, in despite of heart and conscience, he still forced
himself to cherish) that his father might be innocent, he now preserved
the appearance at least of perfect calmness. "If I tell my secret to
Perrine's father, I risk disturbing in him that confidence in the
future safety of his child for which I am his present and only warrant."
Something like this thought was in Gabriel's mind, as he took the hand
of Pere Bonan, and waited anxiously to hear what was required of him on
that day.

"We have a short respite from danger, Gabriel," said the old man. "News
has come to me that the spoilers of our churches and the murderers of
our congregations have been stopped on their way hitherward by tidings
which have reached them from another district. This interval of peace
and safety will be a short one--we must take advantage of it while it
is yet ours. My name is among the names on the list of the denounced. If
the soldiers of the Republic find me here--but we will say nothing more
of this; it is of Perrine and of you that I must now speak. On this very
evening your marriage may be solemnized with all the wonted rites of our
holy religion, and the blessing may be pronounced over you by the lips
of a priest. This evening, therefore, Gabriel, you must become the
husband and the protector of Perrine. Listen to me attentively, and I
will tell you how."

This was the substance of what Gabriel now heard from Pere Bonan:

Not very long before the persecutions broke out in Brittany, a priest,
known generally by the name of Father Paul, was appointed to a curacy
in one of the northern districts of the province. He fulfilled all the
duties of his station in such a manner as to win the confidence and
affection of every member of his congregation, and was often spoken of
with respect, even in parts of the country distant from the scene of
his labors. It was not, however, until the troubles broke out, and the
destruction and bloodshed began, that he became renowned far and wide,
from one end of Brittany to another. From the date of the very first
persecutions the name of Father Paul was a rallying-cry of the hunted
peasantry; he was their great encouragement under oppression, their
example in danger, their last and only consoler in the hour of death.
Wherever havoc and ruin raged most fiercely, wherever the pursuit was
hottest and the slaughter most cruel, there the intrepid priest was sure
to be seen pursuing his sacred duties in defiance of every peril. His
hair-breadth escapes from death; his extraordinary re-appearances in
parts of the country where no one ever expected to see him again, were
regarded by the poorer classes with superstitious awe. Wherever Father
Paul appeared, with his black dress, his calm face, and the ivory
crucifix which he always carried in his hand, the people reverenced him
as more than mortal; and grew at last to believe, that, single-handed,
he would successfully defend his religion against the armies of the
Republic. But their simple confidence in his powers of resistance was
soon destined to be shaken. Fresh re-enforcements arrived in Brittany,
and overran the whole province from one end to the other. One morning,
after celebrating service in a dismantled church, and after narrowly
escaping with his life from those who pursued him, the priest
disappeared. Secret inquiries were made after him in all directions; but
he was heard of no more.

Many weary days had passed, and the dispirited peasantry had already
mourned him as dead, when some fishermen on the northern coast observed
a ship of light burden in the offing, making signals to the shore. They
put off to her in their boats; and on reaching the deck saw standing
before them the well-remembered figure of Father Paul.

The priest had returned to his congregations, and had founded the new
altar that they were to worship at on the deck of the ship! Razed from
the face of the earth, their church had not been destroyed--for Father
Paul and the priests who acted with him had given that church a refuge
on the sea. Henceforth, their children could still be baptized, their
sons and daughters could still be married, the burial of their dead
could still be solemnized, under the sanction of the old religion for
which, not vainly, they had suffered so patiently and so long.

Throughout the remaining time of trouble the services were uninterrupted
on board the ship. A code of signals was established by which those on
shore were always enabled to direct their brethren at sea toward such
parts of the coast as happened to be uninfested by the enemies of
their worship. On the morning of Gabriel's visit to the farmhouse these
signals had shaped the course of the ship toward the extremity of the
peninsula of Quiberon. The people of the district were all prepared to
expect the appearance of the vessel some time in the evening, and
had their boats ready at a moment's notice to put off, and attend the
service. At the conclusion of this service Pere Bonan had arranged that
the marriage of his daughter and Gabriel was to take place.

They waited for evening at the farmhouse. A little before sunset
the ship was signaled as in sight; and then Pere Bonan and his wife,
followed by Gabriel and Perrine, set forth over the heath to the beach.
With the solitary exception of Francois Sarzeau, the whole population
of the neighborhood was already assembled there, Gabriel's brother and
sisters being among the number.

It was the calmest evening that had been known for months. There was not
a cloud in the lustrous sky--not a ripple on the still surface of the
sea. The smallest children were suffered by their mothers to stray down
on the beach as they pleased; for the waves of the great ocean slept as
tenderly and noiselessly on their sandy bed as if they had been changed
into the waters of an inland lake. Slow, almost imperceptible, was the
approach of the ship--there was hardly a breath of wind to carry her
on--she was just drifting gently with the landward set of the tide at
that hour, while her sails hung idly against the masts. Long after the
sun had gone down, the congregation still waited and watched on the
beach. The moon and stars were arrayed in their glory of the night
before the ship dropped anchor. Then the muffled tolling of a bell came
solemnly across the quiet waters; and then, from every creek along the
shore, as far as the eye could reach, the black forms of the fishermen's
boats shot out swift and stealthy into the shining sea.

By the time the boats had arrived alongside of the ship, the lamp had
been kindled before the altar, and its flame was gleaming red and dull
in the radiant moonlight. Two of the priests on board were clothed in
their robes of office, and were waiting in their appointed places to
begin the service. But there was a third, dressed only in the ordinary
attire of his calling, who mingled with the congregation, and spoke
a few words to each of the persons composing it, as, one by one, they
mounted the sides of the ship. Those who had never seen him before knew
by the famous ivory crucifix in his hand that the priest who received
them was Father Paul. Gabriel looked at this man, whom he now beheld for
the first time, with a mixture of astonishment and awe; for he saw that
the renowned chief of the Christians of Brittany was, to all appearance,
but little older than himself.

The expression on the pale, calm face of the priest was so gentle and
kind, that children just able to walk tottered up to him, and held
familiarly by the skirts of his black gown, whenever his clear blue eyes
rested on theirs, while he beckoned them to his side. No one would ever
have guessed from the countenance of Father Paul what deadly perils he
had confronted, but for the scar of a saber-wound, as yet hardly healed,
which ran across his forehead. That wound had been dealt while he was
kneeling before the altar in the last church in Brittany which had
escaped spoliation. He would have died where he knelt, but for the
peasants who were praying with him, and who, unarmed as they were, threw
themselves like tigers on the soldiery, and at awful sacrifice of their
own lives saved the life of their priest. There was not a man now on
board the ship who would have hesitated, had the occasion called for it
again, to have rescued him in the same way.

The service began. Since the days when the primitive Christians
worshiped amid the caverns of the earth, can any service be imagined
nobler in itself, or sublimer in the circumstances surrounding it, than
that which was now offered up? Here was no artificial pomp, no gaudy
profusion of ornament, no attendant grandeur of man's creation. All
around this church spread the hushed and awful majesty of the tranquil
sea. The roof of this cathedral was the immeasurable heaven, the pure
moon its one great light, the countless glories of the stars its only
adornment. Here were no hired singers or rich priest-princes; no curious
sight-seers, or careless lovers of sweet sounds. This congregation and
they who had gathered it together, were all poor alike, all persecuted
alike, all worshiping alike, to the overthrow of their worldly
interests, and at the imminent peril of their lives. How brightly and
tenderly the moonlight shone upon the altar and the people before
it! how solemnly and divinely the deep harmonies, as they chanted the
penitential Psalms, mingled with the hoarse singing of the freshening
night breeze in the rigging of the ship! how sweetly the still rushing
murmur of many voices, as they uttered the responses together, now died
away, and now rose again softly into the mysterious night!

Of all the members of the congregation--young or old--there was but one
over whom that impressive service exercised no influence of consolation
or of peace; that one was Gabriel. Often, throughout the day, his
reproaching conscience had spoken within him again and again. Often when
he joined the little assembly on the beach, he turned away his face in
secret shame and apprehension from Perrine and her father. Vainly, after
gaining the deck of the ship, did he try to meet the eye of Father Paul
as frankly, as readily, and as affectionately as others met it. The
burden of concealment seemed too heavy to be borne in the presence of
the priest--and yet, torment as it was, he still bore it! But when he
knelt with the rest of the congregation and saw Perrine kneeling by his
side--when he felt the calmness of the solemn night and the still sea
filling his heart--when the sounds of the first prayers spoke with a
dread spiritual language of their own to his soul--then the remembrance
of the confession which he had neglected, and the terror of receiving
unprepared the sacrament which he knew would be offered to him--grew too
vivid to be endured; the sense that he merited no longer, though once
worthy of it, the confidence in his perfect truth and candor placed
in him by the woman with whom he was soon to stand before the altar,
overwhelmed him with shame: the mere act of kneeling among that
congregation, the passive accomplice by his silence and secrecy, for
aught he knew to the contrary, of a crime which it was his bounden duty
to denounce, appalled him as if he had already committed sacrilege that
could never be forgiven. Tears flowed down his cheeks, though he strove
to repress them: sobs burst from him, though he tried to stifle them. He
knew that others besides Perrine were looking at him in astonishment
and alarm; but he could neither control himself, nor move to leave his
place, nor raise his eyes even--until suddenly he felt a hand laid on
his shoulder. That touch, slight as it was, ran through him instantly. He
looked up, and saw Father Paul standing by his side.

Beckoning him to follow, and signing to the congregation not to suspend
their devotions, he led Gabriel out of the assembly--then paused for a
moment, reflecting--then beckoning him again, took him into the cabin of
the ship, and closed the door carefully.

"You have something on your mind," he said, simply and quietly, taking
the young man by the hand. "I may be able to relieve you, if you tell me
what it is."

As Gabriel heard these gentle words, and saw, by the light of a lamp
which burned before a cross fixed against the wall, the sad kindness of
expression with which the priest was regarding him, the oppression that
had lain so long on his heart seemed to leave it in an instant. The
haunting fear of ever divulging his fatal suspicions and his fatal
secret had vanished, as it were, at the touch of Father Paul's hand. For
the first time he now repeated to another ear--the sounds of prayer
and praise rising grandly the while from the congregation above--his
grandfather's death-bed confession, word for word almost, as he had
heard it in the cottage on the night of the storm.

Once, and once only, did Father Paul interrupt the narrative, which in
whispers was addressed to him. Gabriel had hardly repeated the first two
or three sentences of his grandfather's confession, when the priest, in
quick, altered tones, abruptly asked him his name and place of abode.

As the question was answered, Father Paul's calm face became suddenly
agitated; but the next moment, resolutely resuming his self-possession,
he bowed his head as a sign that Gabriel was to continue; clasped his
trembling hands, and raising them as if in silent prayer, fixed his eyes
intently on the cross. He never looked away from it while the terrible
narrative proceeded. But when Gabriel described his search at the
Merchant's Table; and, referring to his father's behavior since that
time, appealed to the priest to know whether he might even yet, in
defiance of appearances, be still filially justified in doubting whether
the crime had been really perpetrated--then Father Paul moved near to
him once more, and spoke again.

"Compose yourself, and look at me," he said, with his former sad
kindness of voice and manner. "I can end your doubts forever. Gabriel,
your father was guilty in intention and in act; but the victim of his
crime still lives. I can prove it."

Gabriel's heart beat wildly; a deadly coldness crept over him as he saw
Father Paul loosen the fastening of his cassock round the throat.

At that instant the chanting of the congregation above ceased; and then
the sudden and awful stillness was deepened rather than interrupted by
the faint sound of one voice praying. Slowly and with trembling fingers
the priest removed the band round his neck--paused a little--sighed
heavily--and pointed to a scar which was now plainly visible on one side
of his throat. He said something at the same time; but the bell above
tolled while he spoke. It was the signal of the elevation of the Host.
Gabriel felt an arm passed round him, guiding him to his knees, and
sustaining him from sinking to the floor. For one moment longer he was
conscious that the bell had stopped, that there was dead silence, that
Father Paul was kneeling by him beneath the cross, with bowed head--then
all objects around vanished; and he saw and knew nothing more.

When he recovered his senses, he was still in the cabin; the man whose
life his father had attempted was bending over him, and sprinkling
water on his face; and the clear voices of the women and children of the
congregation were joining the voices of the men in singing the _Agnus
Dei._

"Look up at me without fear, Gabriel," said the priest. "I desire not to
avenge injuries: I visit not the sins of the father on the child. Look
up, and listen! I have strange things to speak of; and I have a sacred
mission to fulfill before the morning, in which you must be my guide."

Gabriel attempted to kneel and kiss his hand but Father Paul stopped
him, and said, pointing to the cross: "Kneel to that--not to me; not to
your fellow-mortal, and your friend--for I will be your friend, Gabriel;
believing that God's mercy has ordered it so. And now listen to me,"
he proceeded, with a brotherly tenderness in his manner which went to
Gabriel's heart. "The service is nearly ended. What I have to tell you
must be told at once; the errand on which you will guide me must be
performed before to-morrow dawns. Sit here near me, and attend to what I
now say!"

Gabriel obeyed; Father Paul then proceeded thus:

"I believe the confession made to you by your grandfather to have been
true in every particular. On the evening to which he referred you, I
approached your cottage, as he said, for the purpose of asking shelter
for the night. At that period I had been studying hard to qualify myself
for the holy calling which I now pursue; and, on the completion of
my studies, had indulged in the recreation of a tour on foot through
Brittany, by way of innocently and agreeably occupying the leisure time
then at my disposal, before I entered the priesthood. When I accosted
your father I had lost my way, had been walking for many hours, and was
glad of any rest that I could get for the night. It is unnecessary to
pain you now, by reference to the events which followed my entrance
under your father's roof. I remember nothing that happened from the
time when I lay down to sleep before the fire, until the time when I
recovered my senses at the place which you call the Merchant's Table. My
first sensation was that of being moved into the cold air; when I opened
my eyes I saw the great Druid stones rising close above me, and two men
on either side of me rifling my pockets. They found nothing valuable
there, and were about to leave me where I lay, when I gathered strength
enough to appeal to their mercy through their cupidity. Money was not
scarce with me then, and I was able to offer them a rich reward (which
they ultimately received as I had promised) if they would take me to
any place where I could get shelter and medical help. I supposed they
inferred by my language and accent--perhaps also by the linen I wore,
which they examined closely--that I belonged to the higher ranks of the
community, in spite of the plainness of my outer garments; and might,
therefore, be in a position to make good my promise to them. I heard one
say to the other, 'Let us risk it'; and then they took me in their arms,
carried me down to a boat on the beach, and rowed to a vessel in the
offing. The next day they disembarked me at Paimboeuf, where I got the
assistance which I so much needed. I learned, through the confidence
they were obliged to place in me in order to give me the means of
sending them their promised reward, that these men were smugglers, and
that they were in the habit of using the cavity in which I had been laid
as a place of concealment for goods, and for letters of advice to their
accomplices. This accounted for their finding me. As to my wound, I
was informed by the surgeon who attended me that it had missed being
inflicted in a mortal part by less than a quarter of an inch, and that,
as it was, nothing but the action of the night air in coagulating the
blood over the place, had, in the first instance, saved my life. To
be brief, I recovered after a long illness, returned to Paris, and was
called to the priesthood. The will of my superiors obliged me to perform
the first duties of my vocation in the great city; but my own wish was
to be appointed to a cure of souls in your province, Gabriel. Can you
imagine why?"

The answer to this question was in Gabriel's heart; but he was still too
deeply awed and affected by what he had heard to give it utterance.

"I must tell you, then, what my motive was," said Father Paul. "You must
know first that I uniformly abstained from disclosing to any one where
and by whom my life had been attempted. I kept this a secret from the
men who rescued me--from the surgeon--from my own friends even. My
reason for such a proceeding was, I would fain believe, a Christian
reason. I hope I had always felt a sincere and humble desire to prove
myself, by the help of God, worthy of the sacred vocation to which I was
destined. But my miraculous escape from death made an impression on
my mind, which gave me another and an infinitely higher view of this
vocation--the view which I have since striven, and shall always strive
for the future, to maintain. As I lay, during the first days of my
recovery, examining my own heart, and considering in what manner it
would be my duty to act toward your father when I was restored to
health, a thought came into my mind which calmed, comforted, and
resolved all my doubts. I said within myself, 'In a few months more I
shall be called to be one of the chosen ministers of God. If I am worthy
of my vocation, my first desire toward this man who has attempted to
take my life should be, not to know that human justice has overtaken
him, but to know that he has truly and religiously repented and made
atonement for his guilt. To such repentance and atonement let it be my
duty to call him; if he reject that appeal, and be hardened only the
more against me because I have forgiven him my injuries, then it will be
time enough to denounce him for his crimes to his fellow-men. Surely
it must be well for me, here and hereafter, if I begin my career in the
holy priesthood by helping to save from hell the soul of the man who,
of all others, has most cruelly wronged me.' It was for this reason,
Gabriel--it was because I desired to go straightway to your father's
cottage, and reclaim him after he had believed me to be dead--that I
kept the secret and entreated of my superiors that I might be sent to
Brittany. But this, as I have said, was not to be at first, and when
my desire was granted, my place was assigned me in a far district. The
persecution under which we still suffer broke out; the designs of my
life were changed; my own will became no longer mine to guide me. But,
through sorrow and suffering, and danger and bloodshed, I am now led,
after many days, to the execution of that first purpose which I formed
on entering the priesthood. Gabriel, when the service is over, and
the congregation are dispersed, you must guide me to the door of your
father's cottage."

He held up his hand, in sign of silence, as Gabriel was about to answer.
Just then the officiating priests above were pronouncing the final
benediction. When it was over, Father Paul opened the cabin door. As he
ascended the steps, followed by Gabriel, Pere Bonan met them. The old
man looked doubtfully and searchingly on his future son-in-law, as he
respectfully whispered a few words in the ear of the priest. Father Paul
listened attentively, answered in a whisper, and then turned to Gabriel,
first begging the few people near them to withdraw a little.

"I have been asked whether there is any impediment to your marriage,"
he said, "and have answered that there is none. What you have said to
me has been said in confession, and is a secret between us two. Remember
that; and forget not, at the same time, the service which I shall
require of you to-night, after the marriage-ceremony is over. Where
is Perrine Bonan?" he added, aloud, looking round him. Perrine came
forward. Father Paul took her hand and placed it in Gabriel's. "Lead her
to the altar steps," he said, "and wait there for me."

It was more than an hour later; the boats had left the ship's side; the
congregation had dispersed over the face of the country--but still the
vessel remained at anchor. Those who were left in her watched the land
more anxiously than usual; for they knew that Father Paul had risked
meeting the soldiers of the Republic by trusting himself on shore. A
boat was awaiting his return on the beach; half of the crew, armed,
being posted as scouts in various directions on the high land of the
heath. They would have followed and guarded the priest to the place of
his destination; but he forbade it; and, leaving them abruptly, walked
swiftly onward with one young man only for his companion.

Gabriel had committed his brother and his sisters to the charge
of Perrine. They were to go to the farmhouse that night with his
newly-married wife and her father and mother. Father Paul had desired
that this might be done. When Gabriel and he were left alone to follow
the path which led to the fisherman's cottage, the priest never spoke
while they walked on--never looked aside either to the right or the
left--always held his ivory crucifix clasped to his breast. They arrived
at the door.

"Knock," whispered Father Paul to Gabriel, "and then wait here with me."

The door was opened. On a lovely moonlight night Francois Sarzeau had
stood on that threshold, years since, with a bleeding body in his arms.
On a lovely moonlight night he now stood there again, confronting the
very man whose life he had attempted, and knowing him not.

Father Paul advanced a few paces, so that the moonlight fell fuller on
his features, and removed his hat.

Francois Sarzeau looked, started, moved one step back, then stood
motionless and perfectly silent, while all traces of expression of any
kind suddenly vanished from his face. Then the calm, clear tones of the
priest stole gently on the dead silence. "I bring a message of peace and
forgiveness from a guest of former years," he said; and pointed, as he
spoke, to the place where he had been wounded in the neck.

For one moment, Gabriel saw his father trembling violently from head to
foot--then his limbs steadied again--stiffened suddenly, as if struck by
catalepsy. His lips parted, but without quivering; his eyes glared, but
without moving in the orbits. The lovely moonlight itself looked ghastly
and horrible, shining on the supernatural panic deformity of that face!
Gabriel turned away his head in terror. He heard the voice of Father
Paul saying to him: "Wait here till I come back."

Then there was an instant of silence again--then a low groaning sound
that seemed to articulate the name of God; a sound unlike his father's
voice, unlike any human voice he had ever heard--and then the noise of
a closing door. He looked up, and saw that he was standing alone before
the cottage.

Once, after an interval, he approached the window.

He just saw through it the hand of the priest holding on high the ivory
crucifix; but stopped not to see more, for he heard such words, such
sounds, as drove him back to his former place. There he stayed, until
the noise of something falling heavily within the cottage struck on
his ear. Again he advanced toward the door; heard Father Paul praying;
listened for several minutes; then heard a moaning voice, now joining
itself to the voice of the priest, now choked in sobs and bitter
wailing. Once more he went back out of hearing, and stirred not again
from his place. He waited a long and a weary time there--so long that
one of the scouts on the lookout came toward him, evidently suspicious
of the delay in the priest's return. He waved the man back, and then
looked again toward the door. At last he saw it open--saw Father Paul
approach him, leading Francois Sarzeau by the hand.

The fisherman never raised his downcast eyes to his son's face; tears
trickled silently over his cheeks; he followed the hand that led him, as
a little child might have followed it, listened anxiously and humbly at
the priest's side to every word that he spoke.

"Gabriel," said Father Paul, in a voice which trembled a little for the
first time that night--"Gabriel, it has pleased God to grant the perfect
fulfillment of the purpose which brought me to this place; I tell you
this, as all that you need--as all, I believe, that you would wish--to
know of what has passed while you have been left waiting for me here.
Such words as I have now to speak to you are spoken by your father's
earnest desire. It is his own wish that I should communicate to you his
confession of having secretly followed you to the Merchant's Table, and
of having discovered (as you discovered) that no evidence of his guilt
remained there. This admission, he thinks, will be enough to account for
his conduct toward yourself from that time to this. I have next to tell
you (also at your father's desire) that he has promised in my presence,
and now promises again in yours, sincerity of repentance in this manner:
When the persecution of our religion has ceased--as cease it will, and
that speedily, be assured of it--he solemnly pledges himself henceforth
to devote his life, his strength and what worldly possessions he may
have, or may acquire, to the task of re-erecting and restoring the
road-side crosses which have been sacrilegiously overthrown and
destroyed in his native province, and to doing good, go where he may.
I have now said all that is required of me, and may bid you
farewell--bearing with me the happy remembrance that I have left a
father and son reconciled and restored to each other. May God bless
and prosper you, and those dear to you, Gabriel! May God accept your
father's repentance, and bless him also throughout his future life!"

He took their hands, pressed them long and warmly, then turned and
walked quickly down the path which led to the beach. Gabriel dared not
trust himself yet to speak; but he raised his arm, and put it gently
round his father's neck. The two stood together so, looking out dimly
through the tears that filled their eyes to the sea. They saw the boat
put off in the bright track of the moonlight, and reach the vessel's
side; they watched the spreading of the sails, and followed the slow
course of the ship till she disappeared past a distant headland from
sight.

After that, they went into the cottage together. They knew it not then,
but they had seen the last, in this world, of Father Paul.



CHAPTER V.

The events foretold by the good priest happened sooner even than he had
anticipated. A new government ruled the destinies of France, and the
persecution ceased in Brittany.

Among other propositions which were then submitted to the Parliament,
was one advocating the restoration of the road-side crosses throughout
the province. It was found, however, on inquiry, that these crosses were
to be counted by thousands, and that the mere cost of wood required to
re-erect them necessitated an expenditure of money which the bankrupt
nation could ill afford to spare. While this project was under
discussion, and before it was finally rejected, one man had undertaken
the task which the Government shrank from attempting. When Gabriel left
the cottage, taking his brother and sisters to live with his wife and
himself at the farmhouse, Francois Sarzeau left it also, to perform in
highway and byway his promise to Father Paul. For months and months he
labored without intermission at his task; still, always doing good, and
rendering help and kindness and true charity to any whom he could serve.
He walked many a weary mile, toiled through many a hard day's work,
humbled himself even to beg of others, to get wood enough to restore a
single cross. No one ever heard him complain, ever saw him impatient,
ever detected him in faltering at his task. The shelter in an outhouse,
the crust of bread and drink of water, which he could always get from
the peasantry, seemed to suffice him. Among the people who watched
his perseverance, a belief began to gain ground that his life would be
miraculously prolonged until he had completed his undertaking from one
end of Brittany to the other. But this was not to be.

He was seen one cold autumn evening, silently and steadily at work
as usual, setting up a new cross on the site of one which had been
shattered to splinters in the troubled times. In the morning he was
found lying dead beneath the sacred symbol which his own hands had
completed and erected in its place during the night. They buried him
where he lay; and the priest who consecrated the ground allowed Gabriel
to engrave his father's epitaph in the wood of the cross. It was
simply the initial letters of the dead man's name, followed by this
inscription: "Pray for the repose of his soul: he died penitent, and the
doer of good works."

Once, and once only, did Gabriel hear anything of Father Paul. The good
priest showed, by writing to the farmhouse, that he had not forgotten
the family so largely indebted to him for their happiness. The letter
was dated "Rome." Father Paul said that such services as he had been
permitted to render to the Church in Brittany had obtained for him a
new and a far more glorious trust than any he had yet held. He had been
recalled from his curacy, and appointed to be at the head of a mission
which was shortly to be dispatched to convert the inhabitants of a
savage and far distant land to the Christian faith. He now wrote, as his
brethren with him were writing, to take leave of all friends forever
in this world, before setting out--for it was well known to the chosen
persons intrusted with the new mission that they could only hope to
advance its object by cheerfully risking their own lives for the sake
of their religion. He gave his blessing to Francois Sarzeau, to Gabriel,
and to his family; and bade them affectionately farewell for the last
time.

There was a postscript to the letter, which was addressed to Perrine,
and which she often read afterward with tearful eyes. The writer begged
that, if she should have any children, she would show her friendly and
Christian remembrance of him by teaching them to pray (as he hoped she
herself would pray) that a blessing might attend Father Paul's labors in
the distant land.

The priest's loving petition was never forgotten. When Perrine taught
its first prayer to her first child, the little creature was instructed
to end the few simple words pronounced at its mother's knees, with, "God
bless Father Paul."


In those words the nun concluded her narrative. After it was ended, she
pointed to the old wooden cross, and said to me:

"That was one of the many that he made. It was found, a few years since,
to have suffered so much from exposure to the weather that it was unfit
to remain any longer in its old place. A priest in Brittany gave it
to one of the nuns in this convent. Do you wonder now that the Mother
Superior always calls it a Relic?"

"No," I answered. "And I should have small respect indeed for the
religious convictions of any one who could hear the story of that wooden
cross, and not feel that the Mother Superior's name for it is the very
best that could have been chosen."

PROLOGUE TO THE SIXTH STORY.

On the last occasion when I made a lengthened stay in London, my wife
and I were surprised and amused one morning by the receipt of the
following note, addressed to me in a small, crabbed, foreign-looking
handwriting.


"Professor Tizzi presents amiable compliments to Mr. Kerby, the artist,
and is desirous of having his portrait done, to be engraved from, and
placed at the beginning of the voluminous work on 'The Vital Principle;
or, Invisible Essence of Life,' which the Professor is now preparing for
the press--and posterity.

"The Professor will give five pounds; and will look upon his face with
satisfaction, as an object perpetuated for public contemplation at a
reasonable rate, if Mr. Kerby will accept the sum just mentioned.

"In regard to the Professor's ability to pay five pounds, as well as
to offer them, if Mr. Kerby should, from ignorance, entertain injurious
doubts, he is requested to apply to the Professor's honorable friend,
Mr. Lanfray, of Rockleigh Place."

But for the reference at the end of this strange note, I should
certainly have considered it as a mere trap set to make a fool of me by
some mischievous friend. As it was, I rather doubted the propriety
of taking any serious notice of Professor Tizzi's offer; and I might
probably have ended by putting the letter in the fire without further
thought about it, but for the arrival by the next post of a note from
Mr. Lanfray, which solved all my doubts, and sent me away at once to
make the acquaintance of the learned discoverer of the Essence of Life.

"Do not be surprised" (Mr. Lanfray wrote) "if you get a strange note
from a very eccentric Italian, one Professor Tizzi, formerly of the
University of Padua. I have known him for some years. Scientific inquiry
is his monomania, and vanity his ruling passion. He has written a book
on the principle of life, which nobody but himself will ever read;
but which he is determined to publish, with his own portrait for
frontispiece. If it is worth your while to accept the little he can
offer you, take it by all means, for he is a character worth knowing.
He was exiled, I should tell you, years ago, for some absurd political
reason, and has lived in England ever since. All the money he inherits
from his father, who was a mail contractor in the north of Italy, goes
in books and experiments; but I think I can answer for his solvency,
at any rate, for the large sum of five pounds. If you are not very much
occupied just now, go and see him. He is sure to amuse you."

Professor Tizzi lived in the northern suburb of London. On approaching
his house, I found it, so far as outward appearance went, excessively
dirty and neglected, but in no other respect different from the "villas"
in its neighborhood. The front garden door, after I had rang twice, was
opened by a yellow-faced, suspicious old foreigner, dressed in worn-out
clothes, and completely and consistently dirty all over, from top to
toe. On mentioning my name and business, this old man led me across a
weedy, neglected garden, and admitted me into the house. At the first
step into the passage, I was surrounded by books. Closely packed in
plain wooden shelves, they ran all along the wall on either side to the
back of the house; and when I looked up at the carpetless staircase, I
saw nothing but books again, running all the way up the wall, as far as
my eye could reach. "Here is the Artist Painter!" cried the old servant,
throwing open one of the parlor doors, before I had half done looking at
the books, and signing impatiently to me to walk into the room.

Books again! all round the walls, and all over the floor--among them a
plain deal table, with leaves of manuscript piled high on every part of
it--among the leaves a head of long, elfish white hair covered with a
black skull-cap, and bent down over a book--above the head a sallow,
withered hand shaking itself at me as a sign that I must not venture to
speak just at that moment--on the tops of the bookcases glass vases
full of spirits of some kind, with horrible objects floating in the
liquid--dirt on the window panes, cobwebs hanging from the ceiling, dust
springing up in clouds under my intruding feet. These were the things I
observed on first entering the study of Professor Tizzi.

After I had waited for a minute or so, the shaking hand stopped,
descended with a smack on the nearest pile of manuscript, seized the
book that the head had been bending over, and flung it contemptuously
to the other end of the room. "I've refuted _you,_ at any rate!" said
Professor Tizzi, looking with extreme complacency at the cloud of dust
raised by the fall of the rejected volume.

He turned next to me. What a grand face it was! What a broad, white
forehead---what fiercely brilliant black eyes--what perfect regularity
and refinement in the other features; with the long, venerable hair,
framing them in, as it were, on either side! Poor as I was, I felt
that I could have painted his portrait for nothing. Titian, Vandyke,
Valasquez--any of the three would have paid him to sit to them!

"Accept my humblest excuses, sir," said the old man, speaking English
with a singularly pure accent for a foreigner. "That absurd book plunged
me so deep down in the quagmires of sophistry and error, Mr. Kerby, that
I really could not get to the surface at once when you came into the
room. So you are willing to draw my likeness for such a small sum as
five pounds?" he continued, rising, and showing me that he wore a long
black velvet gown, instead of the paltry and senseless costume of modern
times.

I informed him that five pounds was as much as I generally got for a
drawing.

"It seems little," said the professor; "but if you want fame, I can make
it up to you in that way. There is my great work" (he pointed to the
piles of manuscript), "the portrait of my mind and the mirror of my
learning; put a likeness of my face on the first page, and posterity
will then be thoroughly acquainted with me, outside and in. Your
portrait will be engraved, Mr. Kerby, and your name shall be inscribed
under the print. You shall be associated, sir, in that way, with a work
which will form an epoch in the history of human science. The Vital
Principle--or, in other words, the essence of that mysterious Something
which we call Life, and which extends down from Man to the feeblest
insect and the smallest plant--has been an unguessed riddle from the
beginning of the world to the present time. I alone have found the
answer; and here it is!" He fixed his dazzling eyes on me in triumph,
and smacked the piles of manuscript fiercely with both his sallow hands.

I saw that he was waiting for me to say something; so I asked if his
great work had not cost a vast expenditure of time and pains.

"I am seventy, sir," said the Professor; "and I began preparing myself
for that book at twenty. After mature consideration, I have written it
in English (having three other foreign languages at my fingers' ends),
as a substantial proof of my gratitude to the nation that has given
me an asylum. Perhaps you think the work looks rather long in its
manuscript state? It will occupy twelve volumes, sir, and it is not half
long enough, even then, for the subject. I take two volumes (and no man
could do it in less) to examine the theories of all the philosophers in
the world, ancient and modern, on the Vital Principle. I take two more
(and little enough) to scatter every one of the theories, _seriatim_,
to the winds. I take two more (at the risk, for brevity's sake, of doing
things by halves) to explain the exact stuff, or vital compound, of
which the first man and woman in the world were made--calling them Adam
and Eve, out of deference to popular prejudices. I take two more--but
you are standing all this time, Mr. Kerby; and I am talking instead of
sitting for my portrait. Pray take any books you want, anywhere off the
floor, and make a seat of any height you please. Furniture would only be
in my way here, so I don't trouble myself with anything of the kind."

I obediently followed the Professor's directions, and had just heaped
up a pile of grimy quartos, when the old servant entered the room with a
shabby little tray in his hand. In the middle of the tray I saw a crust
of bread and a bit of garlic, encircled by a glass of water, a knife,
salt, pepper, a bottle of vinegar, and a flask of oil.

"With your permission, I am going to breakfast," said Professor Tizzi,
as the tray was set down before him on the part of his great work
relating to the vital compound of Adam and Eve. As he spoke, he took
up the piece of bread, and rubbed the crusty part of it with the bit of
garlic, till it looked as polished as a new dining-table. That done, he
turned the bread, crumb uppermost, and saturated it with oil, added a
few drops of vinegar, sprinkled with pepper and salt, and, with a gleam
of something very like greediness in his bright eyes, took up the knife
to cut himself a first mouthful of the horrible mess that he had just
concocted. "The best of breakfasts," said the Professor, seeing me look
amazed. "Not a cannibal meal of chicken-life in embryo (vulgarly called
an egg); not a dog's gorge of a dead animal's flesh, blood and bones,
warmed with fire (popularly known as a chop); not a breakfast, sir, that
lions, tigers, Caribbees, and costermongers could all partake of alike;
but an innocent, nutritive, simple, vegetable meal; a philosopher's
refection, a breakfast that a prize-fighter would turn from in disgust,
and that a Plato would share with relish."

I have no doubt that he was right, and that I was prejudiced; but as I
saw the first oily, vinegary, garlicky morsel slide noiselessly into his
mouth, I began to feel rather sick. My hands were dirty with moving the
books, and I asked if I could wash them before beginning to work at the
likeness, as a good excuse for getting out of the room, while Professor
Tizzi was unctuously disposing of his simple vegetable meal.

The philosopher looked a little astonished at my request, as if the
washing of hands at irregular times and seasons offered a comparatively
new subject of contemplation to him; but he rang a hand-bell on his
table immediately, and told the old servant to take me up into his
bedroom.

The interior of the parlor had astonished me; but a sight of the bedroom
was a new sensation--not of the most agreeable kind. The couch on which
the philosopher sought repose after his labors was a truckle-bed that
would not have fetched half a crown at a sale. On one side of it dangled
from the ceiling a complete male skeleton, looking like all that was
left of a man who might have hung himself about a century ago, and who
had never been disturbed since the moment of his suicide. On the other
side of the bed stood a long press, in which I observed hideous colored
preparations of the muscular system, and bottles with curious, twining,
thread-like substances inside them, which might have been remarkable
worms or dissections of nerves, scattered amicably side by side with
the Professor's hair-brush (three parts worn out), with remnants of
his beard on bits of shaving-paper, with a broken shoe-horn, and with
a traveling looking-glass of the sort usually sold at sixpence apiece.
Repetitions of the litter of books in the parlor lay all about over the
floor; colored anatomical prints were nailed anyhow against the walls;
rolled-up towels were scattered here, there, and everywhere in the
wildest confusion, as if the room had been bombarded with them; and
last, but by no means least remarkable among the other extraordinary
objects in the bed-chamber, the stuffed figure of a large unshaven
poodle-dog, stood on an old card-table, keeping perpetual watch over a
pair of the philosopher's black breeches twisted round his forepaws.

I had started, on entering the room, at the skeleton, and I started once
more at the dog. The old servant noticed me each time with a sardonic
grin. "Don't be afraid," he said; "one is as dead as the other." With
these words, he left me to wash my hands.

Finding little more than a pint of water at my disposal, and failing
altogether to discover where the soap was kept, I was not long in
performing my ablutions. Before leaving the room, I looked again at the
stuffed poodle. On the board to which he was fixed, I saw painted in
faded letters the word "Scarammuccia," evidently the comic Italian
name to which he had answered in his lifetime. There was no other
inscription; but I made up my mind that the dog must have been the
Professor's pet, and that he kept the animal stuffed in his bedroom as
a remembrance of past times. "Who would have suspected so great a
philosopher of having so much heart!" thought I, leaving the bedroom to
go downstairs again.

The Professor had done his breakfast, and was anxious to begin the
sitting; so I took out my chalks and paper, and set to work at once--I
seated on one pile of books and he on another.

"Fine anatomical preparations in my room, are there not, Mr. Kerby?"
said the old gentleman. "Did you notice a very interesting and perfect
arrangement of the intestinal ganglia? They form the subject of an
important chapter in my great work."

"I am afraid you will think me very ignorant," I replied. "But I really
do not know the intestinal ganglia when I see them. The object I noticed
with most curiosity in your room was something more on a level with my
own small capacity."

"And what was that?" asked the Professor.

"The figure of the stuffed poodle. I suppose he was a favorite of
yours?"

"Of mine? No, no; a young woman's favorite, sir, before I was born;
and a very remarkable dog, too. The vital principle in that poodle, Mr.
Kerby, must have been singularly intensified. He lived to a fabulous old
age, and he was clever enough to play an important part of his own
in what you English call a Romance of Real Life! If I could only have
dissected that poodle, I would have put him into my book; he should have
headed my chapter on the Vital Principle of Beasts."

"Here is a story in prospect," thought I, "if I can only keep his
attention up to the subject."

"He should have figured in my great work, sir," the Professor went on.
"Scarammuccia should have taken his place among the examples that prove
my new theory; but unfortunately he died before I was born. His mistress
gave him, stuffed, as you see upstairs, to my father to take care of
for her, and he has descended as an heirloom to me. Talking of dogs,
Mr. Kerby, I have ascertained, beyond the possibility of doubt, that the
brachial plexus in people who die of hydrophobia--but stop! I had better
show you how it is--the preparation is upstairs under my wash-hand
stand."

He left his seat as he spoke. In another minute he would have sent the
servant to fetch the "preparation," and I should have lost the story.
At the risk of his taking offense, I begged him not to move just then,
unless he wished me to spoil his likeness. This alarmed, but fortunately
did not irritate him. He returned to his seat, and I resumed the subject
of the stuffed poodle, asking him boldly to tell me the story with which
the dog was connected. The demand seemed to impress him with no very
favorable opinion of my intellectual tastes; but he complied with it,
and related, not without many a wearisome digression to the subject of
his great work, the narrative which I propose calling by the name of
"The Yellow Mask." After the slight specimens that I have given of his
character and style of conversation, it will be almost unnecessary
for me to premise that I tell this story as I have told the last, and
"Sister Rose," in my own language, and according to my own plan in the
disposition of the incidents--adding nothing, of course, to the facts,
but keeping them within the limits which my disposable space prescribes
to me.

I may perhaps be allowed to add in this place, that I have not yet seen
or heard of my portrait in an engraved state. Professor Tizzi is
still alive; but I look in vain through the publishers' lists for an
announcement of his learned work on the Vital Principle. Possibly he
may be adding a volume or two to the twelve already completed, by way
of increasing the debt which a deeply obliged posterity is, sooner or
later, sure of owing to him.




THE PROFESSOR'S STORY OF THE YELLOW MASK.




PART FIRST.



CHAPTER I.

About a century ago, there lived in the ancient city of Pisa a famous
Italian milliner, who, by way of vindicating to all customers her
familiarity with Paris fashions, adopted a French title, and called
herself the Demoiselle Grifoni. She was a wizen little woman with a
mischievous face, a quick tongue, a nimble foot, a talent for business,
and an uncertain disposition. Rumor hinted that she was immensely rich,
and scandal suggested that she would do anything for money.

The one undeniable good quality which raised Demoiselle Grifoni above
all her rivals in the trade was her inexhaustible fortitude. She was
never known to yield an inch under any pressure of adverse circumstances.
Thus the memorable occasion of her life on which she was threatened with
ruin was also the occasion on which she most triumphantly asserted the
energy and decision of her character. At the height of the demoiselle's
prosperity her skilled forewoman and cutter-out basely married and
started in business as her rival. Such a calamity as this would have
ruined an ordinary milliner; but the invincible Grifoni rose superior
to it almost without an effort, and proved incontestably that it was
impossible for hostile Fortune to catch her at the end of her resources.
While the minor milliners were prophesying that she would shut up shop,
she was quietly carrying on a private correspondence with an agent in
Paris. Nobody knew what these letters were about until a few weeks had
elapsed, and then circulars were received by all the ladies in Pisa,
announcing that the best French forewoman who could be got for money
was engaged to superintend the great Grifoni establishment. This
master-stroke decided the victory. All the demoiselle's customers
declined giving orders elsewhere until the forewoman from Paris had
exhibited to the natives of Pisa the latest fashions from the metropolis
of the world of dress.

The Frenchwoman arrived punctual to the appointed day--glib and curt,
smiling and flippant, tight of face and supple of figure. Her name was
Mademoiselle Virginie, and her family had inhumanly deserted her. She
was set to work the moment she was inside the doors of the Grifoni
establishment. A room was devoted to her own private use; magnificent
materials in velvet, silk, and satin, with due accompaniment of muslins,
laces, and ribbons were placed at her disposal; she was told to spare no
expense, and to produce, in the shortest possible time, the finest and
nearest specimen dresses for exhibition in the show-room. Mademoiselle
Virginie undertook to do everything required of her, produced her
portfolios of patterns and her book of colored designs, and asked for
one assistant who could speak French enough to interpret her orders to
the Italian girls in the work-room.

"I have the very person you want," cried Demoiselle Grifoni. "A
work-woman we call Brigida here--the idlest slut in Pisa, but as sharp
as a needle--has been in France, and speaks the language like a native.
I'll send her to you directly."

Mademoiselle Virginie was not left long alone with her patterns and
silks. A tall woman, with bold black eyes, a reckless manner, and a
step as firm as a man's, stalked into the room with the gait of a
tragedy-queen crossing the stage. The instant her eyes fell on the
French forewoman, she stopped, threw up her hands in astonishment, and
exclaimed, "Finette!"

"Teresa!" cried the Frenchwoman, casting her scissors on the table, and
advancing a few steps.

"Hush! call me Brigida."

"Hush! call me Virginie."

These two exclamations were uttered at the same moment, and then the
two women scrutinized each other in silence. The swarthy cheeks of
the Italian turned to a dull yellow, and the voice of the Frenchwoman
trembled a little when she spoke again.

"How, in the name of Heaven, have you dropped down in the world as low
as this?" she asked. "I thought you were provided for when--"

"Silence!" interrupted Brigida. "You see I was not provided for. I have
had my misfortunes; and you are the last woman alive who ought to refer
to them."

"Do you think I have not had my misfortunes, too, since we met?"
(Brigida's face brightened maliciously at those words.) "You have had
your revenge," continued Mademoiselle Virginie, coldly, turning away to
the table and taking up the scissors again.

Brigida followed her, threw one arm roughly round her neck, and kissed
her on the cheek. "Let us be friends again," she said. The Frenchwoman
laughed. "Tell me how I have had my revenge," pursued the other,
tightening her grasp. Mademoiselle Virginie signed to Brigida to stoop,
and whispered rapidly in her ear. The Italian listened eagerly, with
fierce, suspicious eyes fixed on the door. When the whispering ceased,
she loosened her hold, and, with a sigh of relief, pushed back her heavy
black hair from her temples. "Now we are friends," she said, and sat
down indolently in a chair placed by the worktable.

"Friends," repeated Mademoiselle Virginie, with another laugh. "And now
for business," she continued, getting a row of pins ready for use by
putting them between her teeth. "I am here, I believe, for the purpose
of ruining the late forewoman, who has set up in opposition to us? Good!
I _will_ ruin her. Spread out the yellow brocaded silk, my dear, and
pin that pattern on at your end, while I pin at mine. And what are your
plans, Brigida? (Mind you don't forget that Finette is dead, and that
Virginie has risen from her ashes.) You can't possibly intend to stop
here all your life? (Leave an inch outside the paper, all round.) You
must have projects? What are they?"

"Look at my figure," said Brigida, placing herself in an attitude in the
middle of the room.

"Ah," rejoined the other, "it's not what it was. There's too much of it.
You want diet, walking, and a French stay-maker," muttered Mademoiselle
Virginie through her chevaus-defrise of pins.

"Did the goddess Minerva walk, and employ a French stay-maker? I
thought she rode upon clouds, and lived at a period before waists were
invented."

"What do you mean?"

"This--that my present project is to try if I can't make my fortune by
sitting as a model for Minerva in the studio of the best sculptor in
Pisa."

"And who is he! (Unwind me a yard or two of that black lace.)"

"The master-sculptor, Luca Lomi--an old family, once noble, but down in
the world now. The master is obliged to make statues to get a living for
his daughter and himself."

"More of the lace--double it over the bosom of the dress. And how is
sitting to this needy sculptor to make your fortune?"

"Wait a minute. There are other sculptors besides him in the studio.
There is, first, his brother, the priest--Father Rocco, who passes all
his spare time with the master. He is a good sculptor in his way--has
cast statues and made a font for his church--a holy man, who devotes all
his work in the studio to the cause of piety."

"Ah, bah! we should think him a droll priest in France. (More pins.) You
don't expect _him_ to put money in your pocket, surely?"

"Wait, I say again. There is a third sculptor in the studio--actually
a nobleman! His name is Fabio d'Ascoli. He is rich, young, handsome,
an only child, and little better than a fool. Fancy his working at
sculpture, as if he had his bread to get by it--and thinking that an
amusement! Imagine a man belonging to one of the best families in Pisa
mad enough to want to make a reputation as an artist! Wait! wait!
the best is to come. His father and mother are dead--he has no near
relations in the world to exercise authority over him--he is a bachelor,
and his fortune is all at his own disposal; going a-begging, my friend;
absolutely going a-begging for want of a clever woman to hold out her
hand and take it from him."

"Yes, yes--now I understand. The goddess Minerva is a clever woman, and
she will hold out her hand and take his fortune from him with the utmost
docility."

"The first thing is to get him to offer it. I must tell you that I am
not going to sit to him, but to his master, Luca Lomi, who is doing the
statue of Minerva. The face is modeled from his daughter; and now he
wants somebody to sit for the bust and arms. Maddalena Lomi and I are
as nearly as possible the same height, I hear--the difference between us
being that I have a good figure and she has a bad one. I have offered
to sit, through a friend who is employed in the studio. If the master
accepts, I am sure of an introduction to our rich young gentleman; and
then leave it to my good looks, my various accomplishments, and my ready
tongue, to do the rest."

"Stop! I won't have the lace doubled, on second thoughts. I'll have it
single, and running all round the dress in curves--so. Well, and who is
this friend of yours employed in the studio? A fourth sculptor?"

"No, no; the strangest, simplest little creature--"

Just then a faint tap was audible at the door of the room.

Brigida laid her finger on her lips, and called impatiently to the
person outside to come in.

The door opened gently, and a young girl, poorly but very neatly
dressed, entered the room. She was rather thin and under the average
height; but her head and figure were in perfect proportion. Her hair was
of that gorgeous auburn color, her eyes of that deep violet-blue, which
the portraits of Giorgione and Titian have made famous as the type of
Venetian beauty. Her features possessed the definiteness and regularity,
the "good modeling" (to use an artist's term), which is the rarest of
all womanly charms, in Italy as elsewhere. The one serious defect of
her face was its paleness. Her cheeks, wanting nothing in form, wanted
everything in color. That look of health, which is the essential
crowning-point of beauty, was the one attraction which her face did not
possess.

She came into the room with a sad and weary expression in her
eyes, which changed, however, the moment she observed the
magnificently-dressed French forewoman, into a look of astonishment,
and almost of awe. Her manner became shy and embarrassed; and after an
instant of hesitation, she turned back silently to the door.

"Stop, stop, Nanina," said Brigida, in Italian. "Don't be afraid of that
lady. She is our new forewoman; and she has it in her power to do all
sorts of kind things for you. Look up, and tell us what you want. You
were sixteen last birthday, Nanina, and you behave like a baby of two
years old!"

"I only came to know if there was any work for me to-day," said the
girl, in a very sweet voice, that trembled a little as she tried to face
the fashionable French forewoman again.

"No work, child, that is easy enough for you to do," said Brigida. "Are
you going to the studio to-day?"

Some of the color that Nanina's cheeks wanted began to steal over them
as she answered "Yes."

"Don't forget my message, darling. And if Master Luca Lomi asks where I
live, answer that you are ready to deliver a letter to me; but that you
are forbidden to enter into any particulars at first about who I am, or
where I live."

"Why am I forbidden?" inquired Nanina, innocently.

"Don't ask questions, baby! Do as you are told. Bring me back a nice
note or message to-morrow from the studio, and I will intercede with
this lady to get you some work. You are a foolish child to want it, when
you might make more money here and at Florence, by sitting to painters
and sculptors; though what they can see to paint or model in you I never
could understand."

"I like working at home better than going abroad to sit," said Nanina,
looking very much abashed as she faltered out the answer, and escaping
from the room with a terrified farewell obeisance, which was an
eccentric compound of a start, a bow, and a courtesy.

"That awkward child would be pretty," said Mademoiselle Virginie, making
rapid progress with the cutting-out of her dress, "if she knew how to
give herself a complexion, and had a presentable gown on her back. Who
is she?"

"The friend who is to get me into Master Luca Lomi's studio," replied
Brigida, laughing. "Rather a curious ally for me to take up with, isn't
she?"

"Where did you meet with her?"

"Here, to be sure; she hangs about this place for any plain work she can
get to do, and takes it home to the oddest little room in a street near
the Campo Santo. I had the curiosity to follow her one day, and knocked
at her door soon after she had gone in, as if I was a visitor. She
answered my knock in a great flurry and fright, as you may imagine. I
made myself agreeable, affected immense interest in her affairs, and so
got into her room. Such a place! A mere corner of it curtained off to
make a bedroom. One chair, one stool, one saucepan on the fire. Before
the hearth the most grotesquely hideous unshaven poodle-dog you ever
saw; and on the stool a fair little girl plaiting dinner-mats. Such was
the household--furniture and all included. 'Where is your father?' I
asked. 'He ran away and left us years ago,' answers my awkward little
friend who has just left the room, speaking in that simple way of hers,
with all the composure in the world. 'And your mother?'--'Dead.' She
went up to the little mat-plaiting girl as she gave that answer, and
began playing with her long flaxen hair. 'Your sister, I suppose,' said
I. 'What is her name?'--'They call me La Biondella,' says the child,
looking up from her mat (La Biondella, Virginie, means The Fair). 'And
why do you let that great, shaggy, ill-looking brute lie before your
fireplace?' I asked. 'Oh!' cried the little mat-plaiter, 'that is our
dear old dog, Scarammuccia. He takes care of the house when Nanina is
not at home. He dances on his hind legs, and jumps through a hoop, and
tumbles down dead when I cry Bang! Scarammuccia followed us home one
night, years ago, and he has lived with us ever since. He goes out every
day by himself, we can't tell where, and generally returns licking his
chops, which makes us afraid that he is a thief; but nobody finds him
out, because he is the cleverest dog that ever lived!' The child ran on
in this way about the great beast by the fireplace, till I was obliged
to stop her; while that simpleton Nanina stood by, laughing and
encouraging her. I asked them a few more questions, which produced some
strange answers. They did not seem to know of any relations of theirs
in the world. The neighbors in the house had helped them, after their
father ran away, until they were old enough to help themselves; and
they did not seem to think there was anything in the least wretched or
pitiable in their way of living. The last thing I heard, when I left
them that day, was La Biondella crying 'Bang!'--then a bark, a thump
on the floor, and a scream of laughter. If it was not for their dog, I
should go and see them oftener. But the ill-conditioned beast has taken
a dislike to me, and growls and shows his teeth whenever I come near
him."

"The girl looked sickly when she came in here. Is she always like that?"

"No. She has altered within the last month. I suspect our interesting
young nobleman has produced an impression. The oftener the girl has sat
to him lately, the paler and more out of spirits she has become."

"Oh! she has sat to him, has she?"

"She is sitting to him now. He is doing a bust of some Pagan nymph or
other, and prevailed on Nanina to let him copy from her head and face.
According to her own account the little fool was frightened at first,
and gave him all the trouble in the world before she would consent."

"And now she has consented, don't you think it likely she may turn out
rather a dangerous rival? Men are such fools, and take such fancies into
their heads--"

"Ridiculous! A thread-paper of a girl like that, who has no manner, no
talk, no intelligence; who has nothing to recommend her but an awkward,
babyish prettiness! Dangerous to me? No, no! If there is danger at all,
I have to dread it from the sculptor's daughter. I don't mind confessing
that I am anxious to see Maddalena Lomi. But as for Nanina, she will
simply be of use to me. All I know already about the studio and the
artists in it, I know through her. She will deliver my message, and
procure me my introduction; and when we have got so far, I shall give
her an old gown and a shake of the hand; and then, good-by to our little
innocent!"

"Well, well, for your sake I hope you are the wiser of the two in this
matter. For my part, I always distrust innocence. Wait one moment, and
I shall have the body and sleeves of this dress ready for the
needle-women. There, ring the bell, and order them up; for I have
directions to give, and you must interpret for me."

While Brigida went to the bell, the energetic Frenchwoman began planning
out the skirt of the new dress. She laughed as she measured off yard
after yard of the silk.

"What are you laughing about?" asked Brigida, opening the door and
ringing a hand-bell in the passage.

"I can't help fancying, dear, in spite of her innocent face and her
artless ways, that your young friend is a hypocrite."

"And I am quite certain, love, that she is only a simpleton."



CHAPTER II.

The studio of the master-sculptor, Luca Lomi, was composed of two large
rooms unequally divided by a wooden partition, with an arched doorway
cut in the middle of it.

While the milliners of the Grifoni establishment were industriously
shaping dresses, the sculptors in Luca Lomi's workshop were, in their
way, quite as hard at work shaping marble and clay. In the smaller of
the two rooms the young nobleman (only addressed in the studio by his
Christian name of Fabio) was busily engaged on his bust, with Nanina
sitting before him as a model. His was not one of those traditional
Italian faces from which subtlety and suspicion are always supposed to
look out darkly on the world at large. Both countenance and expression
proclaimed his character frankly and freely to all who saw him. Quick
intelligence looked brightly from his eyes; and easy good humor laughed
out pleasantly in the rather quaint curve of his lips. For the rest,
his face expressed the defects as well as the merits of his character,
showing that he wanted resolution and perseverance just as plainly as it
showed also that he possessed amiability and intelligence.

At the end of the large room, nearest to the street door, Luca Lomi was
standing by his life-size statue of Minerva; and was issuing directions,
from time to time, to some of his workmen, who were roughly chiseling
the drapery of another figure. At the opposite side of the room, nearest
to the partition, his brother, Father Rocco, was taking a cast from a
statuette of the Madonna; while Maddalena Lomi, the sculptor's daughter,
released from sitting for Minerva's face, walked about the two rooms,
and watched what was going on in them.

There was a strong family likeness of a certain kind between father,
brother and daughter. All three were tall, handsome, dark-haired, and
dark-eyed; nevertheless, they differed in expression, strikingly as they
resembled one another in feature. Maddalena Lomi's face betrayed strong
passions, but not an ungenerous nature. Her father, with the same
indications of a violent temper, had some sinister lines about his mouth
and forehead which suggested anything rather than an open disposition.
Father Rocco's countenance, on the other hand, looked like the
personification of absolute calmness and invincible moderation; and his
manner, which, in a very firm way, was singularly quiet and deliberate,
assisted in carrying out the impression produced by his face. The
daughter seemed as if she could fly into a passion at a moment's notice,
and forgive also at a moment's notice. The father, appearing to be just
as irritable, had something in his face which said, as plainly as if in
words, "Anger me, and I never pardon." The priest looked as if he need
never be called on either to ask forgiveness or to grant it, for the
double reason that he could irritate nobody else, and that nobody else
could irritate him.

"Rocco," said Luca, looking at the face of his Minerva, which was now
finished, "this statue of mine will make a sensation."

"I am glad to hear it," rejoined the priest, dryly.

"It is a new thing in art," continued Luca, enthusiastically. "Other
sculptors, with a classical subject like mine, limit themselves to the
ideal classical face, and never think of aiming at individual character.
Now I do precisely the reverse of that. I get my handsome daughter,
Maddalena, to sit for Minerva, and I make an exact likeness of her. I
may lose in ideal beauty, but I gain in individual character. People may
accuse me of disregarding established rules; but my answer is, that I
make my own rules. My daughter looks like a Minerva, and there she is
exactly as she looks."

"It is certainly a wonderful likeness," said Father Rocco, approaching
the statue.

"It the girl herself," cried the other. "Exactly her expression, and
exactly her features. Measure Maddalena, and measure Minerva, and from
forehead to chin, you won't find a hair-breadth of difference between
them."

"But how about the bust and arms of the figure, now the face is done?"
asked the priest, returning, as he spoke, to his own work.

"I may have the very model I want for them to-morrow. Little Nanina has
just given me the strangest message. What do you think of a mysterious
lady admirer who offers to sit for the bust and arms of my Minerva?"

"Are you going to accept the offer?" inquired the priest.

"I am going to receive her to-morrow; and if I really find that she is
the same height as Maddalena, and has a bust and arms worth modeling, of
course I shall accept her offer; for she will be the very sitter I have
been looking after for weeks past. Who can she be? That's the mystery
I want to find out. Which do you say, Rocco--an enthusiast or an
adventuress?"

"I do not presume to say, for I have no means of knowing."

"Ah, there you are with your moderation again. Now, I do presume to
assert that she must be either one or the other--or she would not have
forbidden Nanina to say anything about her in answer to all my first
natural inquiries. Where is Maddalena? I thought she was here a minute
ago."

"She is in Fabio's room," answered Father Rocco, softly. "Shall I call
her?"

"No, no!" returned Luca. He stopped, looked round at the workmen, who
were chipping away mechanically at their bit of drapery; then advanced
close to the priest, with a cunning smile, and continued in a whisper,
"If Maddalena can only get from Fabio's room here to Fabio's palace over
the way, on the Arno--come, come, Rocco! don't shake your head. If
I brought her up to your church door one of these days, as Fabio
d'Ascoli's betrothed, you would be glad enough to take the rest of the
business off my hands, and make her Fabio d'Ascoli's wife. You are a
very holy man, Rocco, but you know the difference between the clink of
the money-bag and the clink of the chisel for all that!"

"I am sorry to find, Luca," returned the priest, coldly, "that you allow
yourself to talk of the most delicate subjects in the coarsest way. This
is one of the minor sins of the tongue which is growing on you. When we
are alone in the studio, I will endeavor to lead you into speaking of
the young man in the room there, and of your daughter, in terms more
becoming to you, to me, and to them. Until that time, allow me to go on
with my work."

Luca shrugged his shoulders, and went back to his statue. Father Rocco,
who had been engaged during the last ten minutes in mixing wet plaster
to the right consistency for taking a cast, suspended his occupation;
and crossing the room to a corner next the partition, removed from it
a cheval-glass which stood there. He lifted it away gently, while his
brother's back was turned, carried it close to the table at which he
had been at work, and then resumed his employment of mixing the plaster.
Having at last prepared the composition for use, he laid it over the
exposed half of the statuette with a neatness and dexterity which showed
him to be a practiced hand at cast-taking. Just as he had covered the
necessary extent of surface, Luca turned round from his statue.

"How are you getting on with the cast?" he asked. "Do you want any
help?"

"None, brother, I thank you," answered the priest. "Pray do not disturb
either yourself or your workmen on my account."

Luca turned again to the statue; and, at the same moment, Father Rocco
softly moved the cheval-glass toward the open doorway between the two
rooms, placing it at such an angle as to make it reflect the figures
of the persons in the smaller studio. He did this with significant
quickness and precision. It was evidently not the first time he had used
the glass for purposes of secret observation.

Mechanically stirring the wet plaster round and round for the second
casting, the priest looked into the glass, and saw, as in a picture, all
that was going forward in the inner room. Maddalena Lomi was standing
behind the young nobleman, watching the progress he made with his bust.
Occasionally she took the modeling tool out of his hand, and showed
him, with her sweetest smile, that she, too, as a sculptor's daughter,
understood something of the sculptor's art; and now and then, in the
pauses of the conversation, when her interest was especially intense in
Fabio's work, she suffered her hand to drop absently on his shoulder, or
stooped forward so close to him that her hair mingled for a moment with
his. Moving the glass an inch or two, so as to bring Nanina well under
his eye, Father Rocco found that he could trace each repetition of these
little acts of familiarity by the immediate effect which they produced
on the girl's face and manner. Whenever Maddalena so much as touched the
young nobleman--no matter whether she did so by premeditation, or really
by accident--Nanina's features contracted, her pale cheeks grew paler,
she fidgeted on her chair, and her fingers nervously twisted and
untwisted the loose ends of the ribbon fastened round her waist.

"Jealous," thought Father Rocco; "I suspected it weeks ago."

He turned away, and gave his whole attention for a few minutes to the
mixing of the plaster. When he looked back again at the glass, he was
just in time to witness a little accident which suddenly changed the
relative positions of the three persons in the inner room.

He saw Maddalena take up a modeling tool which lay on a table near her,
and begin to help Fabio in altering the arrangement of the hair in his
bust. The young man watched what she was doing earnestly enough for a
few moments; then his attention wandered away to Nanina. She looked at
him reproachfully, and he answered by a sign which brought a smile to
her face directly. Maddalena surprised her at the instant of the change;
and, following the direction of her eyes, easily discovered at whom the
smile was directed. She darted a glance of contempt at Nanina, threw
down the modeling tool, and turned indignantly to the young sculptor,
who was affecting to be hard at work again.

"Signor Fabio," she said, "the next time you forget what is due to your
rank and yourself, warn me of it, if you please, beforehand, and I will
take care to leave the room." While speaking the last words, she passed
through the doorway. Father Rocco, bending abstractedly over his plaster
mixture, heard her continue to herself in a whisper, as she went by
him, "If I have any influence at all with my father, that impudent
beggar-girl shall be forbidden the studio."

"Jealousy on the other side," thought the priest. "Something must be
done at once, or this will end badly."

He looked again at the glass, and saw Fabio, after an instant of
hesitation, beckon to Nanina to approach him. She left her seat,
advanced half-way to his, then stopped. He stepped forward to meet her,
and, taking her by the hand, whispered earnestly in her ear. When he had
done, before dropping her hand, he touched her cheek with his lips, and
then helped her on with the little white mantilla which covered her head
and shoulders out-of-doors. The girl trembled violently, and drew the
linen close to her face as Fabio walked into the larger studio, and,
addressing Father Rocco, said:

"I am afraid I am more idle, or more stupid, than ever to-day. I can't
get on with the bust at all to my satisfaction, so I have cut short the
sitting, and given Nanina a half-holiday."

At the first sound of his voice, Maddalena, who was speaking to her
father, stopped, and, with another look of scorn at Nanina standing
trembling in the doorway, left the room. Luca Lomi called Fabio to him
as she went away, and Father Rocco, turning to the statuette, looked
to see how the plaster was hardening on it. Seeing them thus engaged,
Nanina attempted to escape from the studio without being noticed; but
the priest stopped her just as she was hurrying by him.

"My child," said he, in his gentle, quiet way, "are you going home?"

Nanina's heart beat too fast for her to reply in words; she could only
answer by bowing her head.

"Take this for your little sister," pursued Father Rocco, putting a few
silver coins in her hand; "I have got some customers for those mats she
plaits so nicely. You need not bring them to my rooms; I will come and
see you this evening, when I am going my rounds among my parishioners,
and will take the mats away with me. You are a good girl, Nanina--you
have always been a good girl--and as long as I am alive, my child, you
shall never want a friend and an adviser."

Nanina's eyes filled with tears. She drew the mantilla closer than ever
round her face, as she tried to thank the priest. Father Rocco nodded
to her kindly, and laid his hand lightly on her head for a moment, then
turned round again to his cast.

"Don't forget my message to the lady who is to sit to me to-morrow,"
said Luca to Nanina, as she passed him on her way out of the studio.

After she had gone, Fabio returned to the priest, who was still busy
over his cast.

"I hope you will get on better with the bust to-morrow," said Father
Rocco, politely; "I am sure you cannot complain of your model."

"Complain of her!" cried the young man, warmly; "she has the most
beautiful head I ever saw. If I were twenty times the sculptor that I
am, I should despair of being able to do her justice."

He walked into the inner room to look at his bust again--lingered before
it for a little while--and then turned to retrace his steps to the
larger studio. Between him and the doorway stood three chairs. As he
went by them, he absently touched the backs of the first two, and passed
the third; but just as he was entering the larger room, stopped, as if
struck by a sudden recollection, returned hastily, and touched the third
chair. Raising his eyes, as he approached the large studio again after
doing this, he met the eyes of the priest fixed on him in unconcealed
astonishment.

"Signor Fabio!" exclaimed Father Rocco, with a sarcastic smile, "who
would ever have imagined that you were superstitious?"

"My nurse was," returned the young man, reddening, and laughing rather
uneasily. "She taught me some bad habits that I have not got over yet."
With those words he nodded and hastily went out.

"Superstitious," said Father Rocco softly to himself. He smiled again,
reflected for a moment, and then, going to the window, looked into the
street. The way to the left led to Fabio's palace, and the way to the
right to the Campo Santo, in the neighborhood of which Nanina lived. The
priest was just in time to see the young sculptor take the way to the
right.

After another half-hour had elapsed, the two workmen quitted the studio
to go to dinner, and Luca and his brother were left alone.

"We may return now," said Father Rocco, "to that conversation which was
suspended between us earlier in the day."

"I have nothing more to say," rejoined Luca, sulkily.

"Then you can listen to me, brother, with the greater attention,"
pursued the priest. "I objected to the coarseness of your tone in
talking of our young pupil and your daughter; I object still more
strongly to your insinuation that my desire to see them married
(provided always that they are sincerely attached to each other) springs
from a mercenary motive."

"You are trying to snare me, Rocco, in a mesh of fine phrases; but I am
not to be caught. I know what my own motive is for hoping that Maddalena
may get an offer of marriage from this wealthy young gentleman--she
will have his money, and we shall all profit by it. That is coarse and
mercenary, if you please; but it is the true reason why I want to
see Maddalena married to Fabio. You want to see it, too--and for what
reason, I should like to know, if not for mine?"

"Of what use would wealthy relations be to me? What are people with
money--what is money itself--to a man who follows my calling?"

"Money is something to everybody."

"Is it? When have you found that I have taken any account of it? Give
me money enough to buy my daily bread, and to pay for my lodging and my
coarse cassock, and though I may want much for the poor, for myself I
want no more. Then have you found me mercenary? Do I not help you in
this studio, for love of you and of the art, without exacting so much as
journeyman's wages? Have I ever asked you for more than a few crowns to
give away on feast-days among my parishioners? Money! money for a man
who may be summoned to Rome to-morrow, who may be told to go at half an
hour's notice on a foreign mission that may take him to the ends of the
earth, and who would be ready to go the moment when he was called on!
Money to a man who has no wife, no children, no interests outside the
sacred circle of the Church! Brother, do you see the dust and dirt and
shapeless marble chips lying around your statue there? Cover that floor
instead with gold, and, though the litter may have changed in color and
form, in my eyes it would be litter still."

"A very noble sentiment, I dare say, Rocco, but I can't echo it.
Granting that you care nothing for money, will you explain to me why
you are so anxious that Maddalena should marry Fabio? She has had offers
from poorer men--you knew of them--but you have never taken the least
interest in her accepting or rejecting a proposal before."

"I hinted the reason to you, months ago, when Fabio first entered the
studio."

"It was rather a vague hint, brother; can't you be plainer to-day?"

"I think I can. In the first place, let me begin by assuring you that
I have no objection to the young man himself. He may be a little
capricious and undecided, but he has no incorrigible faults that I have
discovered."

"That is rather a cool way of praising him, Rocco."

"I should speak of him warmly enough, if he were not the representative
of an intolerable corruption, and a monstrous wrong. Whenever I think of
him I think of an injury which his present existence perpetuates; and if
I do speak of him coldly, it is only for that reason."

Luca looked away quickly from his brother, and began kicking absently at
the marble chips which were scattered over the floor around him.

"I now remember," he said, "what that hint of yours pointed at. I know
what you mean."

"Then you know," answered the priest, "that while part of the wealth
which Fabio d'Ascoli possesses is honestly and incontestably his own;
part, also, has been inherited by him from the spoilers and robbers of
the Church--"

"Blame his ancestors for that; don't blame him."

"I blame him as long as the spoil is not restored."

"How do you know that it was spoil, after all?"

"I have examined more carefully than most men the records of the civil
wars in Italy; and I know that the ancestors of Fabio d'Ascoli wrung
from the Church, in her hour of weakness, property which they dared to
claim as their right. I know of titles to lands signed away, in
those stormy times, under the influence of fear, or through false
representations of which the law takes no account. I call the money thus
obtained spoil, and I say that it ought to be restored, and shall be
restored, to the Church from which it was taken."

"And what does Fabio answer to that, brother?"

"I have not spoken to him on the subject."

"Why not?"

"Because I have, as yet, no influence over him. When he is married, his
wife will have influence over him, and she shall speak."

"Maddalena, I suppose? How do you know that she will speak?"

"Have I not educated her? Does she not understand what her duties are
toward the Church, in whose bosom she has been reared?"

Luca hesitated uneasily, and walked away a step or two before he spoke
again.

"Does this spoil, as you call it, amount to a large sum of money?" he
asked, in an anxious whisper.

"I may answer that question, Luca, at some future time," said the
priest. "For the present, let it be enough that you are acquainted with
all I undertook to inform you of when we began our conversation. You now
know that if I am anxious for this marriage to take place, it is from
motives entirely unconnected with self-interest. If all the property
which Fabio's ancestors wrongfully obtained from the Church were
restored to the Church to-morrow, not one paulo of it would go into my
pocket. I am a poor priest now, and to the end of my days shall remain
so. You soldiers of the world, brother, fight for your pay; I am a
soldier of the Church, and I fight for my cause."

Saying these words, he returned abruptly to the statuette; and refused
to speak, or leave his employment again, until he had taken the mold
off, and had carefully put away the various fragments of which it
consisted. This done, he drew a writing-desk from the drawer of his
working-table, and taking out a slip of paper wrote these lines:


"Come down to the studio to-morrow. Fabio will be with us, but Nanina
will return no more."


Without signing what he had written, he sealed it up, and directed it
to "Donna Maddalena"; then took his hat, and handed the note to his
brother.

"Oblige me by giving that to my niece," he said.

"Tell me, Rocco," said Luca, turning the note round and round
perplexedly between his finger and thumb; "do you think Maddalena will
be lucky enough to get married to Fabio?"

"Still coarse in your expressions, brother!"

"Never mind my expressions. Is it likely?"

"Yes, Luca, I think it is likely."

With those words he waved his hand pleasantly to his brother, and went
out.



CHAPTER III.

From the studio Father Rocco went straight to his own rooms, hard by the
church to which he was attached. Opening a cabinet in his study, he took
from one of its drawers a handful of small silver money, consulted for a
minute or so a slate on which several names and addresses were written,
provided himself with a portable inkhorn and some strips of paper, and
again went out.

He directed his steps to the poorest part of the neighborhood; and
entering some very wretched houses, was greeted by the inhabitants with
great respect and affection. The women, especially, kissed his hands
with more reverence than they would have shown to the highest
crowned head in Europe. In return, he talked to them as easily and
unconstrainedly as if they were his equals; sat down cheerfully on dirty
bedsides and rickety benches; and distributed his little gifts of
money with the air of a man who was paying debts rather than bestowing
charity. Where he encountered cases of illness, he pulled out his
inkhorn and slips of paper, and wrote simple prescriptions to be made up
from the medicine-chest of a neighboring convent, which served the same
merciful purpose then that is answered by dispensaries in our days.
When he had exhausted his money, and had got through his visits, he
was escorted out of the poor quarter by a perfect train of enthusiastic
followers. The women kissed his hand again, and the men uncovered as he
turned, and, with a friendly sign, bade them all farewell.

As soon as he was alone again, he walked toward the Campo Santo, and,
passing the house in which Nanina lived, sauntered up and down the
street thoughtfully for some minutes. When he at length ascended the
steep staircase that led to the room occupied by the sisters, he found
the door ajar. Pushing it open gently, he saw La Biondella sitting with
her pretty, fair profile turned toward him, eating her evening meal
of bread and grapes. At the opposite end of the room, Scarammuccia was
perched up on his hindquarters in a corner, with his mouth wide open to
catch the morsel of bread which he evidently expected the child to throw
to him. What the elder sister was doing, the priest had not time to see;
for the dog barked the moment he presented himself, and Nanina hastened
to the door to ascertain who the intruder might be. All that he could
observe was that she was too confused, on catching sight of him, to be
able to utter a word. La Biondella was the first to speak.

"Thank you, Father Rocco," said the child, jumping up, with her bread in
one hand and her grapes in the other--"thank you for giving me so much
money for my dinner-mats. There they are, tied up together in one little
parcel, in the corner. Nanina said she was ashamed to think of your
carrying them; and I said I knew where you lived, and I should like to
ask you to let me take them home!"

"Do you think you can carry them all the way, my dear?" asked the
priest.

"Look, Father Rocco, see if I can't carry them!" cried La Biondella,
cramming her bread into one of the pockets of her little apron, holding
her bunch of grapes by the stalk in her mouth, and hoisting the packet
of dinner-mats on her head in a moment. "See, I am strong enough to
carry double," said the child, looking up proudly into the priest's
face.

"Can you trust her to take them home for me?" asked Father Rocco,
turning to Nanina. "I want to speak to you alone, and her absence will
give me the opportunity. Can you trust her out by herself?"

"Yes, Father Rocco, she often goes out alone." Nanina gave this answer
in low, trembling tones, and looked down confusedly on the ground.

"Go then, my dear," said Father Rocco, patting the child on the
shoulder; "and come back here to your sister, as soon as you have left
the mats."

La Biondella went out directly in great triumph, with Scarammuccia
walking by her side, and keeping his muzzle suspiciously close to the
pocket in which she had put her bread. Father Rocco closed the door
after them, and then, taking the one chair which the room possessed,
motioned to Nanina to sit by him on the stool.

"Do you believe that I am your friend, my child, and that I have always
meant well toward you?" he began.

"The best and kindest of friends," answered Nanina.

"Then you will hear what I have to say patiently, and you will believe
that I am speaking for your good, even if my words should distress you?"
(Nanina turned away her head.) "Now, tell me; should I be wrong, to
begin with, if I said that my brother's pupil, the young nobleman
whom we call 'Signor Fabio,' had been here to see you to-day?" (Nanina
started up affrightedly from her stool.) "Sit down again, my child; I am
not going to blame you. I am only going to tell you what you must do for
the future."

He took her hand; it was cold, and it trembled violently in his.

"I will not ask what he has been saying to you," continued the priest;
"for it might distress you to answer, and I have, moreover, had means of
knowing that your youth and beauty have made a strong impression on
him. I will pass over, then, all reference to the words he may have been
speaking to you; and I will come at once to what I have now to say,
in my turn. Nanina, my child, arm yourself with all your courage, and
promise me, before we part to-night, that you will see Signor Fabio no
more."

Nanina turned round suddenly, and fixed her eyes on him, with an
expression of terrified incredulity. "No more?"

"You are very young and very innocent," said Father Rocco; "but surely
you must have thought before now of the difference between Signor Fabio
and you. Surely you must have often remembered that you are low down
among the ranks of the poor, and that he is high up among the rich and
the nobly born?"

Nanina's hands dropped on the priest's knees. She bent her head down on
them, and began to weep bitterly.

"Surely you must have thought of that?" reiterated Father Rocco.

"Oh, I have often, often thought of it!" murmured the girl "I have
mourned over it, and cried about it in secret for many nights past. He
said I looked pale, and ill, and out of spirits to-day, and I told him
it was with thinking of that!"

"And what did he say in return?"

There was no answer. Father Rocco looked down. Nanina raised her head
directly from his knees, and tried to turn it away again. He took her
hand and stopped her.

"Come!" he said; "speak frankly to me. Say what you ought to say to your
father and your friend. What was his answer, my child, when you reminded
him of the difference between you?"

"He said I was born to be a lady," faltered the girl, still struggling
to turn her face away, "and that I might make myself one if I would
learn and be patient. He said that if he had all the noble ladies in
Pisa to choose from on one side, and only little Nanina on the other, he
would hold out his hand to me, and tell them, 'This shall be my wife.'
He said love knew no difference of rank; and that if he was a nobleman
and rich, it was all the more reason why he should please himself. He
was so kind, that I thought my heart would burst while he was speaking;
and my little sister liked him so, that she got upon his knee and kissed
him. Even our dog, who growls at other strangers, stole to his side and
licked his hand. Oh, Father Rocco! Father Rocco!" The tears burst out
afresh, and the lovely head dropped once more, wearily, on the priest's
knee.

Father Rocco smiled to himself, and waited to speak again till she was
calmer.

"Supposing," he resumed, after some minutes of silence, "supposing
Signor Fabio really meant all he said to you--"

Nanina started up, and confronted the priest boldly for the first time
since he had entered the room.

"Supposing!" she exclaimed, her cheeks beginning to redden, and her dark
blue eyes flashing suddenly through her tears "Supposing! Father Rocco,
Fabio would never deceive me. I would die here at your feet, rather than
doubt the least word he said to me!"

The priest signed to her quietly to return to the stool. "I never
suspected the child had so much spirit in her," he thought to himself.

"I would die," repeated Nanina, in a voice that began to falter now. "I
would die rather than doubt him."

"I will not ask you to doubt him," said Father Rocco, gently; "and
I will believe in him myself as firmly as you do. Let us suppose, my
child, that you have learned patiently all the many things of which you
are now ignorant, and which it is necessary for a lady to know. Let us
suppose that Signor Fabio has really violated all the laws that govern
people in his high station and has taken you to him publicly as his
wife. You would be happy then, Nanina; but would he? He has no father or
mother to control him, it is true; but he has friends--many friends and
intimates in his own rank--proud, heartless people, who know nothing of
your worth and goodness; who, hearing of your low birth, would look on
you, and on your husband too, my child, with contempt. He has not your
patience and fortitude. Think how bitter it would be for him to bear
that contempt--to see you shunned by proud women, and carelessly pitied
or patronized by insolent men. Yet all this, and more, he would have to
endure, or else to quit the world he has lived in from his boyhood--the
world he was born to live in. You love him, I know--"

Nanina's tears burst out afresh. "Oh, how dearly--how dearly!" she
murmured.

"Yes, you love him dearly," continued the priest; "but would all your
love compensate him for everything else that he must lose? It might,
at first; but there would come a time when the world would assert its
influence over him again; when he would feel a want which you could not
supply--a weariness which you could not solace. Think of his life then,
and of yours. Think of the first day when the first secret doubt whether
he had done rightly in marrying you would steal into his mind. We are
not masters of all our impulses. The lightest spirits have their moments
of irresistible depression; the bravest hearts are not always superior
to doubt. My child, my child, the world is strong, the pride of rank is
rooted deep, and the human will is frail at best! Be warned! For your
own sake and for Fabio's, be warned in time."

Nanina stretched out her hands toward the priest in despair.

"Oh, Father Rocco! Father Rocco!" she cried, "why did you not tell me
this before?"

"Because, my child, I only knew of the necessity for telling you to-day.
But it is not too late; it is never too late to do a good action. You
love Fabio, Nanina? Will you prove that love by making a great sacrifice
for his good?"

"I would die for his good!"

"Will you nobly cure him of a passion which will be his ruin, if not
yours, by leaving Pisa to-morrow?"

"Leave Pisa!" exclaimed Nanina. Her face grew deadly pale; she rose and
moved back a step or two from the priest.

"Listen to me," pursued Father Rocco; "I have heard you complain that
you could not get regular employment at needle-work. You shall have that
employment, if you will go with me--you and your little sister too, of
course--to Florence to-morrow."

"I promised Fabio to go to the studio," began Nanina, affrightedly. "I
promised to go at ten o'clock. How can I--"

She stopped suddenly, as if her breath were failing her.

"I myself will take you and your sister to Florence," said Father Rocco,
without noticing the interruption. "I will place you under the care of a
lady who will be as kind as a mother to you both. I will answer for your
getting such work to do as will enable you to keep yourself honestly
and independently; and I will undertake, if you do not like your life at
Florence, to bring you back to Pisa after a lapse of three months only.
Three months, Nanina. It is not a long exile."

"Fabio! Fabio!" cried the girl, sinking again on the seat, and hiding
her face.

"It is for his good," said Father Rocco, calmly: "for Fabio's good,
remember."

"What would he think of me if I went away? Oh, if I had but learned to
write! If I could only write Fabio a letter!"

"Am I not to be depended on to explain to him all that he ought to
know?"

"How can I go away from him! Oh! Father Rocco, how can you ask me to go
away from him?"

"I will ask you to do nothing hastily. I will leave you till to-morrow
morning to decide. At nine o'clock I shall be in the street; and I will
not even so much as enter this house, unless I know beforehand that you
have resolved to follow my advice. Give me a sign from your window. If
I see you wave your white mantilla out of it, I shall know that you have
taken the noble resolution to save Fabio and to save yourself. I will
say no more, my child; for, unless I am grievously mistaken in you, I
have already said enough."

He went out, leaving her still weeping bitterly. Not far from the house,
he met La Biondella and the dog on their way back. The little girl
stopped to report to him the safe delivery of her dinner-mats; but he
passed on quickly with a nod and a smile. His interview with Nanina
had left some influence behind it, which unfitted him just then for the
occupation of talking to a child.


Nearly half an hour before nine o'clock on the following morning, Father
Rocco set forth for the street in which Nanina lived. On his way thither
he overtook a dog walking lazily a few paces ahead in the roadway; and
saw, at the same time, an elegantly-dressed lady advancing toward him.
The dog stopped suspiciously as she approached, and growled and showed
his teeth when she passed him. The lady, on her side, uttered an
exclamation of disgust, but did not seem to be either astonished or
frightened by the animal's threatening attitude. Father Rocco looked
after her with some curiosity as she walked by him. She was a handsome
woman, and he admired her courage. "I know that growling brute well
enough," he said to himself, "but who can the lady be?"

The dog was Scarammuccia, returning from one of his marauding
expeditions The lady was Brigida, on her way to Luca Lomi's studio.

Some minutes before nine o'clock the priest took his post in the street,
opposite Nanina's window. It was open; but neither she nor her little
sister appeared at it. He looked up anxiously as the church-clocks
struck the hour; but there was no sign for a minute or so after they
were all silent. "Is she hesitating still?" said Father Rocco to
himself.

Just as the words passed his lips, the white mantilla was waved out of
the window.




PART SECOND.



CHAPTER I.

Even the master-stroke of replacing the treacherous Italian forewoman by
a French dressmaker, engaged direct from Paris, did not at first avail
to elevate the great Grifoni establishment above the reach of minor
calamities. Mademoiselle Virginie had not occupied her new situation
at Pisa quite a week before she fell ill. All sorts of reports were
circulated as to the cause of this illness; and the Demoiselle Grifoni
even went so far as to suggest that the health of the new forewoman had
fallen a sacrifice to some nefarious practices of the chemical sort, on
the part of her rival in the trade. But, however the misfortune had been
produced, it was a fact that Mademoiselle Virginie was certainly very
ill, and another fact that the doctor insisted on her being sent to the
baths of Lucca as soon as she could be moved from her bed.

Fortunately for the Demoiselle Grifoni, the Frenchwoman had succeeded in
producing three specimens of her art before her health broke down. They
comprised the evening-dress of yellow brocaded silk, to which she had
devoted herself on the morning when she first assumed her duties
at Pisa; a black cloak and hood of an entirely new shape; and an
irresistibly fascinating dressing-gown, said to have been first brought
into fashion by the princesses of the blood-royal of France. These
articles of costume, on being exhibited in the showroom, electrified the
ladies of Pisa; and orders from all sides flowed in immediately on the
Grifoni establishment. They were, of course, easily executed by the
inferior work-women, from the specimen designs of the French dressmaker.
So that the illness of Mademoiselle Virginie, though it might cause her
mistress some temporary inconvenience, was, after all, productive of no
absolute loss.

Two months at the baths of Lucca restored the new forewoman to health.
She returned to Pisa, and resumed her place in the private work-room.
Once re-established there, she discovered that an important change had
taken place during her absence. Her friend and assistant, Brigida, had
resigned her situation. All inquiries made of the Demoiselle Grifoni
only elicited one answer: the missing work-woman had abruptly left her
place at five minutes' warning, and had departed without confiding to
any one what she thought of doing, or whither she intended to turn her
steps.

Months elapsed The new year came; but no explanatory letter arrived from
Brigida. The spring season passed off, with all its accompaniments of
dressmaking and dress-buying, but still there was no news of her.
The first anniversary of Mademoiselle Virginie's engagement with the
Demoiselle Grifoni came round; and then at last a note arrived, stating
that Brigida had returned to Pisa, and that if the French forewoman
would send an answer, mentioning where her private lodgings were,
she would visit her old friend that evening after business hours. The
information was gladly enough given; and, punctually to the appointed
time, Brigida arrived in Mademoiselle Virginie's little sitting-room.

Advancing with her usual indolent stateliness of gait, the Italian asked
after her friend's health as coolly, and sat down in the nearest chair
as carelessly, as if they had not been separated for more than a few
days. Mademoiselle Virginie laughed in her liveliest manner, and raised
her mobile French eyebrows in sprightly astonishment.

"Well, Brigida!" she exclaimed, "they certainly did you no injustice
when they nicknamed you 'Care-for-Nothing,' in old Grifoni's workroom.
Where have you been? Why have you never written to me?"

"I had nothing particular to write about; and besides, I always intended
to come back to Pisa and see you," answered Brigida, leaning back
luxuriously in her chair.

"But where have you been for nearly a whole year past? In Italy?"

"No; at Paris. You know I can sing--not very well; but I have a voice,
and most Frenchwomen (excuse the impertinence) have none. I met with a
friend, and got introduced to a manager; and I have been singing at the
theater--not the great parts, only the second. Your amiable countrywomen
could not screech me down on the stage, but they intrigued against me
successfully behind the scenes. In short, I quarreled with our principal
lady, quarreled with the manager, quarreled with my friend; and here I
am back at Pisa, with a little money saved in my pocket, and no great
notion what I am to do next."

"Back at Pisa? Why did you leave it?"

Brigida's eyes began to lose their indolent expression. She sat up
suddenly in her chair, and set one of her hands heavily on a little
table by her side.

"Why?" she repeated. "Because when I find the game going against me, I
prefer giving it up at once to waiting to be beaten."

"Ah! you refer to that last year's project of yours for making your
fortune among the sculptors. I should like to hear how it was you failed
with the wealthy young amateur. Remember that I fell ill before you
had any news to give me. Your absence when I returned from Lucca, and,
almost immediately afterward, the marriage of your intended conquest
to the sculptor's daughter, proved to me, of course, that you must have
failed. But I never heard how. I know nothing at this moment but the
bare fact that Maddalena Lomi won the prize."

"Tell me first, do she and her husband live together happily?"

"There are no stories of their disagreeing. She has dresses, horses,
carriages; a negro page, the smallest lap-dog in Italy--in short, all
the luxuries that a woman can want; and a child, by-the-by, into the
bargain."

"A child?"

"Yes; a child, born little more than a week ago."

"Not a boy, I hope?"

"No; a girl."

"I am glad of that. Those rich people always want the first-born to be
an heir. They will both be disappointed. I am glad of that."

"Mercy on us, Brigida, how fierce you look!"

"Do I? It's likely enough. I hate Fabio d'Ascoli and Maddalena
Lomi--singly as man and woman, doubly as man and wife. Stop! I'll tell
you what you want to know directly. Only answer me another question or
two first. Have you heard anything about her health?"

"How should I hear? Dressmakers can't inquire at the doors of the
nobility."

"True. Now one last question. That little simpleton, Nanina?"

"I have never seen or heard anything of her. She can't be at Pisa, or
she would have called at our place for work."

"Ah! I need not have asked about her if I had thought a moment
beforehand. Father Rocco would be sure to keep her out of Fabio's sight,
for his niece's sake."

"What, he really loved that 'thread-paper of a girl' as you called her?"

"Better than fifty such wives as he has got now! I was in the studio the
morning he was told of her departure from Pisa. A letter was privately
given to him, telling him that the girl had left the place out of a
feeling of honor, and had hidden herself beyond the possibility of
discovery, to prevent him from compromising himself with all his friends
by marrying her. Naturally enough, he would not believe that this was
her own doing; and, naturally enough also, when Father Rocco was sent
for, and was not to be found, he suspected the priest of being at the
bottom of the business. I never saw a man in such a fury of despair
and rage before. He swore that he would have all Italy searched for the
girl, that he would be the death of the priest, and that he would never
enter Luca Lomi's studio again--"

"And, as to this last particular, of course, being a man, he failed to
keep his word?"

"Of course. At that first visit of mine to the studio I discovered two
things. The first, as I said, that Fabio was really in love with the
girl--the second, that Maddalena Lomi was really in love with him. You
may suppose I looked at her attentively while the disturbance was going
on, and while nobody's notice was directed on me. All women are vain,
I know, but vanity never blinded my eyes. I saw directly that I had but
one superiority over her--my figure. She was my height, but not well
made. She had hair as dark and as glossy as mine; eyes as bright and
as black as mine; and the rest of her face better than mine. My nose is
coarse, my lips are too thick, and my upper lip overhangs my under too
far. She had none of those personal faults; and, as for capacity, she
managed the young fool in his passion as well as I could have managed
him in her place."

"How?"

"She stood silent, with downcast eyes and a distressed look, all the
time he was raving up and down the studio. She must have hated the girl,
and been rejoiced at her disappearance; but she never showed it. 'You
would be an awkward rival' (I thought to myself), 'even to a handsomer
woman than I am.' However, I determined not to despair too soon, and
made up my mind to follow my plan just as if the accident of the girl's
disappearance had never occurred. I smoothed down the master-sculptor
easily enough--flattering him about his reputation, assuring him that
the works of Luca Lomi had been the objects of my adoration since
childhood, telling him that I had heard of his difficulty in finding a
model to complete his Minerva from, and offering myself (if he thought
me worthy) for the honor--laying great stress on that word--for the
honor of sitting to him. I don't know whether he was altogether deceived
by what I told him; but he was sharp enough to see that I really could
be of use, and he accepted my offer with a profusion of compliments.
We parted, having arranged that I was to give him a first sitting in a
week's time."

"Why put it off so long?"

"To allow our young gentleman time to cool down and return to the
studio, to be sure. What was the use of my being there while he was
away?"

"Yes, yes--I forgot. And how long was it before he came back?"

"I had allowed him more time than enough. When I had given my first
sitting I saw him in the studio, and heard it was his second visit there
since the day of the girl's disappearance. Those very violent men are
always changeable and irresolute."

"Had he made no attempt, then, to discover Nanina?"

"Oh, yes! He had searched for her himself, and had set others searching
for her, but to no purpose. Four days of perpetual disappointment had
been enough to bring him to his senses. Luca Lomi had written him a
peace-making letter, asking what harm he or his daughter had done, even
supposing Father Rocco was to blame. Maddalena Lomi had met him in the
street, and had looked resignedly away from him, as if she expected him
to pass her. In short, they had awakened his sense of justice and his
good nature (you see, I can impartially give him his due), and they
had got him back. He was silent and sentimental enough at first, and
shockingly sulky and savage with the priest--"

"I wonder Father Rocco ventured within his reach."

"Father Rocco is not a man to be daunted or defeated by anybody, I
can tell you. The same day on which Fabio came back to the studio, he
returned to it. Beyond boldly declaring that he thought Nanina had done
quite right, and had acted like a good and virtuous girl, he would say
nothing about her or her disappearance. It was quite useless to ask him
questions--he denied that any one had a right to put them. Threatening,
entreating, flattering--all modes of appeal were thrown away on him.
Ah, my dear! depend upon it, the cleverest and politest man in Pisa,
the most dangerous to an enemy and the most delightful to a friend, is
Father Rocco. The rest of them, when I began to play my cards a little
too openly, behaved with brutal rudeness to me. Father Rocco, from
first to last, treated me like a lady. Sincere or not, I don't care--he
treated me like a lady when the others treated me like--"

"There! there! don't get hot about it now. Tell me instead how you
made your first approaches to the young gentleman whom you talk of so
contemptuously as Fabio."

"As it turned out, in the worst possible way. First, of course, I made
sure of interesting him in me by telling him that I had known Nanina. So
far it was all well enough. My next object was to persuade him that she
could never have gone away if she had truly loved him alone; and that he
must have had some fortunate rival in her own rank of life, to whom she
had sacrificed him, after gratifying her vanity for a time by bringing
a young nobleman to her feet. I had, as you will easily imagine,
difficulty enough in making him take this view of Nanina's flight. His
pride and his love for the girl were both concerned in refusing to admit
the truth of my suggestion. At last I succeeded. I brought him to
that state of ruffled vanity and fretful self-assertion in which it is
easiest to work on a man's feelings--in which a man's own wounded pride
makes the best pitfall to catch him in. I brought him, I say, to that
state, and then _she_ stepped in and profited by what I had done. Is it
wonderful now that I rejoice in her disappointments--that I should be
glad to hear any ill thing of her that any one could tell me?"

"But how did she first get the advantage of you?"

"If I had found out, she would never have succeeded where I failed. All
I know is, that she had more opportunities of seeing him than I, and
that she used them cunningly enough even to deceive me. While I thought
I was gaining ground with Fabio, I was actually losing it. My first
suspicions were excited by a change in Luca Lomi's conduct toward me.
He grew cold, neglectful--at last absolutely rude. I was resolved not
to see this; but accident soon obliged me to open my eyes. One morning
I heard Fabio and Maddalena talking of me when they imagined I had left
the studio. I can't repeat their words, especially here. The blood flies
into my head, and the cold catches me at the heart, when I only think
of them. It will be enough if I tell you that he laughed at me, and that
she--"

"Hush! not so loud. There are other people lodging in the house. Never
mind about telling me what you heard; it only irritates you to no
purpose. I can guess that they had discovered--"

"Through her--remember, all through her!"

"Yes, yes, I understand. They had discovered a great deal more than you
ever intended them to know, and all through her."

"But for the priest, Virginie, I should have been openly insulted and
driven from their doors. He had insisted on their behaving with decent
civility toward me. They said that he was afraid of me, and laughed
at the notion of his trying to make them afraid too. That was the last
thing I heard. The fury I was in, and the necessity of keeping it down,
almost suffocated me. I turned round to leave the place forever, when,
who should I see, standing close behind me, but Father Rocco. He must
have discovered in my face that I knew all, but he took no notice of
it. He only asked, in his usual quiet, polite way, if I was looking for
anything I had lost, and if he could help me. I managed to thank him,
and to get to the door. He opened it for me respectfully, and bowed--he
treated me like a lady to the last! It was evening when I left the
studio in that way. The next morning I threw up my situation, and turned
my back on Pisa. Now you know everything."

"Did you hear of the marriage? or did you only assume from what you knew
that it would take place?"

"I heard of it about six months ago. A man came to sing in the chorus at
our theater who had been employed some time before at the grand concert
given on the occasion of the marriage. But let us drop the subject now.
I am in a fever already with talking of it. You are in a bad situation
here, my dear; I declare your room is almost stifling."

"Shall I open the other window?"

"No; let us go out and get a breath of air by the river-side. Come! take
your hood and fan--it is getting dark--nobody will see us, and we can
come back here, if you like, in half an hour."

Mademoiselle Virginie acceded to her friend's wish rather reluctantly.
They walked toward the river. The sun was down, and the sudden night of
Italy was gathering fast. Although Brigida did not say another word on
the subject of Fabio or his wife, she led the way to the bank of the
Arno, on which the young nobleman's palace stood.

Just as they got near the great door of entrance, a sedan-chair,
approaching in the opposite direction, was set down before it; and
a footman, after a moment's conference with a lady inside the chair,
advanced to the porter's lodge in the courtyard. Leaving her friend
to go on, Brigida slipped in after the servant by the open wicket, and
concealed herself in the shadow cast by the great closed gates.

"The Marchesa Melani, to inquire how the Countess d'Ascoli and the
infant are this evening," said the footman.

"My mistress has not changed at all for the better since the morning,"
answered the porter. "The child is doing quite well."

The footman went back to the sedan-chair; then returned to the porter's
lodge.

"The marchesa desires me to ask if fresh medical advice has been sent
for," he said.

"Another doctor has arrived from Florence to-day," replied the porter.

Mademoiselle Virginie, missing her friend suddenly, turned back toward
the palace to look after her, and was rather surprised to see Brigida
slip out of the wicket-gate. There were two oil lamps burning on pillars
outside the doorway, and their light glancing on the Italian's face, as
she passed under them, showed that she was smiling.



CHAPTER II.

While the Marchesa Melani was making inquiries at the gate of the
palace, Fabio was sitting alone in the apartment which his wife usually
occupied when she was in health. It was her favorite room, and had been
prettily decorated, by her own desire, with hangings in yellow satin and
furniture of the same color. Fabio was now waiting in it, to hear the
report of the doctors after their evening visit.

Although Maddalena Lomi had not been his first love, and although he
had married her under circumstances which are generally and rightly
considered to afford few chances of lasting happiness in wedded life,
still they had lived together through the one year of their union
tranquilly, if not fondly. She had molded herself wisely to his peculiar
humors, had made the most of his easy disposition; and, when her quick
temper had got the better of her, had seldom hesitated in her
cooler moments to acknowledge that she had been wrong. She had been
extravagant, it is true, and had irritated him by fits of unreasonable
jealousy; but these were faults not to be thought of now. He could only
remember that she was the mother of his child, and that she lay ill but
two rooms away from him--dangerously ill, as the doctors had unwillingly
confessed on that very day.

The darkness was closing in upon him, and he took up the handbell to
ring for lights. When the servant entered there was genuine sorrow in
his face, genuine anxiety in his voice, as he inquired for news from the
sick-room. The man only answered that his mistress was still asleep, and
then withdrew, after first leaving a sealed letter on the table by his
master's side. Fabio summoned him back into the room, and asked when the
letter had arrived. He replied that it had been delivered at the palace
two days since, and that he had observed it lying unopened on a desk in
his master's study.

Left alone again, Fabio remembered that the letter had arrived at a time
when the first dangerous symptoms of his wife's illness had declared
themselves, and that he had thrown it aside, after observing the address
to be in a handwriting unknown to him. In his present state of suspense,
any occupation was better than sitting idle. So he took up the letter
with a sigh, broke the seal, and turned inquiringly to the name signed
at the end.

It was "NANINA."

He started, and changed color. "A letter from her," he whispered to
himself. "Why does it come at such a time as this?"

His face grew paler, and the letter trembled in his fingers. Those
superstitious feelings which he had ascribed to the nursery influences
of his childhood, when Father Rocco charged him with them in the studio,
seemed to be overcoming him now. He hesitated, and listened anxiously
in the direction of his wife's room, before reading the letter. Was its
arrival ominous of good or evil? That was the thought in his heart as he
drew the lamp near to him, and looked at the first lines.

"Am I wrong in writing to you?" (the letter began abruptly). "If I am,
you have but to throw this little leaf of paper into the fire, and to
think no more of it after it is burned up and gone. I can never reproach
you for treating my letter in that way; for we are never likely to meet
again.

"Why did I go away? Only to save you from the consequences of marrying a
poor girl who was not fit to become your wife. It almost broke my
heart to leave you; for I had nothing to keep up my courage but the
remembrance that I was going away for your sake. I had to think of that,
morning and night--to think of it always, or I am afraid I should have
faltered in my resolution, and have gone back to Pisa. I longed so much
at first to see you once more, only to tell you that Nanina was not
heartless and ungrateful, and that you might pity her and think kindly
of her, though you might love her no longer.

"Only to tell you that! If I had been a lady I might have told it to you
in a letter; but I had never learned to write, and I could not prevail
on myself to get others to take the pen for me. All I could do was to
learn secretly how to write with my own hand. It was long, long
work; but the uppermost thought in my heart was always the thought of
justifying myself to you, and that made me patient and persevering. I
learned, at last, to write so as not to be ashamed of myself, or to make
you ashamed of me. I began a letter--my first letter to you--but I heard
of your marriage before it was done, and then I had to tear the paper
up, and put the pen down again.

"I had no right to come between you and your wife, even with so little
a thing as a letter; I had no right to do anything but hope and pray for
your happiness. Are you happy? I am sure you ought to be; for how can
your wife help loving you?

"It is very hard for me to explain why I have ventured on writing now,
and yet I can't think that I am doing wrong. I heard a few days ago (for
I have a friend at Pisa who keeps me informed, by my own desire, of all
the pleasant changes in your life)--I heard of your child being born;
and I thought myself, after that, justified at last in writing to you.
No letter from me, at such a time as this, can rob your child's mother
of so much as a thought of yours that is due to her. Thus, at least, it
seems to me. I wish so well to your child, that I cannot surely be doing
wrong in writing these lines.

"I have said already what I wanted to say--what I have been longing to
say for a whole year past. I have told you why I left Pisa; and have,
perhaps, persuaded you that I have gone through some suffering, and
borne some heart-aches for your sake. Have I more to write? Only a word
or two, to tell you that I am earning my bread, as I always wished to
earn it, quietly at home--at least, at what I must call home now. I am
living with reputable people, and I want for nothing. La Biondella has
grown very much; she would hardly be obliged to get on your knee to kiss
you now; and she can plait her dinner-mats faster and more neatly than
ever. Our old dog is with us, and has learned two new tricks; but you
can't be expected to remember him, although you were the only stranger I
ever saw him take kindly to at first.

"It is time I finished. If you have read this letter through to the end,
I am sure you will excuse me if I have written it badly. There is no
date to it, because I feel that it is safest and best for both of us
that you should know nothing of where I am living. I bless you and pray
for you, and bid you affectionately farewell. If you can think of me as
a sister, think of me sometimes still."

Fabio sighed bitterly while he read the letter. "Why," he whispered to
himself, "why does it come at such a time as this, when I cannot dare
not think of her?" As he slowly folded the letter up the tears came into
his eyes, and he half raised the paper to his lips. At the same moment,
some one knocked at the door of the room. He started, and felt himself
changing color guiltily as one of his servants entered.

"My mistress is awake," the man said, with a very grave face, and a very
constrained manner; "and the gentlemen in attendance desire me to say--"

He was interrupted, before he could give his message, by one of the
medical men, who had followed him into the room.

"I wish I had better news to communicate," began the doctor, gently.

"She is worse, then?" said Fabio, sinking back into the chair from which
he had risen the moment before.

"She has awakened weaker instead of stronger after her sleep," returned
the doctor, evasively. "I never like to give up all hope till the very
last, but--"

"It is cruel not to be candid with him," interposed another voice--the
voice of the doctor from Florence, who had just entered the room.
"Strengthen yourself to bear the worst," he continued, addressing
himself to Fabio. "She is dying. Can you compose yourself enough to go
to her bedside?"

Pale and speechless, Fabio rose from his chair, and made a sign in the
affirmative. He trembled so that the doctor who had first spoken was
obliged to lead him out of the room.

"Your mistress has some near relations in Pisa, has she not?" said the
doctor from Florence, appealing to the servant who waited near him.

"Her father, sir, Signor Luca Lomi; and her uncle, Father Rocco,"
answered the man. "They were here all through the day, until my mistress
fell asleep."

"Do you know where to find them now?"

"Signor Luca told me he should be at his studio, and Father Rocco said I
might find him at his lodgings."

"Send for them both directly. Stay, who is your mistress's confessor? He
ought to be summoned without loss of time."

"My mistress's confessor is Father Rocco, sir."

"Very well--send, or go yourself, at once. Even minutes may be of
importance now." Saying this, the doctor turned away, and sat down to
wait for any last demands on his services, in the chair which Fabio had
just left.



CHAPTER III.

Before the servant could get to the priest's lodgings a visitor had
applied there for admission, and had been immediately received by Father
Rocco himself. This favored guest was a little man, very sprucely and
neatly dressed, and oppressively polite in his manner. He bowed when he
first sat down, he bowed when he answered the usual inquiries about his
health, and he bowed, for the third time, when Father Rocco asked what
had brought him from Florence.

"Rather an awkward business," replied the little man, recovering himself
uneasily after his third bow. "The dressmaker, named Nanina, whom you
placed under my wife's protection about a year ago--"

"What of her?" inquired the priest eagerly.

"I regret to say she has left us, with her child-sister, and their very
disagreeable dog, that growls at everybody."

"When did they go?"

"Only yesterday. I came here at once to tell you, as you were so very
particular in recommending us to take care of her. It is not our fault
that she has gone. My wife was kindness itself to her, and I always
treated her like a duchess. I bought dinner-mats of her sister; I even
put up with the thieving and growling of the disagreeable dog--"

"Where have they gone to? Have you found out that?"

"I have found out, by application at the passport-office, that they
have not left Florence--but what particular part of the city they have
removed to, I have not yet had time to discover."

"And pray why did they leave you, in the first place? Nanina is not a
girl to do anything without a reason. She must have had some cause for
going away. What was it?"

The little man hesitated, and made a fourth bow.

"You remember your private instructions to my wife and myself, when
you first brought Nanina to our house?" he said, looking away rather
uneasily while he spoke.

"Yes; you were to watch her, but to take care that she did not suspect
you. It was just possible, at that time, that she might try to get back
to Pisa without my knowing it; and everything depended on her remaining
at Florence. I think, now, that I did wrong to distrust her; but it
was of the last importance to provide against all possibilities, and to
abstain from putting too much faith in my own good opinion of the girl.
For these reasons, I certainly did instruct you to watch her privately.
So far you are quite right; and I have nothing to complain of. Go on."

"You remember," resumed the little man, "that the first consequence of
our following your instructions was a discovery (which we immediately
communicated to you) that she was secretly learning to write?"

"Yes; and I also remember sending you word not to show that you knew
what she was doing; but to wait and see if she turned her knowledge
of writing to account, and took or sent any letters to the post.
You informed me, in your regular monthly report, that she nearer did
anything of the kind."

"Never, until three days ago; and then she was traced from her room in
my house to the post-office with a letter, which she dropped into the
box."

"And the address of which you discovered before she took it from your
house?"

"Unfortunately I did not," answered the little man, reddening and
looking askance at the priest, as if he expected to receive a severe
reprimand.

But Father Rocco said nothing. He was thinking. Who could she have
written to? If to Fabio, why should she have waited for months and
months, after she had learned how to use her pen, before sending him a
letter? If not to Fabio, to what other person could she have written?

"I regret not discovering the address--regret it most deeply," said the
little man, with a low bow of apology.

"It is too late for regret," said Father Rocco, coldly. "Tell me how she
came to leave your house; I have not heard that yet. Be as brief as you
can. I expect to be called every moment to the bedside of a near and
dear relation, who is suffering from severe illness. You shall have all
my attention; but you must ask it for as short a time as possible."

"I will be briefness itself. In the first place, you must know that I
have--or rather had--an idle, unscrupulous rascal of an apprentice in my
business."

The priest pursed up his mouth contemptuously.

"In the second place, this same good-for-nothing fellow had the
impertinence to fall in love with Nanina."

Father Rocco started, and listened eagerly.

"But I must do the girl the justice to say that she never gave him the
slightest encouragement; and that, whenever he ventured to speak to her,
she always quietly but very decidedly repelled him."

"A good girl!" said Father Rocco. "I always said she was a good girl. It
was a mistake on my part ever to have distrusted her."

"Among the other offenses," continued the little man, "of which I now
find my scoundrel of an apprentice to have been guilty, was the enormity
of picking the lock of my desk, and prying into my private papers."

"You ought not to have had any. Private papers should always be burned
papers."

"They shall be for the future; I will take good care of that."

"Were any of my letters to you about Nanina among these private papers?"

"Unfortunately they were. Pray, pray excuse my want of caution this
time. It shall never happen again."

"Go on. Such imprudence as yours can never be excused; it can only be
provided against for the future. I suppose the apprentice showed my
letters to the girl?"

"I infer as much; though why he should do so--"

"Simpleton! Did you not say that he was in love with her (as you term
it), and that he got no encouragement?"

"Yes; I said that--and I know it to be true."

"Well! Was it not his interest, being unable to make any impression on
the girl's fancy, to establish some claim to her gratitude; and try if
he could not win her that way? By showing her my letters, he would make
her indebted to him for knowing that she was watched in your house. But
this is not the matter in question now. You say you infer that she had
seen my letters. On what grounds?"

"On the strength of this bit of paper," answered the little man,
ruefully producing a note from his pocket. "She must have had your
letters shown to her soon after putting her own letter into the post.
For, on the evening of the same day, when I went up into her room, I
found that she and her sister and the disagreeable dog had all gone, and
observed this note laid on the table."

Father Rocco took the note, and read these lines:


"I have just discovered that I have been watched and suspected ever
since my stay under your roof. It is impossible that I can remain
another night in the house of a spy. I go with my sister. We owe you
nothing, and we are free to live honestly where we please. If you see
Father Rocco, tell him that I can forgive his distrust of me, but that I
can never forget it. I, who had full faith in him, had a right to expect
that he should have full faith in me. It was always an encouragement
to me to think of him as a father and a friend. I have lost that
encouragement forever--and it was the last I had left to me!

"NANINA."


The priest rose from his seat as he handed the note back, and the
visitor immediately followed his example.

"We must remedy this misfortune as we best may," he said, with a sigh.
"Are you ready to go back to Florence to-morrow?"

The little man bowed again.

"Find out where she is, and ascertain if she wants for anything, and if
she is living in a safe place. Say nothing about me, and make no attempt
to induce her to return to your house. Simply let me know what you
discover. The poor child has a spirit that no ordinary people would
suspect in her. She must be soothed and treated tenderly, and we shall
manage her yet. No mistakes, mind, this time! Do just what I tell you,
and do no more. Have you anything else to say to me?"

The little man shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.

"Good-night, then," said the priest.

"Good-night," said the little man, slipping through the door that was
held open for him with the politest alacrity.

"This is vexatious," said Father Rocco, taking a turn or two in the
study after his visitor had gone. "It was bad to have done the child an
injustice--it is worse to have been found out. There is nothing for it
now but to wait till I know where she is. I like her, and I like that
note she left behind her. It is bravely, delicately, and honestly
written--a good girl--a very good girl, indeed!"

He walked to the window, breathed the fresh air for a few moments, and
quietly dismissed the subject from his mind. When he returned to his
table he had no thoughts for any one but his sick niece.

"It seems strange," he said, "that I have had no message about her yet.
Perhaps Luca has heard something. It may be well if I go to the studio
at once to find out."

He took up his hat and went to the door. Just as he opened it, Fabio's
servant confronted him on the thresh old.

"I am sent to summon you to the palace," said the man. "The doctors have
given up all hope."

Father Rocco turned deadly pale, and drew back a step. "Have you told my
brother of this?" he asked.

"I was just on my way to the studio," answered the servant.

"I will go there instead of you, and break the bad news to him," said
the priest.

They descended the stairs in silence. Just as they were about to
separate at the street door, Father Rocco stopped the servant.

"How is the child?" he asked, with such sudden eagerness and impatience,
that the man looked quite startled as he answered that the child was
perfectly well.

"There is some consolation in that," said Father Rocco, walking away,
and speaking partly to the servant, partly to himself. "My caution has
misled me," he continued, pausing thoughtfully when he was left alone in
the roadway. "I should have risked using the mother's influence sooner
to procure the righteous restitution. All hope of compassing it
now rests on the life of the child. Infant as she is, her father's
ill-gotten wealth may yet be gathered back to the Church by her hands."

He proceeded rapidly on his way to the studio, until he reached the
river-side and drew close to the bridge which it was necessary to cross
in order to get to his brother's house. Here he stopped abruptly, as
if struck by a sudden idea. The moon had just risen, and her light,
streaming across the river, fell full upon his face as he stood by the
parapet wall that led up to the bridge. He was so lost in thought that
he did not hear the conversation of two ladies who were advancing along
the pathway close behind him. As they brushed by him, the taller of the
two turned round and looked back at his face.

"Father Rocco!" exclaimed the lady, stopping.

"Donna Brigida!" cried the priest, looking surprised at first, but
recovering himself directly and bowing with his usual quiet politeness.
"Pardon me if I thank you for honoring me by renewing our acquaintance,
and then pass on to my brother's studio. A heavy affliction is likely to
befall us, and I go to prepare him for it."

"You refer to the dangerous illness of your niece?" said Brigida. "I
heard of it this evening. Let us hope that your fears are exaggerated,
and that we may yet meet under less distressing circumstances. I have no
present intention of leaving Pisa for some time, and I shall always be
glad to thank Father Rocco for the politeness and consideration which he
showed to me, under delicate circumstances, a year ago."

With these words she courtesied deferentially, and moved away to rejoin
her friend. The priest observed that Mademoiselle Virginie lingered
rather near, as if anxious to catch a few words of the conversation
between Brigida and himself. Seeing this, he, in his turn, listened as
the two women slowly walked away together, and heard the Italian say to
her companion: "Virginie, I will lay you the price of a new dress that
Fabio d'Ascoli marries again."

Father Rocco started when she said those words, as if he had trodden on
fire.

"My thought!" he whispered nervously to himself. "My thought at the
moment when she spoke to me! Marry again? Another wife, over whom I
should have no influence! Other children, whose education would not be
confided to me! What would become, then, of the restitution that I have
hoped for, wrought for, prayed for?"

He stopped, and looked fixedly at the sky above him. The bridge was
deserted. His black figure rose up erect, motionless, and spectral, with
the white still light falling solemnly all around it. Standing so for
some minutes, his first movement was to drop his hand angrily on the
parapet of the bridge. He then turned round slowly in the direction by
which the two women had walked away.

"Donna Brigida," he said, "I will lay you the price of fifty new dresses
that Fabio d'Ascoli never marries again!"

He set his face once more toward the studio, and walked on without
stopping until he arrived at the master-sculptor's door.

"Marry again?" he thought to himself, as he rang the bell. "Donna
Brigida, was your first failure not enough for you? Are you going to try
a second time?"

Luca Lomi himself opened the door. He drew Father Rocco hurriedly into
the studio toward a single lamp burning on a stand near the partition
between the two rooms.

"Have you heard anything of our poor child?" he asked. "Tell me the
truth! tell me the truth at once!"

"Hush! compose yourself. I have heard," said Father Rocco, in low,
mournful tones.

Luca tightened his hold on the priest's arm, and looked into his face
with breathless, speechless eagerness.

"Compose yourself," repeated Father Rocco. "Compose yourself to hear the
worst. My poor Luca, the doctors have given up all hope."

Luca dropped his brother's arm with a groan of despair. "Oh, Maddalena!
my child--my only child!"

Reiterating these words again and again, he leaned his head against the
partition and burst into tears. Sordid and coarse as his nature was, he
really loved his daughter. All the heart he had was in his statues and
in her.

After the first burst of his grief was exhausted, he was recalled to
himself by a sensation as if some change had taken place in the lighting
of the studio. He looked up directly, and dimly discerned the priest
standing far down at the end of the room nearest the door, with the lamp
in his hand, eagerly looking at something.

"Rocco!" he exclaimed, "Rocco, why have you taken the lamp away? What
are you doing there?"

There was no movement and no answer. Luca advanced a step or two, and
called again. "Rocco, what are you doing there?"

The priest heard this time, and came suddenly toward his brother, with
the lamp in his hand--so suddenly that Luca started.

"What is it?" he asked, in astonishment. "Gracious God, Rocco, how pale
you are!"

Still the priest never said a word. He put the lamp down on the nearest
table. Luca observed that his hand shook. He had never seen his brother
violently agitated before. When Rocco had announced, but a few minutes
ago, that Maddalena's life was despaired of, it was in a voice which,
though sorrowful, was perfectly calm. What was the meaning of this
sudden panic--this strange, silent terror?

The priest observed that his brother was looking at him earnestly.
"Come!" he said in a faint whisper, "come to her bedside: we have no
time to lose. Get your hat, and leave it to me to put out the lamp."

He hurriedly extinguished the light while he spoke. They went down the
studio side by side toward the door. The moonlight streamed through the
window full on the place where the priest had been standing alone with
the lamp in his hand. As they passed it, Luca felt his brother tremble,
and saw him turn away his head.

             .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Two hours later, Fabio d'Ascoli and his wife were separated in this
world forever; and the servants of the palace were anticipating in
whispers the order of their mistress's funeral procession to the
burial-ground of the Campo Santo.




PART THIRD.



CHAPTER I.

About eight months after the Countess d'Ascoli had been laid in her
grave in the Campo Santo, two reports were circulated through the
gay world of Pisa, which excited curiosity and awakened expectation
everywhere.

The first report announced that a grand masked ball was to be given at
the Melani Palace, to celebrate the day on which the heir of the house
attained his majority. All the friends of the family were delighted
at the prospect of this festival; for the old Marquis Melani had the
reputation of being one of the most hospitable, and, at the same time,
one of the most eccentric men in Pisa. Every one expected, therefore,
that he would secure for the entertainment of his guests, if he really
gave the ball, the most whimsical novelties in the way of masks, dances,
and amusements generally, that had ever been seen.

The second report was, that the rich widower, Fabio d'Ascoli, was on the
point of returning to Pisa, after having improved his health and spirits
by traveling in foreign countries; and that he might be expected to
appear again in society, for the first time since the death of his wife,
at the masked ball which was to be given in the Melani Palace. This
announcement excited special interest among the young ladies of Pisa.
Fabio had only reached his thirtieth year; and it was universally agreed
that his return to society in his native city could indicate nothing
more certainly than his desire to find a second mother for his infant
child. All the single ladies would now have been ready to bet, as
confidently as Brigida had offered to bet eight months before, that
Fabio d'Ascoli would marry again.

For once in a way, report turned out to be true, in both the cases just
mentioned. Invitations were actually issued from the Melani Palace, and
Fabio returned from abroad to his home on the Arno.

In settling all the arrangements connected with his masked ball, the
Marquis Melani showed that he was determined not only to deserve, but
to increase, his reputation for oddity. He invented the most extravagant
disguises, to be worn by some of his more intimate friends; he arranged
grotesque dances, to be performed at stated periods of the evening by
professional buffoons, hired from Florence. He composed a toy symphony,
which included solos on every noisy plaything at that time manufactured
for children's use. And not content with thus avoiding the beaten track
in preparing the entertainments at the ball, he determined also to show
decided originality, even in selecting the attendants who were to wait
on the company. Other people in his rank of life were accustomed
to employ their own and hired footmen for this purpose; the marquis
resolved that his attendants should be composed of young women only;
that two of his rooms should be fitted up as Arcadian bowers; and that
all the prettiest girls in Pisa should be placed in them to preside over
the refreshments, dressed, in accordance with the mock classical taste
of the period, as shepherdesses of the time of Virgil.

The only defect of this brilliantly new idea was the difficulty of
executing it. The marquis had expressly ordered that not fewer than
thirty shepherdesses were to be engaged--fifteen for each bower. It
would have been easy to find double this number in Pisa, if beauty had
been the only quality required in the attendant damsels. But it was also
absolutely necessary, for the security of the marquis's gold and silver
plate, that the shepherdesses should possess, besides good looks, the
very homely recommendation of a fair character. This last qualification
proved, it is sad to say, to be the one small merit which the majority
of the ladies willing to accept engagements at the palace did not
possess. Day after day passed on; and the marquis's steward only
found more and more difficulty in obtaining the appointed number of
trustworthy beauties. At last his resources failed him altogether; and
he appeared in his master's presence about a week before the night of
the ball, to make the humiliating acknowledgment that he was entirely
at his wits' end. The total number of fair shepherdesses with
fair characters whom he had been able to engage amounted only to
twenty-three.

"Nonsense!" cried the marquis, irritably, as soon as the steward had
made his confession. "I told you to get thirty girls, and thirty I mean
to have. What's the use of shaking your head when all their dresses are
ordered? Thirty tunics, thirty wreaths, thirty pairs of sandals and silk
stockings, thirty crooks, you scoundrel--and you have the impudence to
offer me only twenty-three hands to hold them. Not a word! I won't hear
a word! Get me my thirty girls, or lose your place." The marquis roared
out this last terrible sentence at the top of his voice, and pointed
peremptorily to the door.

The steward knew his master too well to remonstrate. He took his hat and
cane, and went out. It was useless to look through the ranks of rejected
volunteers again; there was not the slightest hope in that quarter.
The only chance left was to call on all his friends in Pisa who had
daughters out at service, and to try what he could accomplish, by
bribery and persuasion, that way.

After a whole day occupied in solicitations, promises, and patient
smoothing down of innumerable difficulties, the result of his efforts
in the new direction was an accession of six more shepherdesses. This
brought him on bravely from twenty-three to twenty-nine, and left him,
at last, with only one anxiety--where was he now to find shepherdess
number thirty?

He mentally asked himself that important question, as he entered a shady
by-street in the neighborhood of the Campo Santo, on his way back to the
Melani Palace. Sauntering slowly along in the middle of the road, and
fanning himself with his handkerchief after the oppressive exertions of
the day, he passed a young girl who was standing at the street door of
one of the houses, apparently waiting for somebody to join her before
she entered the building.

"Body of Bacchus!" exclaimed the steward (using one of those old Pagan
ejaculations which survive in Italy even to the present day), "there
stands the prettiest girl I have seen yet. If she would only be
shepherdess number thirty, I should go home to supper with my mind at
ease. I'll ask her, at any rate. Nothing can be lost by asking, and
everything may be gained. Stop, my dear," he continued, seeing the girl
turn to go into the house as he approached her. "Don't be afraid of
me. I am steward to the Marquis Melani, and well known in Pisa as an
eminently respectable man. I have something to say to you which may be
greatly for your benefit. Don't look surprised; I am coming to the point
at once. Do you want to earn a little money? honestly, of course. You
don't look as if you were very rich, child."

"I am very poor, and very much in want of some honest work to do,"
answered the girl, sadly.

"Then we shall suit each other to a nicety; for I have work of the
pleasantest kind to give you, and plenty of money to pay for it. But
before we say anything more about that, suppose you tell me first
something about yourself--who you are, and so forth. You know who I am
already."

"I am only a poor work-girl, and my name is Nanina. I have nothing more,
sir, to say about myself than that."

"Do you belong to Pisa?"

"Yes, sir--at least, I did. But I have been away for some time. I was a
year at Florence, employed in needlework."

"All by yourself?"

"No, sir, with my little sister. I was waiting for her when you came
up."

"Have you never done anything else but needlework? never been out at
service?"

"Yes, sir. For the last eight months I have had a situation to wait on a
lady at Florence, and my sister (who is turned eleven, sir, and can make
herself very useful) was allowed to help in the nursery."

"How came you to leave this situation?"

"The lady and her family were going to Rome, sir. They would have taken
me with them, but they could not take my sister. We are alone in the
world, and we never have been parted from each other, and never shall
be--so I was obliged to leave the situation."

"And here you are, back at Pisa--with nothing to do, I suppose?"

"Nothing yet, sir. We only came back yesterday."

"Only yesterday! You are a lucky girl, let me tell you, to have met
with me. I suppose you have somebody in the town who can speak to your
character?"

"The landlady of this house can, sir."

"And who is she, pray?"

"Marta Angrisani, sir."

"What! the well-known sick-nurse? You could not possibly have a better
recommendation, child. I remember her being employed at the Melani
Palace at the time of the marquis's last attack of gout; but I never
knew that she kept a lodging-house."

"She and her daughter, sir, have owned this house longer than I can
recollect. My sister and I have lived in it since I was quite a little
child, and I had hoped we might be able to live here again. But the top
room we used to have is taken, and the room to let lower down is far
more, I am afraid, than we can afford."

"How much is it?"

Nanina mentioned the weekly rent of the room in fear and trembling. The
steward burst out laughing.

"Suppose I offered you money enough to be able to take that room for a
whole year at once?" he said.

Nanina looked at him in speechless amazement.

"Suppose I offered you that?" continued the steward. "And suppose I only
ask you in return to put on a fine dress and serve refreshments in a
beautiful room to the company at the Marquis Melani's grand ball? What
should you say to that?"

Nanina said nothing. She drew back a step or two, and looked more
bewildered than before.

"You must have heard of the ball," said the steward, pompously; "the
poorest people in Pisa have heard of it. It is the talk of the whole
city."

Still Nanina made no answer. To have replied truthfully, she must have
confessed that "the talk of the whole city" had now no interest for her.
The last news from Pisa that had appealed to her sympathies was the news
of the Countess d'Ascoli's death, and of Fabio's departure to travel in
foreign countries. Since then she had heard nothing more of him. She
was as ignorant of his return to his native city as of all the reports
connected with the marquis's ball. Something in her own heart--some
feeling which she had neither the desire nor the capacity to
analyze--had brought her back to Pisa and to the old home which now
connected itself with her tenderest recollections. Believing that Fabio
was still absent, she felt that no ill motive could now be attributed
to her return; and she had not been able to resist the temptation of
revisiting the scene that had been associated with the first great
happiness as well as with the first great sorrow of her life. Among all
the poor people of Pisa, she was perhaps the very last whose curiosity
could be awakened, or whose attention could be attracted by the rumor of
gayeties at the Melani Palace.

But she could not confess all this; she could only listen with great
humility and no small surprise, while the steward, in compassion for her
ignorance, and with the hope of tempting her into accepting his offered
engagement, described the arrangements of the approaching festival, and
dwelt fondly on the magnificence of the Arcadian bowers, and the beauty
of the shepherdesses' tunics. As soon as he had done, Nanina ventured on
the confession that she should feel rather nervous in a grand dress that
did not belong to her, and that she doubted very much her own capability
of waiting properly on the great people at the ball. The steward,
however, would hear of no objections, and called peremptorily for Marta
Angrisani to make the necessary statement as to Nanina's character.
While this formality was being complied with to the steward's perfect
satisfaction, La Biondella came in, unaccompanied on this occasion by
the usual companion of all her walks, the learned poodle Scarammuccia.

"This is Nanina's sister," said the good-natured sick-nurse, taking the
first opportunity of introducing La Biondella to the great marquis's
great man. "A very good, industrious little girl; and very clever at
plaiting dinner-mats, in case his excellency should ever want any. What
have you done with the dog, my dear?"

"I couldn't get him past the pork butcher's, three streets off," replied
La Biondella. "He would sit down and look at the sausages. I am more
than half afraid he means to steal some of them."

"A very pretty child," said the steward, patting La Biondella on the
cheek. "We ought to have her at the hall. If his excellency should want
a Cupid, or a youthful nymph, or anything small and light in that way,
I shall come back and let you know. In the meantime, Nanina, consider
yourself Shepherdess Number Thirty, and come to the housekeeper's room
at the palace to try on your dress to-morrow. Nonsense! don't talk to
me about being afraid and awkward. All you're wanted to do is to look
pretty; and your glass must have told you you could do that long ago.
Remember the rent of the room, my dear, and don't stand in your light
and your sister's. Does the little girl like sweetmeats? Of course she
does! Well, I promise you a whole box of sugar-plums to take home for
her, if you will come and wait at the ball."

"Oh, go to the ball, Nanina; go to the ball!" cried La Biondella,
clapping her hands.

"Of course she will go to the ball," said the nurse. "She would be mad
to throw away such an excellent chance."

Nanina looked perplexed. She hesitated a little, then drew Marta
Angrisani away into a corner, and whispered this question to her:

"Do you think there will be any priests at the palace where the marquis
lives?"

"Heavens, child, what a thing to ask!" returned the nurse. "Priests at a
masked ball! You might as well expect to find Turks performing high mass
in the cathedral. But supposing you did meet with priests at the palace,
what then?"

"Nothing," said Nanina, constrainedly. She turned pale, and walked away
as she spoke. Her great dread, in returning to Pisa, was the dread
of meeting with Father Rocco again. She had never forgotten her first
discovery at Florence of his distrust of her. The bare thought of seeing
him any more, after her faith in him had been shaken forever, made her
feel faint and sick at heart.

"To-morrow, in the housekeeper's room," said the steward, putting on his
hat, "you will find your new dress all ready for you."

Nanina courtesied, and ventured on no more objections. The prospect of
securing a home for a whole year to come among people whom she knew,
reconciled her--influenced as she was also by Marta Angrisani's advice,
and by her sister's anxiety for the promised present--to brave the trial
of appearing at the ball.

"What a comfort to have it all settled at last," said the steward, as
soon as he was out again in the street. "We shall see what the marquis
says now. If he doesn't apologize for calling me a scoundrel the moment
he sets eyes on Number Thirty, he is the most ungrateful nobleman that
ever existed."

Arriving in front of the palace, the steward found workmen engaged in
planning the external decorations and illuminations for the night of the
ball. A little crowd had already assembled to see the ladders raised
and the scaffoldings put up. He observed among them, standing near the
outskirts of the throng, a lady who attracted his attention (he was
an ardent admirer of the fair sex) by the beauty and symmetry of
her figure. While he lingered for a moment to look at her, a shaggy
poodle-dog (licking his chops, as if he had just had something to eat)
trotted by, stopped suddenly close to the lady, sniffed suspiciously
for an instant, and then began to growl at her without the slightest
apparent provocation. The steward advancing politely with his stick to
drive the dog away, saw the lady start, and heard her exclaim to herself
amazedly:

"You here, you beast! Can Nanina have come back to Pisa?"

This last exclamation gave the steward, as a gallant man, an excuse for
speaking to the elegant stranger.

"Excuse me, madam," he said, "but I heard you mention the name of
Nanina. May I ask whether you mean a pretty little work-girl who lives
near the Campo Santo?"

"The same," said the lady, looking very much surprised and interested
immediately.

"It may be a gratification to you, madam, to know that she has just
returned to Pisa," continued the steward, politely; "and, moreover, that
she is in a fair way to rise in the world. I have just engaged her to
wait at the marquis's grand ball, and I need hardly say, under those
circumstances, that if she plays her cards properly her fortune is
made."

The lady bowed, looked at her informant very intently and thoughtfully
for a moment, then suddenly walked away without uttering a word.

"A curious woman," thought the steward, entering the palace. "I must ask
Number Thirty about her to-morrow."



CHAPTER II.

The death of Maddalena d'Ascoli produced a complete change in the lives
of her father and her uncle. After the first shock of the bereavement
was over, Luca Lomi declared that it would be impossible for him to work
in his studio again--for some time to come at least--after the death of
the beloved daughter, with whom every corner of it was now so sadly and
closely associated. He accordingly accepted an engagement to assist in
restoring several newly discovered works of ancient sculpture at Naples,
and set forth for that city, leaving the care of his work-rooms at Pisa
entirely to his brother.

On the master-sculptor's departure, Father Rocco caused the statues
and busts to be carefully enveloped in linen cloths, locked the studio
doors, and, to the astonishment of all who knew of his former industry
and dexterity as a sculptor, never approached the place again. His
clerical duties he performed with the same assiduity as ever; but he
went out less than had been his custom hitherto to the houses of his
friends. His most regular visits were to the Ascoli Palace, to inquire
at the porter's lodge after the health of Maddalena's child, who was
always reported to be thriving admirably under the care of the best
nurses that could be found in Pisa. As for any communications with his
polite little friend from Florence, they had ceased months ago. The
information--speedily conveyed to him--that Nanina was in the service
of one of the most respectable ladies in the city seemed to relieve any
anxieties which he might otherwise have felt on her account. He made
no attempt to justify himself to her; and only required that his
over-courteous little visitor of former days should let him know
whenever the girl might happen to leave her new situation.

The admirers of Father Rocco, seeing the alteration in his life, and the
increased quietness of his manner, said that, as he was growing older,
he was getting more and more above the things of this world. His enemies
(for even Father Rocco had them) did not scruple to assert that the
change in him was decidedly for the worse, and that he belonged to
the order of men who are most to be distrusted when they become most
subdued. The priest himself paid no attention either to his eulogists or
his depreciators. Nothing disturbed the regularity and discipline of his
daily habits; and vigilant Scandal, though she sought often to surprise
him, sought always in vain.

Such was Father Rocco's life from the period of his niece's death to
Fabio's return to Pisa.

As a matter of course, the priest was one of the first to call at the
palace and welcome the young nobleman back. What passed between them at
this interview never was precisely known; but it was surmised readily
enough that some misunderstanding had taken place, for Father Rocco did
not repeat his visit. He made no complaints of Fabio, but simply stated
that he had said something, intended for the young man's good, which had
not been received in a right spirit; and that he thought it desirable
to avoid the painful chance of any further collision by not presenting
himself at the palace again for some little time. People were rather
amazed at this. They would have been still more surprised if the subject
of the masked ball had not just then occupied all their attention, and
prevented their noticing it, by another strange event in connection
with the priest. Father Rocco, some weeks after the cessation of his
intercourse with Fabio, returned one morning to his old way of life as a
sculptor, and opened the long-closed doors of his brother's studio.

Luca Lomi's former workmen, discovering this, applied to him immediately
for employment; but were informed that their services would not be
needed. Visitors called at the studio, but were always sent away again
by the disappointing announcement that there was nothing new to show
them. So the days passed on until Nanina left her situation and returned
to Pisa. This circumstance was duly reported to Father Rocco by his
correspondent at Florence; but, whether he was too much occupied among
the statues, or whether it was one result of his cautious resolution
never to expose himself unnecessarily to so much as the breath of
detraction, he made no attempt to see Nanina, or even to justify himself
toward her by writing her a letter. All his mornings continued to be
spent alone in the studio, and all his afternoons to be occupied by
his clerical duties, until the day before the masked ball at the Melani
Palace.

Early on that day he covered over the statues, and locked the doors of
the work-rooms once more; then returned to his own lodgings, and did
not go out again. One or two of his friends who wanted to see him were
informed that he was not well enough to be able to receive them. If they
had penetrated into his little study, and had seen him, they would have
been easily satisfied that this was no mere excuse. They would have
noticed that his face was startlingly pale, and that the ordinary
composure of his manner was singularly disturbed.

Toward evening this restlessness increased, and his old housekeeper, on
pressing him to take some nourishment, was astonished to hear him answer
her sharply and irritably, for the first time since she had been in his
service. A little later her surprise was increased by his sending her
with a note to the Ascoli Palace, and by the quick return of an answer,
brought ceremoniously by one of Fabio's servants. "It is long since
he has had any communication with that quarter. Are they going to be
friends again?" thought the housekeeper as she took the answer upstairs
to her master.

"I feel better to-night," he said as he read it; "well enough indeed to
venture out. If any one inquires for me, tell them that I am gone to the
Ascoli Palace." Saying this, he walked to the door; then returned, and
trying the lock of his cabinet, satisfied himself that it was properly
secured; then went out.

He found Fabio in one of the large drawing-rooms of the palace, walking
irritably backward and forward, with several little notes crumpled
together in his hands, and a plain black domino dress for the masquerade
of the ensuing night spread out on one of the tables.

"I was just going to write to you," said the young man, abruptly, "when
I received your letter. You offer me a renewal of our friendship, and
I accept the offer. I have no doubt those references of yours, when we
last met, to the subject of second marriages were well meant, but they
irritated me; and, speaking under that irritation, I said words that I
had better not have spoken. If I pained you, I am sorry for it. Wait!
pardon me for one moment. I have not quite done yet. It seems that
you are by no means the only person in Pisa to whom the question of my
possibly marrying again appears to have presented itself. Ever since it
was known that I intended to renew my intercourse with society at
the ball to-morrow night, I have been persecuted by anonymous
letters--infamous letters, written from some motive which it is
impossible for me to understand. I want your advice on the best means
of discovering the writers; and I have also a very important question to
ask you. But read one of the letters first yourself; any one will do as
a sample of the rest."

Fixing his eyes searchingly on the priest, he handed him one of the
notes. Still a little paler than usual, Father Rocco sat down by the
nearest lamp, and shading his eyes, read these lines:


"COUNT FABIO---It is the common talk of Pisa that you are likely, as
a young man left with a motherless child, to marry again. Your having
accepted an invitation to the Melani Palace gives a color of truth to
this report. Widowers who are true to the departed do not go among all
the handsomest single women in a city at a masked ball. Reconsider your
determination, and remain at home. I know you, and I knew your wife, and
I say to you solemnly, avoid temptation, for you must never marry again.
Neglect my advice and you will repent it to the end of your life. I have
reasons for what I say--serious, fatal reasons, which I cannot divulge.
If you would let your wife lie easy in her grave, if you would avoid a
terrible warning, go not to the masked ball!"


"I ask you, and I ask any man, if that is not infamous?" exclaimed
Fabio, passionately, as the priest handed him back the letter. "An
attempt to work on my fears through the memory of my poor dead wife! An
insolent assumption that I want to marry again, when I myself have not
even so much as thought of the subject at all! What is the secret object
of this letter, and of the rest here that resemble it? Whose interest is
it to keep me away from the ball? What is the meaning of such a phrase
as, 'If you would let your wife lie easy in her grave'? Have you no
advice to give me--no plan to propose for discovering the vile hand
that traced these lines? Speak to me! Why, in Heaven's name, don't you
speak?"

The priest leaned his head on his hand, and, turning his face from the
light as if it dazzled his eyes, replied in his lowest and quietest
tones:

"I cannot speak till I have had time to think. The mystery of that
letter is not to be solved in a moment. There are things in it that are
enough to perplex and amaze any man!"

"What things?"

"It is impossible for me to go into details--at least at the present
moment."

"You speak with a strange air of secrecy. Have you nothing definite to
say--no advice to give me?"

"I should advise you not to go to the ball."

"You would! Why?"

"If I gave you my reasons, I am afraid I should only be irritating you
to no purpose."

"Father Rocco, neither your words nor your manner satisfy me. You speak
in riddles; and you sit there in the dark with your face hidden from
me--"

The priest instantly started up and turned his face to the light.

"I recommend you to control your temper, and to treat me with common
courtesy," he said, in his quietest, firmest tones, looking at Fabio
steadily while he spoke.

"We will not prolong this interview," said the young man, calming
himself by an evident effort. "I have one question to ask you, and then
no more to say."

The priest bowed his head, in token that he was ready to listen. He
still stood up, calm, pale, and firm, in the full light of the lamp.

"It is just possible," continued Fabio, "that these letters may refer to
some incautious words which my late wife might have spoken. I ask you
as her spiritual director, and as a near relation who enjoyed her
confidence, if you ever heard her express a wish, in the event of my
surviving her, that I should abstain from marrying again?"

"Did she never express such a wish to you?"

"Never. But why do you evade my question by asking me another?"

"It is impossible for me to reply to your question."

"For what reason?"

"Because it is impossible for me to give answers which must refer,
whether they are affirmative or negative, to what I have heard in
confession."

"We have spoken enough," said Fabio, turning angrily from the priest. "I
expected you to help me in clearing up these mysteries, and you do your
best to thicken them. What your motives are, what your conduct means, it
is impossible for me to know, but I say to you, what I would say in far
other terms, if they were here, to the villains who have written these
letters--no menaces, no mysteries, no conspiracies, will prevent me from
being at the ball to-morrow. I can listen to persuasion, but I scorn
threats. There lies my dress for the masquerade; no power on earth shall
prevent me from wearing it to-morrow night!" He pointed, as he spoke, to
the black domino and half-mask lying on the table.

"No power on _earth!_" repeated Father Rocco, with a smile, and an
emphasis on the last word. "Superstitious still, Count Fabio! Do you
suspect the powers of the other world of interfering with mortals at
masquerades?"

Fabio started, and, turning from the table, fixed his eyes intently on
the priest's face.

"You suggested just now that we had better not prolong this interview,"
said Father Rocco, still smiling. "I think you were right; if we part at
once, we may still part friends. You have had my advice not to go to
the ball, and you decline following it. I have nothing more to say.
Good-night."

Before Fabio could utter the angry rejoinder that rose to his lips, the
door of the room had opened and closed again, and the priest was gone.



CHAPTER III.

The next night, at the time of assembling specified in the invitations
to the masked ball, Fabio was still lingering in his palace, and
still allowing the black domino to lie untouched and unheeded on
his dressing-table. This delay was not produced by any change in his
resolution to go to the Melani Palace. His determination to be present
at the ball remained unshaken; and yet, at the last moment, he lingered
and lingered on, without knowing why. Some strange influence seemed to
be keeping him within the walls of his lonely home. It was as if the
great, empty, silent palace had almost recovered on that night the charm
which it had lost when its mistress died.

He left his own apartment and went to the bedroom where his infant child
lay asleep in her little crib. He sat watching her, and thinking quietly
and tenderly of many past events in his life for a long time, then
returned to his room. A sudden sense of loneliness came upon him after
his visit to the child's bedside; but he did not attempt to raise his
spirits even then by going to the ball. He descended instead to his
study, lighted his reading-lamp, and then, opening a bureau, took from
one of the drawers in it the letter which Nanina had written to him.
This was not the first time that a sudden sense of his solitude had
connected itself inexplicably with the remembrance of the work-girl's
letter.

He read it through slowly, and when he had done, kept it open in his
hand. "I have youth, titles, wealth," he thought to himself, sadly;
"everything that is sought after in this world. And yet if I try to
think of any human being who really and truly loves me, I can remember
but one--the poor, faithful girl who wrote these lines!"

Old recollections of the first day when he met with Nanina, of the first
sitting she had given him in Luca Lomi's studio, of the first visit
to the neat little room in the by-street, began to rise more and more
vividly in his mind. Entirely absorbed by them, he sat absently drawing
with pen and ink, on some sheets of letter-paper lying under his hand,
lines and circles, and fragments of decorations, and vague remembrances
of old ideas for statues, until the sudden sinking of the flame of his
lamp awoke his attention abruptly to present things.

He looked at his watch. It was close on midnight.

This discovery at last aroused him to the necessity of immediate
departure. In a few minutes he had put on his domino and mask, and was
on his way to the ball.

Before he reached the Melani Palace the first part of the entertainment
had come to an end. The "Toy Symphony" had been played, the grotesque
dance performed, amid universal laughter; and now the guests were, for
the most part, fortifying themselves in the Arcadian bowers for new
dances, in which all persons present were expected to take part.
The Marquis Melani had, with characteristic oddity, divided his two
classical refreshment-rooms into what he termed the Light and Heavy
Departments. Fruit, pastry, sweetmeats, salads, and harmless drinks were
included under the first head, and all the stimulating liquors and solid
eatables under the last. The thirty shepherdesses had been, according
to the marquis's order, equally divided at the outset of the evening
between the two rooms. But as the company began to crowd more and
more resolutely in the direction of the Heavy Department, ten of the
shepherdesses attached to the Light Department were told off to assist
in attending on the hungry and thirsty majority of guests who were not
to be appeased by pastry and lemonade. Among the five girls who were
left behind in the room for the light refreshments was Nanina. The
steward soon discovered that the novelty of her situation made her
really nervous, and he wisely concluded that if he trusted her where the
crowd was greatest and the noise loudest, she would not only be utterly
useless, but also very much in the way of her more confident and
experienced companions.

When Fabio arrived at the palace, the jovial uproar in the Heavy
Department was at its height, and several gentlemen, fired by the
classical costumes of the shepherdesses, were beginning to speak
Latin to them with a thick utterance, and a valorous contempt for all
restrictions of gender, number, and case. As soon as he could escape
from the congratulations on his return to his friends, which poured on
him from all sides, Fabio withdrew to seek some quieter room. The heat,
noise, and confusion had so bewildered him, after the tranquil life he
had been leading for many months past, that it was quite a relief
to stroll through the half deserted dancing-rooms, to the opposite
extremity of the great suite of apartments, and there to find himself
in a second Arcadian bower, which seemed peaceful enough to deserve its
name.

A few guests were in this room when he first entered it, but the distant
sound of some first notes of dance music drew them all away. After a
careless look at the quaint decorations about him, he sat down alone
on a divan near the door, and beginning already to feel the heat and
discomfort of his mask, took it off. He had not removed it more than
a moment before he heard a faint cry in the direction of a long
refreshment-table, behind which the five waiting-girls were standing. He
started up directly, and could hardly believe his senses, when he found
himself standing face to face with Nanina.

Her cheeks had turned perfectly colorless. Her astonishment at seeing
the young nobleman appeared to have some sensation of terror
mingled with it. The waiting-woman who happened to stand by her side
instinctively stretched out an arm to support her, observing that she
caught at the edge of the table as Fabio hurried round to get behind it
and speak to her. When he drew near, her head drooped on her breast, and
she said, faintly: "I never knew you were at Pisa; I never thought you
would be here. Oh, I am true to what I said in my letter, though I seem
so false to it!"

"I want to speak to you about the letter--to tell you how carefully I
have kept it, how often I have read it," said Fabio.

She turned away her head, and tried hard to repress the tears that would
force their way into her eyes "We should never have met," she said;
"never, never have met again!"

Before Fabio could reply, the waiting-woman by Nanina's side interposed.

"For Heaven's sake, don't stop speaking to her here!" she exclaimed,
impatiently. "If the steward or one of the upper servants was to come
in, you would get her into dreadful trouble. Wait till to-morrow, and
find some fitter place than this."

Fabio felt the justice of the reproof immediately. He tore a leaf out of
his pocketbook, and wrote on it, "I must tell you how I honor and thank
you for that letter. To-morrow--ten o'clock--the wicket-gate at the
back of the Ascoli gardens. Believe in my truth and honor, Nanina, for
I believe implicitly in yours." Having written these lines, he took from
among his bunch of watch-seals a little key, wrapped it up in the note,
and pressed it into her hand. In spite of himself his fingers lingered
round hers, and he was on the point of speaking to her again, when he
saw the waiting-woman's hand, which was just raised to motion him away,
suddenly drop. Her color changed at the same moment, and she looked
fixedly across the table.

He turned round immediately, and saw a masked woman standing alone in
the room, dressed entirely in yellow from head to foot. She had a yellow
hood, a yellow half-mask with deep fringe hanging down over her mouth,
and a yellow domino, cut at the sleeves and edges into long flame-shaped
points, which waved backward and forward tremulously in the light air
wafted through the doorway. The woman's black eyes seemed to gleam with
an evil brightness through the sight-holes of the mask, and the tawny
fringe hanging before her mouth fluttered slowly with every breath she
drew. Without a word or a gesture she stood before the table, and her
gleaming black eyes fixed steadily on Fabio the instant he confronted
her. A sudden chill struck through him, as he observed that the yellow
of the stranger's domino and mask was of precisely the same shade as
the yellow of the hangings and furniture which his wife had chosen after
their marriage for the decoration of her favorite sitting-room.

"The Yellow Mask!" whispered the waiting-girls nervously, crowding
together behind the table. "The Yellow Mask again!"

"Make her speak!"

"Ask her to have something!"

"This gentleman will ask her. Speak to her, sir. Do speak to her! She
glides about in that fearful yellow dress like a ghost."

Fabio looked around mechanically at the girl who was whispering to him.
He saw at the same time that Nanina still kept her head turned away, and
that she had her handkerchief at her eyes. She was evidently struggling
yet with the agitation produced by their unexpected meeting, and was,
most probably for that reason, the only person in the room not conscious
of the presence of the Yellow Mask.

"Speak to her, sir. Do speak to her!" whispered two of the waiting-girls
together.

Fabio turned again toward the table. The black eyes were still gleaming
at him from behind the tawny yellow of the mask. He nodded to the girls
who had just spoken, cast one farewell look at Nanina, and moved down
the room to get round to the side of the table at which the Yellow Mask
was standing. Step by step as he moved the bright eyes followed him.
Steadily and more steadily their evil light seemed to shine through and
through him, as he turned the corner of the table and approached the
still, spectral figure.

He came close up to the woman, but she never moved; her eyes never
wavered for an instant. He stopped and tried to speak; but the chill
struck through him again. An overpowering dread, an unutterable
loathing seized on him; all sense of outer things--the whispering of the
waiting-girls behind the table, the gentle cadence of the dance music,
the distant hum of joyous talk--suddenly left him. He turned away
shuddering, and quitted the room.

Following the sound of the music, and desiring before all things now
to join the crowd wherever it was largest, he was stopped in one of
the smaller apartments by a gentleman who had just risen from the card
table, and who held out his hand with the cordiality of an old friend.

"Welcome back to the world, Count Fabio!" he began, gayly, then suddenly
checked himself. "Why, you look pale, and your hand feels cold. Not ill,
I hope?"

"No, no. I have been rather startled--I can't say why--by a very
strangely dressed woman, who fairly stared me out of countenance."

"You don't mean the Yellow Mask?"

"Yes I do. Have you seen her?"

"Everybody has seen her; but nobody can make her unmask, or get her to
speak. Our host has not the slightest notion who she is; and our hostess
is horribly frightened at her. For my part, I think she has given us
quite enough of her mystery and her grim dress; and if my name, instead
of being nothing but plain Andrea D'Arbino, was Marquis Melani, I would
say to her: 'Madam, we are here to laugh and amuse ourselves; suppose
you open your lips, and charm us by appearing in a prettier dress!'"

During this conversation they had sat down together, with their backs
toward the door, by the side of one of the card-tables. While D'Arbino
was speaking, Fabio suddenly felt himself shuddering again, and became
conscious of a sound of low breathing behind him.

He turned round instantly, and there, standing between them, and peering
down at them, was the Yellow Mask!

Fabio started up, and his friend followed his example. Again the
gleaming black eyes rested steadily on the young nobleman's face, and
again their look chilled him to the heart.

"Yellow Lady, do you know my friend?" exclaimed D'Arbino, with mock
solemnity.

There was no answer. The fatal eyes never moved from Fabio's face.

"Yellow Lady," continued the other, "listen to the music. Will you dance
with me?"

The eyes looked away, and the figure glided slowly from the room.

"My dear count," said D'Arbino, "that woman seems to have quite an
effect on you. I declare she has left you paler than ever. Come into
the supper-room with me, and have some wine; you really look as if you
wanted it."

They went at once to the large refreshment-room. Nearly all the guests
had by this time begun to dance again. They had the whole apartment,
therefore, almost entirely to themselves.

Among the decorations of the room, which were not strictly in accordance
with genuine Arcadian simplicity, was a large looking-glass, placed
over a well-furnished sideboard. D'Arbino led Fabio in this direction,
exchanging greetings as he advanced with a gentleman who stood near the
glass looking into it, and carelessly fanning himself with his mask.

"My dear friend!" cried D'Arbino, "you are the very man to lead us
straight to the best bottle of wine in the palace. Count Fabio, let me
present to you my intimate and good friend, the Cavaliere Finello, with
whose family I know you are well acquainted. Finello, the count is a
little out of spirits, and I have prescribed a good dose of wine. I see
a whole row of bottles at your side, and I leave it to you to apply the
remedy. Glasses there! three glasses, my lovely shepherdess with the
black eyes--the three largest you have got."

The glasses were brought; the Cavaliere Finello chose a particular
bottle, and filled them. All three gentlemen turned round to the
sideboard to use it as a table, and thus necessarily faced the
looking-glass.

"Now let us drink the toast of toasts," said D'Arbino. "Finello, Count
Fabio--the ladies of Pisa!"

Fabio raised the wine to his lips, and was on the point of drinking it,
when he saw reflected in the glass the figure of the Yellow Mask. The
glittering eyes were again fixed on him, and the yellow-hooded head
bowed slowly, as if in acknowledgment of the toast he was about to
drink. For the third time the strange chill seized him, and he set down
his glass of wine untasted.

"What is the matter?" asked D'Arbino.

"Have you any dislike, count, to that particular wine?" inquired the
cavaliere.

"The Yellow Mask!" whispered Fabio. "The Yellow Mask again!"

They all three turned round directly toward the door. But it was too
late--the figure had disappeared.

"Does any one know who this Yellow Mask is?" asked Finello. "One may
guess by the walk that the figure is a woman's. Perhaps it may be the
strange color she has chosen for her dress, or perhaps her stealthy way
of moving from room to room; but there is certainly something mysterious
and startling about her."

"Startling enough, as the count would tell you," said D'Arbino. "The
Yellow Mask has been responsible for his loss of spirits and change of
complexion, and now she has prevented him even from drinking his wine."

"I can't account for it," said Fabio, looking round him uneasily; "but
this is the third room into which she has followed me--the third time
she has seemed to fix her eyes on me alone. I suppose my nerves are
hardly in a fit state yet for masked balls and adventures; the sight of
her seems to chill me. Who can she be?"

"If she followed me a fourth time," said Finello, "I should insist on
her unmasking."

"And suppose she refused?" asked his friend

"Then I should take her mask off for her."

"It is impossible to do that with a woman," said Fabio. "I prefer trying
to lose her in the crowd. Excuse me, gentlemen, if I leave you to finish
the wine, and then to meet me, if you like, in the great ballroom."

He retired as he spoke, put on his mask, and joined the dancers
immediately, taking care to keep always in the most crowded corner of
the apartment. For some time this plan of action proved successful, and
he saw no more of the mysterious yellow domino. Ere long, however, some
new dances were arranged, in which the great majority of the persons in
the ballroom took part; the figures resembling the old English country
dances in this respect, that the ladies and gentlemen were placed in
long rows opposite to each other. The sets consisted of about twenty
couples each, placed sometimes across, and sometimes along the
apartment; and the spectators were all required to move away on either
side, and range themselves close to the walls. As Fabio among others
complied with this necessity, he looked down a row of dancers waiting
during the performance of the orchestral prelude; and there, watching
him again, from the opposite end of the lane formed by the gentlemen on
one side and the ladies on the other, he saw the Yellow Mask.

He moved abruptly back, toward another row of dancers, placed at right
angles to the first row; and there again; at the opposite end of the gay
lane of brightly-dressed figures, was the Yellow Mask. He slipped into
the middle of the room, but it was only to find her occupying his former
position near the wall, and still, in spite of his disguise, watching
him through row after row of dancers. The persecution began to grow
intolerable; he felt a kind of angry curiosity mingling now with the
vague dread that had hitherto oppressed him. Finello's advice recurred
to his memory; and he determined to make the woman unmask at all
hazards. With this intention he returned to the supper-room in which he
had left his friends.

They were gone, probably to the ballroom, to look for him. Plenty of
wine was still left on the sideboard, and he poured himself out a glass.
Finding that his hand trembled as he did so, he drank several more
glasses in quick succession, to nerve himself for the approaching
encounter with the Yellow Mask. While he was drinking he expected
every moment to see her in the looking-glass again; but she never
appeared--and yet he felt almost certain that he had detected her
gliding out after him when he left the ballroom.

He thought it possible that she might be waiting for him in one of the
smaller apartments, and, taking off his mask, walked through several
of them without meeting her, until he came to the door of the
refreshment-room in which Nanina and he had recognized each other. The
waiting-woman behind the table, who had first spoken to him, caught
sight of him now, and ran round to the door.

"Don't come in and speak to Nanina again," she said, mistaking the
purpose which had brought him to the door. "What with frightening her
first, and making her cry afterward, you have rendered her quite unfit
for her work. The steward is in there at this moment, very good-natured,
but not very sober. He says she is pale and red-eyed, and not fit to be
a shepherdess any longer, and that, as she will not be missed now, she
may go home if she likes. We have got her an old cloak, and she is going
to try and slip through the rooms unobserved, to get downstairs and
change her dress. Don't speak to her, pray, or you will only make her
cry again; and what is worse, make the steward fancy--"

She stopped at that last word, and pointed suddenly over Fabio's
shoulder.

"The Yellow Mask!" she exclaimed. "Oh, sir, draw her away into the
ballroom, and give Nanina a chance of getting out!"

Fabio turned directly, and approached the Mask, who, as they looked at
each other, slowly retreated before him. The waiting-woman, seeing the
yellow figure retire, hastened back to Nanina in the refreshment-room.

Slowly the masked woman retreated from one apartment to another till
she entered a corridor brilliantly lighted up and beautifully ornamented
with flowers. On the right hand this corridor led to the ballroom; on
the left to an ante-chamber at the head of the palace staircase. The
Yellow Mask went on a few paces toward the left, then stopped. The
bright eyes fixed themselves as before on Fabio's face, but only for a
moment. He heard a light step behind him, and then he saw the eyes
move. Following the direction they took, he turned round, and discovered
Nanina, wrapped up in the old cloak which was to enable her to get
downstairs unobserved.

"Oh, how can I get out? how can I get out?" cried the girl, shrinking
back affrightedly as she saw the Yellow Mask.

"That way," said Fabio, pointing in the direction of the ballroom.
"Nobody will notice you in the cloak; it will only be thought some new
disguise." He took her arm as he spoke, to reassure her, and continued
in a whisper, "Don't forget to-morrow."

At the same moment he felt a hand laid on him. It was the hand of the
masked woman, and it put him back from Nanina.

In spite of himself, he trembled at her touch, but still retained
presence of mind enough to sign to the girl to make her escape. With
a look of eager inquiry in the direction of the mask, and a half
suppressed exclamation of terror, she obeyed him, and hastened away
toward the ballroom.

"We are alone," said Fabio, confronting the gleaming black eyes, and
reaching out his hand resolutely toward the Yellow Mask. "Tell me who
you are, and why you follow me, or I will uncover your face, and solve
the mystery for myself."

The woman pushed his hand aside, and drew back a few paces, but never
spoke a word. He followed her. There was not an instant to be lost, for
just then the sound of footsteps hastily approaching the corridor became
audible.

"Now or never," he whispered to himself, and snatched at the mask.

His arm was again thrust aside; but this time the woman raised her
disengaged hand at the same moment, and removed the yellow mask.

The lamps shed their soft light full on her face.

It was the face of his dead wife.



CHAPTER IV.

Signor Andrea D'Arbino, searching vainly through the various rooms in
the palace for Count Fabio d'Ascoli, and trying as a last resource, the
corridor leading to the ballroom and grand staircase, discovered his
friend lying on the floor in a swoon, without any living creature near
him. Determining to avoid alarming the guests, if possible, D'Arbino
first sought help in the antechamber. He found there the marquis's
valet, assisting the Cavaliere Finello (who was just taking his
departure) to put on his cloak.

While Finello and his friend carried Fabio to an open window in the
antechamber, the valet procured some iced water. This simple remedy, and
the change of atmosphere, proved enough to restore the fainting man to
his senses, but hardly--as it seemed to his friends--to his former self.
They noticed a change to blankness and stillness in his face, and when
he spoke, an indescribable alteration in the tone of his voice.

"I found you in a room in the corridor," said D'Arbino. "What made you
faint? Don't you remember? Was it the heat?"

Fabio waited for a moment, painfully collecting his ideas. He looked at
the valet, and Finello signed to the man to withdraw.

"Was it the heat?" repeated D'Arbino.

"No," answered Fabio, in strangely hushed, steady tones. "I have seen
the face that was behind the yellow mask."

"Well?"

"It was the face of my dead wife."

"Your dead wife!"

"When the mask was removed I saw her face. Not as I remember it in
the pride of her youth and beauty--not even as I remember her on her
sick-bed--but as I remember her in her coffin."

"Count! for God's sake, rouse yourself! Collect your thoughts--remember
where you are--and free your mind of its horrible delusion."

"Spare me all remonstrances; I am not fit to bear them. My life has only
one object now--the pursuing of this mystery to the end. Will you help
me? I am scarcely fit to act for myself."

He still spoke in the same unnaturally hushed, deliberate tones.
D'Arbino and Finello exchanged glances behind him as he rose from the
sofa on which he had hitherto been lying.

"We will help you in everything," said D'Arbino, soothingly. "Trust in
us to the end. What do you wish to do first?"

"The figure must have gone through this room. Let us descend the
staircase and ask the servants if they have seen it pass."

(Both D'Arbino and Finello remarked that he did not say _her_.)

They inquired down to the very courtyard. Not one of the servants had
seen the Yellow Mask.

The last resource was the porter at the outer gate. They applied to him;
and in answer to their questions he asserted that he had most certainly
seen a lady in a yellow domino and mask drive away, about half an hour
before, in a hired coach.

"Should you remember the coachman again?" asked D'Arbino.

"Perfectly; he is an old friend of mine."

"And you know where he lives?"

"Yes; as well as I know where I do."

"Any reward you like, if you can get somebody to mind your lodge, and
can take us to that house."

In a few minutes they were following the porter through the dark,
silent streets. "We had better try the stables first," said the man. "My
friend, the coachman, will hardly have had time to do more than set the
lady down. We shall most likely catch him just putting up his horses."

The porter turned out to be right. On entering the stable-yard, they
found that the empty coach had just driven into it.

"You have been taking home a lady in a yellow domino from the
masquerade?" said D'Arbino, putting some money into the coachman's hand.

"Yes, sir; I was engaged by that lady for the evening--engaged to drive
her to the ball as well as to drive her home."

"Where did you take her from?"

"From a very extraordinary place--from the gate of the Campo Santo
burial-ground."

During this colloquy, Finello and D'Arbino had been standing with Fabio
between them, each giving him an arm. The instant the last answer was
given, he reeled back with a cry of horror.

"Where have you taken her to now?" asked D'Arbino. He looked about him
nervously as he put the question, and spoke for the first time in a
whisper.

"To the Campo Santo again," said the coachman.

Fabio suddenly drew his arms out of the arms of his friends, and sank to
his knees on the ground, hiding his face. From some broken ejaculations
which escaped him, it seemed as if he dreaded that his senses were
leaving him, and that he was praying to be preserved in his right mind.

"Why is he so violently agitated?" said Finello, eagerly, to his friend.

"Hush!" returned the other. "You heard him say that when he saw the face
behind the yellow mask, it was the face of his dead wife?"

"Yes. But what then?"

"His wife was buried in the Campo Santo."



CHAPTER V.

Of all the persons who had been present, in any capacity, at the Marquis
Melani's ball, the earliest riser on the morning after it was Nanina.
The agitation produced by the strange events in which she had been
concerned destroyed the very idea of sleep. Through the hours of
darkness she could not even close her eyes; and, as soon as the new day
broke, she rose to breathe the early morning air at her window, and to
think in perfect tranquillity over all that had passed since she entered
the Melani Palace to wait on the guests at the masquerade.

On reaching home the previous night, all her other sensations had been
absorbed in a vague feeling of mingled dread and curiosity, produced
by the sight of the weird figure in the yellow mask, which she had left
standing alone with Fabio in the palace corridor. The morning light,
however, suggested new thoughts. She now opened the note which the young
nobleman had pressed into her hand, and read over and over again the
hurried pencil lines scrawled on the paper. Could there be any harm, any
forgetfulness of her own duty, in using the key inclosed in the note,
and keeping her appointment in the Ascoli gardens at ten o'clock? Surely
not--surely the last sentence he had written, "Believe in my truth and
honor, Nanina, for I believe implicitly in yours," was enough to satisfy
her this time that she could not be doing wrong in listening for once to
the pleading of her own heart. And besides, there in her lap lay the key
of the wicket-gate. It was absolutely necessary to use that, if only for
the purpose of giving it back safely into the hand of its owner.

As this last thought was passing through her mind, and plausibly
overcoming any faint doubts and difficulties which she might still have
left, she was startled by a sudden knocking at the street door; and,
looking out of the window immediately, saw a man in livery standing in
the street, anxiously peering up at the house to see if his knocking had
aroused anybody.

"Does Marta Angrisani, the sick-nurse, live here?" inquired the man, as
soon as Nanina showed herself at the window.

"Yes," she answered. "Must I call her up? Is there some person ill?"

"Call her up directly," said the servant; "she is wanted at the Ascoli
Palace. My master, Count Fabio--"

Nanina waited to hear no more. She flew to the room in which the
sick-nurse slept, and awoke her, almost roughly, in an instant.

"He is ill!" she cried, breathlessly. "Oh, make haste, make haste! He is
ill, and he has sent for you!"

Marta inquired who had sent for her, and on being informed, promised
to lose no time. Nanina ran downstairs to tell the servant that the
sick-nurse was getting on her clothes. The man's serious expression,
when she came close to him, terrified her. All her usual self-distrust
vanished; and she entreated him, without attempting to conceal her
anxiety, to tell her particularly what his master's illness was, and how
it had affected him so suddenly after the ball.

"I know nothing about it," answered the man, noticing Nanina's manner
as she put her question, with some surprise, "except that my master was
brought home by two gentlemen, friends of his, about a couple of hours
ago, in a very sad state; half out of his mind, as it seemed to me. I
gathered from what was said that he had got a dreadful shock from seeing
some woman take off her mask, and show her face to him at the ball. How
that could be I don't in the least understand; but I know that when the
doctor was sent for, he looked very serious, and talked about fearing
brain-fever."

Here the servant stopped; for, to his astonishment, he saw Nanina
suddenly turn away from him, and then heard her crying bitterly as she
went back into the house.

Marta Angrisani had huddled on her clothes and was looking at herself in
the glass to see that she was sufficiently presentable to appear at the
palace, when she felt two arms flung round her neck; and, before she
could say a word, found Nanina sobbing on her bosom.

"He is ill--he is in danger!" cried the girl. "I must go with you to
help him. You have always been kind to me, Marta--be kinder than ever
now. Take me with you--take me with you to the palace!"

"You, child!" exclaimed the nurse, gently unclasping her arms.

"Yes--yes! if it is only for an hour," pleaded Nanina; "if it is only
for one little hour every day. You have only to say that I am your
helper, and they would let me in. Marta! I shall break my heart if I
can't see him, and help him to get well again."

The nurse still hesitated. Nanina clasped her round the neck once more,
and laid her cheek--burning hot now, though the tears had been streaming
down it but an instant before--close to the good woman's face.

"I love him, Marta; great as he is, I love him with all my heart and
soul and strength," she went on, in quick, eager, whispering tones; "and
he loves me. He would have married me if I had not gone away to save
him from it. I could keep my love for him a secret while he was well; I
could stifle it, and crush it down, and wither it up by absence. But now
he is ill, it gets beyond me; I can't master it. Oh, Marta! don't break
my heart by denying me! I have suffered so much for his sake, that I
have earned the right to nurse him!"

Marta was not proof against this last appeal. She had one great and rare
merit for a middle-aged woman--she had not forgotten her own youth.

"Come, child," said she, soothingly; "I won't attempt to deny you. Dry
your eyes, put on your mantilla; and, when we get face to face with the
doctor, try to look as old and ugly as you can, if you want to be let
into the sick-room along with me."

The ordeal of medical scrutiny was passed more easily than Marta
Angrisani had anticipated. It was of great importance, in the doctor's
opinion, that the sick man should see familiar faces at his bedside.
Nanina had only, therefore, to state that he knew her well, and that she
had sat to him as a model in the days when he was learning the art of
sculpture, to be immediately accepted as Marta's privileged assistant in
the sick-room.

The worst apprehensions felt by the doctor for the patient were soon
realized. The fever flew to his brain. For nearly six weeks he lay
prostrate, at the mercy of death; now raging with the wild strength
of delirium, and now sunk in the speechless, motionless, sleepless
exhaustion which was his only repose. At last; the blessed day came when
he enjoyed his first sleep, and when the doctor began, for the first
time, to talk of the future with hope. Even then, however, the same
terrible peculiarity marked his light dreams which had previously shown
itself in his fierce delirium. From the faintly uttered, broken phrases
which dropped from him when he slept, as from the wild words which burst
from him when his senses were deranged, the one sad discovery inevitably
resulted--that his mind was still haunted, day and night, hour after
hour, by the figure in the yellow mask.

As his bodily health improved, the doctor in attendance on him grew more
and more anxious as to the state of his mind. There was no appearance
of any positive derangement of intellect, but there was a mental
depression--an unaltering, invincible prostration, produced by his
absolute belief in the reality of the dreadful vision that he had seen
at the masked ball--which suggested to the physician the gravest doubts
about the case. He saw with dismay that the patient showed no anxiety,
as he got stronger, except on one subject. He was eagerly desirous of
seeing Nanina every day by his bedside; but, as soon as he was assured
that his wish should be faithfully complied with, he seemed to care for
nothing more. Even when they proposed, in the hope of rousing him to an
exhibition of something like pleasure, that the girl should read to him
for an hour every day out of one of his favorite books, he only showed a
languid satisfaction. Weeks passed away, and still, do what they would,
they could not make him so much as smile.

One day Nanina had begun to read to him as usual, but had not proceeded
far before Marta Angrisani informed her that he had fallen into a doze.
She ceased with a sigh, and sat looking at him sadly, as he lay near
her, faint and pale and mournful in his sleep--miserably altered from
what he was when she first knew him. It had been a hard trial to watch
by his bedside in the terrible time of his delirium; but it was a harder
trial still to look at him now, and to feel less and less hopeful with
each succeeding day.

While her eyes and thoughts were still compassionately fixed on him, the
door of the bedroom opened, and the doctor came in, followed by Andrea
D'Arbino, whose share in the strange adventure with the Yellow Mask
caused him to feel a special interest in Fabio's progress toward
recovery.

"Asleep, I see; and sighing in his sleep," said the doctor, going to
the bedside. "The grand difficulty with him," he continued, turning to
D'Arbino, "remains precisely what it was. I have hardly left a single
means untried of rousing him from that fatal depression; yet, for the
last fortnight, he has not advanced a single step. It is impossible to
shake his conviction of the reality of that face which he saw (or rather
which he thinks he saw) when the yellow mask was removed; and, as long
as he persists in his own shocking view of the case, so long he will
lie there, getting better, no doubt, as to his body, but worse as to his
mind."

"I suppose, poor fellow, he is not in a fit state to be reasoned with?"

"On the contrary, like all men with a fixed delusion, he has plenty of
intelligence to appeal to on every point, except the one point on which
he is wrong. I have argued with him vainly by the hour together. He
possesses, unfortunately, an acute nervous sensibility and a vivid
imagination; and besides, he has, as I suspect, been superstitiously
brought up as a child. It would be probably useless to argue rationally
with him on certain spiritual subjects, even if his mind was in
perfect health. He has a good deal of the mystic and the dreamer in his
composition; and science and logic are but broken reeds to depend upon
with men of that kind."

"Does he merely listen to you when you reason with him, or does he
attempt to answer?"

"He has only one form of answer, and that is, unfortunately, the most
difficult of all to dispose of. Whenever I try to convince him of his
delusion, he invariably retorts by asking me for a rational explanation
of what happened to him at the masked ball. Now, neither you nor I,
though we believe firmly that he has been the dupe of some infamous
conspiracy, have been able as yet to penetrate thoroughly into this
mystery of the Yellow Mask. Our common sense tells us that he must be
wrong in taking his view of it, and that we must be right in taking
ours; but if we cannot give him actual, tangible proof of that--if we
can only theorize, when he asks us for an explanation--it is but too
plain, in his present condition, that every time we remonstrate with him
on the subject we only fix him in his delusion more and more firmly."

"It is not for want of perseverance on my part," said D'Arbino, after a
moment of silence, "that we are still left in the dark. Ever since the
extraordinary statement of the coachman who drove the woman home, I
have been inquiring and investigating. I have offered the reward of
two hundred scudi for the discovery of her; I have myself examined
the servants at the palace, the night-watchman at the Campo Santo, the
police-books, the lists of keepers of hotels and lodging-houses, to hit
on some trace of this woman; and I have failed in all directions. If my
poor friend's perfect recovery does indeed depend on his delusion being
combated by actual proof, I fear we have but little chance of restoring
him. So far as I am concerned, I confess myself at the end of my
resources."

"I hope we are not quite conquered yet," returned the doctor. "The
proofs we want may turn up when we least expect them. It is certainly
a miserable case," he continued, mechanically laying his fingers on the
sleeping man's pulse. "There he lies, wanting nothing now but to recover
the natural elasticity of his mind; and here we stand at his bedside,
unable to relieve him of the weight that is pressing his faculties down.
I repeat it, Signor Andrea, nothing will rouse him from his delusion
that he is the victim of a supernatural interposition but the production
of some startling, practical proof of his error. At present he is in the
position of a man who has been imprisoned from his birth in a dark room,
and who denies the existence of daylight. If we cannot open the shutters
and show him the sky outside, we shall never convert him to a knowledge
of the truth."

Saying these words, the doctor turned to lead the way out of the room,
and observed Nanina, who had moved from the bedside on his entrance,
standing near the door. He stopped to look at her, shook his head
good-humoredly, and called to Marta, who happened to be occupied in an
adjoining room.

"Signora Marta," said the doctor, "I think you told me some time ago
that your pretty and careful little assistant lives in your house. Pray,
does she take much walking exercise?"

"Very little, Signor Dottore. She goes home to her sister when she
leaves the palace. Very little walking exercise, indeed."

"I thought so! Her pale cheeks and heavy eyes told me as much. Now, my
dear," said the doctor, addressing Nanina, "you are a very good girl,
and I am sure you will attend to what I tell you. Go out every morning
before you come here, and take a walk in the fresh air. You are too
young not to suffer by being shut up in close rooms every day, unless
you get some regular exercise. Take a good long walk in the morning, or
you will fall into my hands as a patient, and be quite unfit to continue
your attendance here. Now, Signor Andrea, I am ready for you. Mind, my
child, a walk every day in the open air outside the town, or you will
fall ill, take my word for it!"

Nanina promised compliance; but she spoke rather absently, and seemed
scarcely conscious of the kind familiarity which marked the doctor's
manner. The truth was, that all her thoughts were occupied with what
he had been saying by Fabio's bedside. She had not lost one word of the
conversation while the doctor was talking of his patient, and of the
conditions on which his recovery depended. "Oh, if that proof which
would cure him could only be found!" she thought to herself, as she
stole back anxiously to the bedside when the room was empty.

On getting home that day she found a letter waiting for her, and was
greatly surprised to see that it was written by no less a person than
the master-sculptor, Luca Lomi. It was very short; simply informing her
that he had just returned to Pisa, and that he was anxious to know when
she could sit to him for a new bust--a commission from a rich foreigner
at Naples.

Nanina debated with herself for a moment whether she should answer the
letter in the hardest way, to her, by writing, or, in the easiest
way, in person; and decided on going to the studio and telling the
master-sculptor that it would be impossible for her to serve him as a
model, at least for some time to come. It would have taken her a long
hour to say this with due propriety on paper; it would only take her
a few minutes to say it with her own lips. So she put on her mantilla
again and departed for the studio.

On, arriving at the gate and ringing the bell, a thought suddenly
occurred to her, which she wondered had not struck her before. Was
it not possible that she might meet Father Rocco in his brother's
work-room? It was too late to retreat now, but not too late to ask,
before she entered, if the priest was in the studio. Accordingly, when
one of the workmen opened the door to her, she inquired first, very
confusedly and anxiously, for Father Rocco. Hearing that he was not with
his brother then, she went tranquilly enough to make her apologies to
the master-sculptor.

She did not think it necessary to tell him more than that she was now
occupied every day by nursing duties in a sick-room, and that it
was consequently out of her power to attend at the studio. Luca Lomi
expressed, and evidently felt, great disappointment at her failing him
as a model, and tried hard to persuade her that she might find time
enough, if she chose, to sit to him, as well as to nurse the sick
person. The more she resisted his arguments and entreaties, the more
obstinately he reiterated them. He was dusting his favorite busts and
statues, after his long absence, with a feather-brush when she came in;
and he continued this occupation all the while he was talking--urging
a fresh plea to induce Nanina to reconsider her refusal to sit at every
fresh piece of sculpture he came to, and always receiving the same
resolute apology from her as she slowly followed him down the studio
toward the door.

Arriving thus at the lower end of the room, Luca stopped with a fresh
argument on his lips before his statue of Minerva. He had dusted it
already, but he lovingly returned to dust it again. It was his favorite
work--the only good likeness (although it did assume to represent
a classical subject) of his dead daughter that he possessed. He had
refused to part with it for Maddalena's sake; and, as he now approached
it with his brush for the second time, he absently ceased speaking, and
mounted on a stool to look at the face near and blow some specks of dust
off the forehead. Nanina thought this a good opportunity of escaping
from further importunities. She was on the point of slipping away to the
door with a word of farewell, when a sudden exclamation from Luca Lomi
arrested her.

"Plaster!" cried the master-sculptor, looking intently at that part of
the hair of the statue which lay lowest on the forehead. "Plaster here!"
He took out his penknife as he spoke, and removed a tiny morsel of some
white substance from an interstice between two folds of the hair
where it touched the face. "It _is_ plaster!" he exclaimed, excitedly.
"Somebody has been taking a cast from the face of my statue!"

He jumped off the stool, and looked all round the studio with an
expression of suspicious inquiry. "I must have this cleared up," he
said. "My statues were left under Rocco's care, and he is answerable
if there has been any stealing of casts from any one of them. I must
question him directly."

Nanina, seeing that he took no notice of her, felt that she might now
easily effect her retreat. She opened the studio door, and repeated,
for the twentieth time at least, that she was sorry she could not sit to
him.

"I am sorry too, child," he said, irritably looking about for his hat.
He found it apparently just as Nanina was going out; for she heard him
call to one of the workmen in the inner studio, and order the man to
say, if anybody wanted him, that he had gone to Father Rocco's lodgings.



CHAPTER VI.

The next morning, when Nanina rose, a bad attack of headache, and
a sense of languor and depression, reminded her of the necessity of
following the doctor's advice, and preserving her health by getting
a little fresh air and exercise. She had more than two hours to spare
before the usual time when her daily attendance began at the Ascoli
Palace; and she determined to employ the interval of leisure in taking a
morning walk outside the town. La Biondella would have been glad enough
to go too, but she had a large order for dinner-mats on hand, and was
obliged, for that day, to stop in the house and work. Thus it happened
that when Nanina set forth from home, the learned poodle, Scarammuccia,
was her only companion.

She took the nearest way out of the town; the dog trotting along in his
usual steady, observant way close at her side, pushing his great rough
muzzle, from time to time, affectionately into her hand, and trying hard
to attract her attention at intervals by barking and capering in front
of her. He got but little notice, however, for his pains. Nanina was
thinking again of all that the physician had said the day before by
Fabio's bedside, and these thoughts brought with them others, equally
absorbing, that were connected with the mysterious story of the young
nobleman's adventure with the Yellow Mask. Thus preoccupied, she had
little attention left for the gambols of the dog. Even the beauty of the
morning appealed to her in vain. She felt the refreshment of the cool,
fragrant air, but she hardly noticed the lovely blue of the sky, or
the bright sunshine that gave a gayety and an interest to the commonest
objects around her.

After walking nearly an hour, she began to feel tired, and looked about
for a shady place to rest in.

Beyond and behind her there was only the high-road and the flat
country; but by her side stood a little wooden building, half inn, half
coffee-house, backed by a large, shady pleasure-garden, the gates of
which stood invitingly open. Some workmen in the garden were putting
up a stage for fireworks, but the place was otherwise quiet and lonely
enough. It was only used at night as a sort of rustic Ranelagh, to
which the citizens of Pisa resorted for pure air and amusement after
the fatigues of the day. Observing that there were no visitors in the
grounds, Nanina ventured in, intending to take a quarter of an hour's
rest in the coolest place she could find before returning to Pisa.

She had passed the back of a wooden summer-house in a secluded part
of the gardens, when she suddenly missed the dog from her side;
and, looking round after him, saw that he was standing behind the
summer-house with his ears erect and his nose to the ground, having
evidently that instant scented something that excited his suspicion.

Thinking it possible that he might be meditating an attack on some
unfortunate cat, she turned to see what he was watching. The carpenters
engaged on the firework stage were just then hammering at it violently.
The noise prevented her from hearing that Scarammuccia was growling, but
she could feel that he was the moment she laid her hand on his back. Her
curiosity was excited, and she stooped down close to him to look through
a crack in the boards before which he stood into the summer-house.

She was startled at seeing a lady and gentleman sitting inside. The
place she was looking through was not high enough up to enable her to
see their faces, but she recognized, or thought she recognized, the
pattern of the lady's dress as one which she had noticed in former days
in the Demoiselle Grifoni's show-room. Rising quickly, her eye detected
a hole in the boards about the level of her own height, caused by a knot
having been forced out of the wood. She looked through it to ascertain,
without being discovered, if the wearer of the familiar dress was the
person she had taken her to be; and saw, not Brigida only, as she had
expected, but Father Rocco as well. At the same moment the carpenters
left off hammering and began to saw. The new sound from the firework
stage was regular and not loud. The voices of the occupants of the
summer-house reached her through it, and she heard Brigida pronounce the
name of Count Fabio.

Instantly stooping down once more by the dog's side, she caught
his muzzle firmly in both her hands. It was the only way to keep
Scarammuccia from growling again, at a time when there was no din of
hammering to prevent him from being heard. Those two words, "Count
Fabio," in the mouth of another woman, excited a jealous anxiety in her.
What could Brigida have to say in connection with that name? She never
came near the Ascoli Palace--what right or reason could she have to talk
of Fabio?

"Did you hear what I said?" she heard Brigida ask, in her coolest,
hardest tone.

"No," the priest answered. "At least, not all of it."

"I will repeat it, then. I asked what had so suddenly determined you to
give up all idea of making any future experiments on the superstitious
fears of Count Fabio?"

"In the first place, the result of the experiment already tried has been
so much more serious than I had anticipated, that I believe the end I
had in view in making it has been answered already."

"Well; that is not your only reason?"

"Another shock to his mind might be fatal to him. I can use what I
believe to be a justifiable fraud to prevent his marrying again; but I
cannot burden myself with a crime."

"That is your second reason; but I believe you have another yet. The
suddenness with which you sent to me last night to appoint a meeting
in this lonely place; the emphatic manner in which you requested--I may
almost say ordered--me to bring the wax mask here, suggest to my mind
that something must have happened. What is it? I am a woman, and my
curiosity must be satisfied. After the secrets you have trusted to me
already, you need not hesitate, I think, to trust me with one more."

"Perhaps not. The secret this time is, moreover, of no great importance.
You know that the wax mask you wore at the ball was made in a plaster
mold taken off the face of my brother's statue?"

"Yes, I know that."

"My brother has just returned to his studio; has found a morsel of the
plaster I used for the mold sticking in the hair of the statue; and
has asked me, as the person left in charge of his work-rooms, for an
explanation. Such an explanation as I could offer has not satisfied him,
and he talks of making further inquiries. Considering that it will be
used no more, I think it safest to destroy the wax mask, and I asked you
to bring it here, that I might see it burned or broken up with my own
eyes. Now you know all you wanted to know; and now, therefore, it is my
turn to remind you that I have not yet had a direct answer to the first
question I addressed to you when we met here. Have you brought the wax
mask with you, or have you not?"

"I have not."

"And why?"

Just as that question was put, Nanina felt the dog dragging himself free
of her grasp on his mouth. She had been listening hitherto with such
painful intensity, with such all-absorbing emotions of suspense, terror,
and astonishment, that she had not noticed his efforts to get away,
and had continued mechanically to hold his mouth shut. But now she was
aroused by the violence of his struggles to the knowledge that, unless
she hit upon some new means of quieting him, he would have his mouth
free, and would betray her by a growl.

In an agony of apprehension lest she should lose a word of the momentous
conversation, she made a desperate attempt to appeal to the dog's
fondness for her, by suddenly flinging both her arms round his neck, and
kissing his rough, hairy cheek. The stratagem succeeded. Scarammuccia
had, for many years past, never received any greater marks of his
mistress's kindness for him than such as a pat on the head or a present
of a lump of sugar might convey. His dog's nature was utterly confounded
by the unexpected warmth of Nanina's caress, and he struggled up
vigorously in her arms to try and return it by licking her face. She
could easily prevent him from doing this, and could so gain a few
minutes more to listen behind the summer-house without danger of
discovery.

She had lost Brigida's answer to Father Rocco's question; but she was in
time to hear her next words.

"We are alone here," said Brigida. "I am a woman, and I don't know that
you may not have come armed. It is only the commonest precaution on my
part not to give you a chance of getting at the wax mask till I have
made my conditions."

"You never said a word about conditions before."

"True. I remember telling you that I wanted nothing but the novelty
of going to the masquerade in the character of my dead enemy, and the
luxury of being able to terrify the man who had brutally ridiculed me in
old days in the studio. That was the truth. But it is not the less the
truth that our experiment on Count Fabio has detained me in this city
much longer than I ever intended, that I am all but penniless, and that
I deserve to be paid. In plain words, will you buy the mask of me for
two hundred scudi?"

"I have not twenty scudi in the world, at my own free disposal."

"You must find two hundred if you want the wax mask. I don't wish to
threaten--but money I must have. I mention the sum of two hundred scudi,
because that is the exact amount offered in the public handbills by
Count Fabio's friends for the discovery of the woman who wore the yellow
mask at the Marquis Melani's ball. What have I to do but to earn that
money if I please, by going to the palace, taking the wax mask with me,
and telling them that I am the woman. Suppose I confess in that way;
they can do nothing to hurt me, and I should be two hundred scudi the
richer. You might be injured, to be sure, if they insisted on knowing
who made the wax model, and who suggested the ghastly disguise--"

"Wretch! do you believe that my character could be injured on the
unsupported evidence of any words from your lips?"

"Father Rocco, for the first time since I have enjoyed the pleasure of
your acquaintance, I find you committing a breach of good manners. I
shall leave you until you become more like yourself. If you wish to
apologize for calling me a wretch, and if you want to secure the wax
mask, honor me with a visit before four o'clock this afternoon, and
bring two hundred scudi with you. Delay till after four, and it will be
too late."

An instant of silence followed; and then Nanina judged that Brigida must
be departing, for she heard the rustling of a dress on the lawn in
front of the summer-house. Unfortunately, Scarammuccia heard it too. He
twisted himself round in her arms and growled.

The noise disturbed Father Rocco. She heard him rise and leave the
summer-house. There would have been time enough, perhaps, for her
to conceal herself among some trees if she could have recovered her
self-possession at once; but she was incapable of making an effort to
regain it. She could neither think nor move--her breath seemed to die
away on her lips--as she saw the shadow of the priest stealing over the
grass slowly from the front to the back of the summer-house. In another
moment they were face to face.

He stopped a few paces from her, and eyed her steadily in dead silence.
She still crouched against the summer-house, and still with one hand
mechanically kept her hold of the dog. It was well for the priest that
she did so. Scarammuccia's formidable teeth were in full view, his
shaggy coat was bristling, his eyes were starting, his growl had changed
from the surly to the savage note; he was ready to tear down, not Father
Rocco only, but all the clergy in Pisa, at a moment's notice.

"You have been listening," said the priest, calmly. "I see it in your
face. You have heard all."

She could not answer a word; she could not take her eyes from him.
There was an unnatural stillness in his face, a steady, unrepentant,
unfathomable despair in his eyes that struck her with horror. She
would have given worlds to be able to rise to her feet and fly from his
presence.

"I once distrusted you and watched you in secret," he said, speaking
after a short silence, thoughtfully, and with a strange, tranquil
sadness in his voice. "And now, what I did by you, you do by me. You
put the hope of your life once in my hands. Is it because they were not
worthy of the trust that discovery and ruin overtake me, and that
you are the instrument of the retribution? Can this be the decree of
Heaven--or is it nothing but the blind justice of chance?"

He looked upward, doubtingly, to the lustrous sky above him, and sighed.
Nanina's eyes still followed his mechanically. He seemed to feel their
influence, for he suddenly looked down at her again.

"What keeps you silent? Why are you afraid?" he said. "I can do you no
harm, with your dog at your side, and the workmen yonder within call.
I can do you no harm, and I wish to do you none. Go back to Pisa; tell
what you have heard, restore the man you love to himself, and ruin me.
That is your work; do it! I was never your enemy, even when I distrusted
you. I am not your enemy now. It is no fault of yours that a fatality
has been accomplished through you--no fault of yours that I am rejected
as the instrument of securing a righteous restitution to the Church.
Rise, child, and go your way, while I go mine, and prepare for what is
to come. If we never meet again, remember that I parted from you without
one hard saying or one harsh look--parted from you so, knowing that
the first words you speak in Pisa will be death to my character, and
destruction to the great purpose of my life."

Speaking these words, always with the same calmness which had marked
his manner from the first, he looked fixedly at her for a little while,
sighed again, and turned away. Just before he disappeared among the
trees, he said "Farewell," but so softly that she could barely hear it.
Some strange confusion clouded her mind as she lost sight of him.
Had she injured him, or had he injured her? His words bewildered
and oppressed her simple heart. Vague doubts and fears, and a sudden
antipathy to remaining any longer near the summer-house, overcame her.
She started to her feet, and, keeping the dog still at her side, hurried
from the garden to the highroad. There, the wide glow of sunshine, the
sight of the city lying before her, changed the current of her thoughts,
and directed them all to Fabio and to the future.

A burning impatience to be back in Pisa now possessed her. She hastened
toward the city at her utmost speed. The doctor was reported to be in
the palace when she passed the servants lounging in the courtyard. He
saw the moment, she came into his presence, that something had happened,
and led her away from the sick-room into Fabio's empty study. There she
told him all.

"You have saved him," said the doctor, joyfully. "I will answer for his
recovery. Only let that woman come here for the reward; and leave me to
deal with her as she deserves. In the meantime, my dear, don't go away
from the palace on any account until I give you permission. I am going
to send a message immediately to Signor Andrea D'Arbino to come and hear
the extraordinary disclosure that you have made to me. Go back to read
to the count, as usual, until I want you again; but, remember, you
must not drop a word to him yet of what you have said to me. He must be
carefully prepared for all that we have to tell him; and must be kept
quite in the dark until those preparations are made."

D'Arbino answered the doctor's summons in person; and Nanina repeated
her story to him. He and the doctor remained closeted together for some
time after she had concluded her narrative and had retired. A little
before four o'clock they sent for her again into the study. The doctor
was sitting by the table with a bag of money before him, and D'Arbino
was telling one of the servants that if a lady called at the palace
on the subject of the handbill which he had circulated, she was to be
admitted into the study immediately.

As the clock struck four Nanina was requested to take possession of
a window-seat, and to wait there until she was summoned. When she had
obeyed, the doctor loosened one of the window-curtains, to hide her from
the view of any one entering the room.

About a quarter of an hour elapsed, and then the door was thrown open,
and Brigida herself was shown into the study. The doctor bowed, and
D'Arbino placed a chair for her. She was perfectly collected, and
thanked them for their politeness with her best grace.

"I believe I am addressing confidential friends of Count Fabio
d'Ascoli?" Brigida began. "May I ask if you are authorized to act for
the count, in relation to the reward which this handbill offers?"

The doctor, having examined the handbill, said that the lady was quite
right, and pointed significantly to the bag of money.

"You are prepared, then," pursued Brigida, smiling, "to give a reward of
two hundred scudi to any one able to tell you who the woman is who wore
the yellow mask at the Marquis Melani's ball, and how she contrived to
personate the face and figure of the late Countess d'Ascoli?"

"Of course we are prepared," answered D'Arbino, a little irritably. "As
men of honor, we are not in the habit of promising anything that we are
not perfectly willing, under proper conditions, to perform."

"Pardon me, my dear friend," said the doctor; "I think you speak
a little too warmly to the lady. She is quite right to take every
precaution. We have the two hundred scudi here, madam," he continued,
patting the money-bag; "and we are prepared to pay that sum for the
information we want. But" (here the doctor suspiciously moved the bag
of scudi from the table to his lap) "we must have proofs that the person
claiming the reward is really entitled to it."

Brigida's eyes followed the money-bag greedily.

"Proofs!" she exclaimed, taking a small flat box from under her cloak,
and pushing it across to the doctor. "Proofs! there you will find one
proof that establishes my claim beyond the possibility of doubt."

The doctor opened the box, and looked at the wax mask inside it; then
handed it to D'Arbino, and replaced the bag of scudi on the table.

"The contents of that box seem certainly to explain a great deal," he
said, pushing the bag gently toward Brigida, but always keeping his
hand over it. "The woman who wore the yellow domino was, I presume, of
the same height as the late countess?"

"Exactly," said Brigida. "Her eyes were also of the same color as the
late countess's; she wore yellow of the same shade as the hangings in
the late countess's room, and she had on, under her yellow mask, the
colorless wax model of the late countess's face, now in your friend's
hand. So much for that part of the secret. Nothing remains now to be
cleared up but the mystery of who the lady was. Have the goodness, sir,
to push that bag an inch or two nearer my way, and I shall be delighted
to tell you."

"Thank you, madam," said the doctor, with a very perceptible change in
his manner. "We know who the lady was already."

He moved the bag of scudi while he spoke back to his own side of the
table. Brigida's cheeks reddened, and she rose from her seat.

"Am I to understand, sir," she said, haughtily, "that you take advantage
of my position here, as a defenseless woman, to cheat me out of the
reward?"

"By no means, madam," rejoined the doctor. "We have covenanted to pay
the reward to the person who could give us the information we required."

"Well, sir! have I not given you part of it? And am I not prepared to
give you the whole?"

"Certainly; but the misfortune is, that another person has been
beforehand with you. We ascertained who the lady in the yellow domino
was, and how she contrived to personate the face of the late Countess
d'Ascoli, several hours ago from another informant. That person has
consequently the prior claim; and, on every principle of justice, that
person must also have the reward. Nanina, this bag belongs to you--come
and take it."

Nanina appeared from the window-seat. Brigida, thunderstruck, looked
at her in silence for a moment; gasped out, "That girl!"--then stopped
again, breathless.

"That girl was at the back of the summer-house this morning, while you
and your accomplice were talking together," said the doctor.

D'Arbino had been watching Brigida's face intently from the moment of
Nanina's appearance, and had quietly stolen close to her side. This was
a fortunate movement; for the doctor's last words were hardly out of
his mouth before Brigida seized a heavy ruler lying, with some writing
materials, on the table. In another instant, if D'Arbino had not caught
her arm, she would have hurled it at Nanina's head.

"You may let go your hold, sir," she said, dropping the ruler, and
turning toward D'Arbino with a smile on her white lips and a wicked
calmness in her steady eyes. "I can wait for a better opportunity."

With those words she walked to the door; and, turning round there,
regarded Nanina fixedly.

"I wish I had been a moment quicker with the ruler," she said, and went
out.

"There!" exclaimed the doctor; "I told you I knew how to deal with her
as she deserved. One thing I am certainly obliged to her for--she has
saved us the trouble of going to her house and forcing her to give up
the mask. And now, my child," he continued, addressing Nanina, "you
can go home, and one of the men-servants shall see you safe to your own
door, in case that woman should still be lurking about the palace. Stop!
you are leaving the bag of scudi behind you."

"I can't take it, sir."

"And why not?"

"_She_ would have taken money!" Saying those words, Nanina reddened, and
looked toward the door.

The doctor glanced approvingly at D'Arbino. "Well, well, we won't argue
about that now," he said. "I will lock up the money with the mask for
to-day. Come here to-morrow morning as usual, my dear. By that time
I shall have made up my mind on the right means for breaking your
discovery to Count Fabio. Only let us proceed slowly and cautiously, and
I answer for success."



CHAPTER VII.

The next morning, among the first visitors at the Ascoli Palace was
the master-sculptor, Luca Lomi. He seemed, as the servants thought,
agitated, and said he was especially desirous of seeing Count Fabio. On
being informed that this was impossible, he reflected a little, and then
inquired if the medical attendant of the count was at the palace, and
could be spoken with. Both questions were answered in the affirmative,
and he was ushered into the doctor's presence.

"I know not how to preface what I want to say," Luca began, looking
about him confusedly. "May I ask you, in the first place, if the
work-girl named Nanina was here yesterday?"

"She was," said the doctor.

"Did she speak in private with any one?"

"Yes; with me."

"Then you know everything?"

"Absolutely everything."

"I am glad at least to find that my object in wishing to see the count
can be equally well answered by seeing you. My brother, I regret to
say--" He stopped perplexedly, and drew from his pocket a roll of
papers.

"You may speak of your brother in the plainest terms," said the doctor.
"I know what share he has had in promoting the infamous conspiracy of
the Yellow Mask."

"My petition to you, and through you to the count, is, that your
knowledge of what my brother has done may go no further. If this scandal
becomes public it will ruin me in my profession. And I make little
enough by it already," said Luca, with his old sordid smile breaking out
again faintly on his face.

"Pray do you come from your brother with this petition?" inquired the
doctor.

"No; I come solely on my own account. My brother seems careless what
happens. He has made a full statement of his share in the matter from
the first; has forwarded it to his ecclesiastical superior (who will
send it to the archbishop), and is now awaiting whatever sentence they
choose to pass on him. I have a copy of the document, to prove that he
has at least been candid, and that he does not shrink from consequences
which he might have avoided by flight. The law cannot touch him, but the
Church can--and to the Church he has confessed. All I ask is, that he
may be spared a public exposure. Such an exposure would do no good to
the count, and it would do dreadful injury to me. Look over the papers
yourself, and show them, whenever you think proper, to the master of
this house. I have every confidence in his honor and kindness, and in
yours."

He laid the roll of papers open on the table, and then retired with
great humility to the window. The doctor looked over them with some
curiosity.

The statement or confession began by boldly avowing the writer's
conviction that part of the property which the Count Fabio d'Ascoli
had inherited from his ancestors had been obtained by fraud and
misrepresentation from the Church. The various authorities on which this
assertion was based were then produced in due order; along with some
curious particles of evidence culled from old manuscripts, which it must
have cost much trouble to collect and decipher.

The second section was devoted, at great length, to the reasons which
induced the writer to think it his absolute duty, as an affectionate son
and faithful servant of the Church, not to rest until he had restored
to the successors of the apostles in his day the property which had been
fraudulently taken from them in days gone by. The writer held himself
justified, in the last resort, and in that only, in using any means for
effecting this restoration, except such as might involve him in mortal
sin.

The third section described the priest's share in promoting the marriage
of Maddalena Lomi with Fabio; and the hopes he entertained of securing
the restitution of the Church property through his influence over his
niece, in the first place, and, when she had died, through his influence
over her child, in the second. The necessary failure of all his
projects, if Fabio married again, was next glanced at; and the time at
which the first suspicion of the possible occurrence of this catastrophe
occurred to his mind was noted with scrupulous accuracy.

The fourth section narrated the manner in which the conspiracy of the
Yellow Mask had originated. The writer described himself as being in
his brother's studio on the night of his niece's death, harassed by
forebodings of the likelihood of Fabio's marrying again, and filled
with the resolution to prevent any such disastrous second union at
all hazards. He asserted that the idea of taking the wax mask from
his brother's statue flashed upon him on a sudden, and that he knew of
nothing to lead to it, except, perhaps, that he had been thinking just
before of the superstitious nature of the young man's character, as he
had himself observed it in the studio. He further declared that the idea
of the wax mask terrified him at first; that he strove against it as
against a temptation of the devil; that, from fear of yielding to
this temptation, he abstained even from entering the studio during his
brother's absence at Naples, and that he first faltered in his good
resolution when Fabio returned to Pisa, and when it was rumored, not
only that the young nobleman was going to the ball, but that he would
certainly marry for the second time.

The fifth section related that the writer, upon this, yielded to
temptation rather than forego the cherished purpose of his life by
allowing Fabio a chance of marrying again--that he made the wax mask in
a plaster mold taken from the face of his brother's statue--and that he
then had two separate interviews with a woman named Brigida (of whom he
had some previous knowledge ), who was ready and anxious, from motives
of private malice, to personate the deceased countess at the masquerade.
This woman had suggested that some anonymous letters to Fabio would pave
the way in his mind for the approaching impersonation, and had written
the letters herself. However, even when all the preparations were made,
the writer declared that he shrank from proceeding to extremities; and
that he would have abandoned the whole project but for the woman Brigida
informing him one day that a work-girl named Nanina was to be one of the
attendants at the ball. He knew the count to have been in love with this
girl, even to the point of wishing to marry her; he suspected that her
engagement to wait at the ball was preconcerted; and, in consequence, he
authorized his female accomplice to perform her part in the conspiracy.

The sixth section detailed the proceedings at the masquerade, and
contained the writer's confession that, on the night before it, he had
written to the count proposing the reconciliation of a difference that
had taken place between them, solely for the purpose of guarding himself
against suspicion. He next acknowledged that he had borrowed the key of
the Campo Santo gate, keeping the authority to whom it was intrusted in
perfect ignorance of the purpose for which he wanted it. That purpose
was to carry out the ghastly delusion of the wax mask (in the very
probable event of the wearer being followed and inquired after) by
having the woman Brigida taken up and set down at the gate of the
cemetery in which Fabio's wife had been buried.

The seventh section solemnly averred that the sole object of the
conspiracy was to prevent the young nobleman from marrying again, by
working on his superstitious fears; the writer repeating, after this
avowal, that any such second marriage would necessarily destroy
his project for promoting the ultimate restoration of the Church
possessions, by diverting Count Fabio's property, in great part,
from his first wife's child, over whom the priest would always have
influence, to another wife and probably other children, over whom he
could hope to have none.

The eighth and last section expressed the writer's contrition for having
allowed his zeal for the Church to mislead him into actions liable to
bring scandal on his cloth; reiterated in the strongest language his
conviction that, whatever might be thought of the means employed, the
end he had proposed to himself was a most righteous one; and concluded
by asserting his resolution to suffer with humility any penalties,
however severe, which his ecclesiastical superiors might think fit to
inflict on him.

Having looked over this extraordinary statement, the doctor addressed
himself again to Luca Lomi.

"I agree with you," he said, "that no useful end is to be gained now by
mentioning your brother's conduct in public--always provided, however,
that his ecclesiastical superiors do their duty. I shall show these
papers to the count as soon as he is fit to peruse them, and I have no
doubt that he will be ready to take my view of the matter."

This assurance relieved Luca Lomi of a great weight of anxiety. He bowed
and withdrew.

The doctor placed the papers in the same cabinet in which he had secured
the wax mask. Before he locked the doors again he took out the flat box,
opened it, and looked thoughtfully for a few minutes at the mask inside,
then sent for Nanina.

"Now, my child," he said, when she appeared, "I am going to try our
first experiment with Count Fabio; and I think it of great importance
that you should be present while I speak to him."

He took up the box with the mask in it, and beckoning to Nanina to
follow him, led the way to Fabio's chamber.



CHAPTER VIII.

About six months after the events already related, Signor Andrea
D'Arbino and the Cavaliere Finello happened to be staying with a friend,
in a seaside villa on the Castellamare shore of the bay of Naples.
Most of their time was pleasantly occupied on the sea, in fishing and
sailing. A boat was placed entirely at their disposal. Sometimes they
loitered whole days along the shore; sometimes made trips to the lovely
islands in the bay.

One evening they were sailing near Sorrento, with a light wind. The
beauty of the coast tempted them to keep the boat close inshore. A short
time before sunset, they rounded the most picturesque headland they had
yet passed; and a little bay, with a white-sand beach, opened on their
view. They noticed first a villa surrounded by orange and olive trees on
the rocky heights inland; then a path in the cliff-side leading down
to the sands; then a little family party on the beach, enjoying the
fragrant evening air.

The elders of the group were a lady and gentleman, sitting together
on the sand. The lady had a guitar in her lap and was playing a simple
dance melody. Close at her side a young child was rolling on the beach
in high glee; in front of her a little girl was dancing to the music,
with a very extraordinary partner in the shape of a dog, who was
capering on his hind legs in the most grotesque manner. The merry
laughter of the girl, and the lively notes of the guitar were heard
distinctly across the still water.

"Edge a little nearer in shore," said D'Arbino to his friend, who was
steering; "and keep as I do in the shadow of the sail. I want to see the
faces of those persons on the beach without being seen by them."

Finello obeyed. After approaching just near enough to see the
countenances of the party on shore, and to be barked at lustily by the
dog, they turned the boat's head again toward the offing.

"A pleasant voyage, gentlemen," cried the clear voice of the little
girl. They waved their hats in return; and then saw her run to the dog
and take him by the forelegs. "Play, Nanina," they heard her say. "I
have not half done with my partner yet." The guitar sounded once more,
and the grotesque dog was on his hind legs in a moment.

"I had heard that he was well again, that he had married her lately,
and that he was away with her and her sister, and his child by the
first wife," said D'Arbino; "but I had no suspicion that their place
of retirement was so near us. It is too soon to break in upon their
happiness, or I should have felt inclined to run the boat on shore."

"I never heard the end of that strange adventure of the Yellow Mask,"
said Finello. "There was a priest mixed up in it, was there not?"

"Yes; but nobody seems to know exactly what has become of him. He was
sent for to Rome, and has never been heard of since. One report is,
that he has been condemned to some mysterious penal seclusion by his
ecclesiastical superiors--another, that he has volunteered, as a sort of
Forlorn Hope, to accept a colonial curacy among rough people, and in
a pestilential climate. I asked his brother, the sculptor, about him a
little while ago, but he only shook his head, and said nothing."

"And the woman who wore the yellow mask?"

"She, too, has ended mysteriously. At Pisa she was obliged to sell off
everything she possessed to pay her debts. Some friends of hers at a
milliner's shop, to whom she applied for help, would have nothing to do
with her. She left the city, alone and penniless."

The boat had approached the next headland on the coast while they were
talking. They looked back for a last glance at the beach. Still the notes
of the guitar came gently across the quiet water; but there mingled with
them now the sound of the lady's voice. She was singing. The little girl
and the dog were at her feet, and the gentleman was still in his old
place close at her side.

In a few minutes more the boat rounded the next headland, the beach
vanished from view, and the music died away softly in the distance.

LAST LEAVES FROM LEAH'S DIARY.

3d of June.--Our stories are ended; our pleasant work is done. It is a
lovely summer afternoon. The great hall at the farmhouse, after having
been filled with people, is now quite deserted. I sit alone at my little
work-table, with rather a crying sensation at my heart, and with the
pen trembling in my fingers, as if I was an old woman already. Our
manuscript has been sealed up and taken away; the one precious object
of all our most anxious thoughts for months past--our third child, as we
have got to call it--has gone out from us on this summer's day, to seek
its fortune in the world.

A little before twelve o'clock last night, my husband dictated to me
the last words of "The Yellow Mask." I laid down the pen, and closed the
paper thoughtfully. With that simple action the work that we had wrought
at together so carefully and so long came to a close. We were both
so silent and still, that the murmuring of the trees in the night air
sounded audibly and solemnly in our room.

William's collection of stories has not, thus far, been half exhausted
yet; but those who understand the public taste and the interests of
bookselling better than we, think it advisable not to risk offering too
much to the reader at first. If individual opinions can be accepted as
a fair test, our prospects of success seem hopeful. The doctor (but
we must not forget that he is a friend) was so pleased with the two
specimen stories we sent to him, that he took them at once to his
friend, the editor of the newspaper, who showed his appreciation of what
he read in a very gratifying manner. He proposed that William should
publish in the newspaper, on very fair terms, any short anecdotes and
curious experiences of his life as a portrait-painter, which might not
be important enough to put into a book. The money which my husband
has gained from time to time in this way has just sufficed to pay our
expenses at the farmhouse up to within the last month; and now our
excellent friends here say they will not hear anything more from us on
the subject of the rent until the book is sold and we have plenty of
money. This is one great relief and happiness. Another, for which I feel
even more grateful, is that William's eyes have gained so much by their
long rest, that even the doctor is surprised at the progress he has
made. He only puts on his green shade now when he goes out into the sun,
or when the candles are lit. His spirits are infinitely raised, and he
is beginning to talk already of the time when he will unpack his palette
and brushes, and take to his old portrait-painting occupations again.

With all these reasons for being happy, it seems unreasonable and
ungracious in me to be feeling sad, as I do just at this moment. I can
only say, in my own justification, that it is a mournful ceremony to
take leave of an old friend; and I have taken leave twice over of the
book that has been like an old friend to me--once when I had written the
last word in it, and once again when I saw it carried away to London.

I packed the manuscript up with my own hands this morning, in thick
brown paper, wasting a great deal of sealing-wax, I am afraid, in my
anxiety to keep the parcel from bursting open in case it should be
knocked about on its journey to town. Oh me, how cheap and common it
looked, in its new form, as I carried it downstairs! A dozen pairs of
worsted stockings would have made a larger parcel; and half a crown's
worth of groceries would have weighed a great deal heavier.

Just as we had done dinner the doctor and the editor came in. The first
had called to fetch the parcel--I mean the manuscript; the second had
come out with him to Appletreewick for a walk. As soon as the farmer
heard that the book was to be sent to London, he insisted that we should
drink success to it all round. The children, in high glee, were mounted
up on the table, with a glass of currant-wine apiece; the rest of us had
ale; the farmer proposed the toast, and his sailor son led the cheers.
We all joined in (the children included), except the editor--who, being
the only important person of the party, could not, I suppose, afford
to compromise his dignity by making a noise. He was extremely polite,
however, in a lofty way, to me, waving his hand and bowing magnificently
every time he spoke. This discomposed me a little; and I was still more
flurried when he said that he had written to the London publishers that
very day, to prepare them for the arrival of our book.

"Do you think they will print it, sir?" I ventured to ask.

"My dear madam, you may consider it settled," said the editor,
confidently. "The letter is written--the thing is done. Look upon the
book as published already; pray oblige me by looking upon the book as
published already."

"Then the only uncertainty now is about how the public will receive it!"
said my husband, fidgeting in his chair, and looking nervously at me.

"Just so, my dear sir, just so," answered the editor. "Everything
depends upon the public--everything, I pledge you my word of honor."

"Don't look doubtful, Mrs. Kerby; there isn't a doubt about it,"
whispered the kind doctor, giving the manuscript a confident smack as he
passed by me with it on his way to the door.

In another minute he and the editor, and the poor cheap-looking brown
paper parcel, were gone. The others followed them out, and I was left in
the hall alone.

Oh, Public! Public! it all depends now upon you! The children are
to have new clothes from top to toe; I am to have a black silk gown;
William is to buy a beautiful traveling color-box; the rent is to be
paid; all our kind friends at the farmhouse are to have little presents,
and our future way in this hard world is to be smoothed for us at the
outset, if you will only accept a poor painter's stories which his wife
has written down for him After Dark!







CHAPTER 1.

GOISVINTHA.

The mountains forming the range of Alps which border on the
north-eastern confines of Italy, were, in the autumn of the year 408,
already furrowed in numerous directions by the tracks of the invading
forces of those northern nations generally comprised under the
appellation of Goths.

In some places these tracks were denoted on either side by fallen
trees, and occasionally assumed, when half obliterated by the ravages
of storms, the appearance of desolate and irregular marshes.  In other
places they were less palpable.  Here, the temporary path was entirely
hidden by the incursions of a swollen torrent; there, it was faintly
perceptible in occasional patches of soft ground, or partly traceable
by fragments of abandoned armour, skeletons of horses and men, and
remnants of the rude bridges which had once served for passage across a
river or transit over a precipice.

Among the rocks of the topmost of the range of mountains immediately
overhanging the plains of Italy, and presenting the last barrier to the
exertions of a traveller or the march of an invader, there lay, at the
beginning of the fifth century, a little lake.  Bounded on three sides
by precipices, its narrow banks barren of verdure or habitations, and
its dark and stagnant waters brightened but rarely by the presence of
the lively sunlight, this solitary spot--at all times
mournful--presented, on the autumn of the day when our story commences,
an aspect of desolation at once dismal to the eye and oppressive to the
heart.

It was near noon; but no sun appeared in the heaven.  The dull clouds,
monotonous in colour and form, hid all beauty in the firmament, and
shed heavy darkness on the earth.  Dense, stagnant vapours clung to the
mountain summits; from the drooping trees dead leaves and rotten
branches sunk, at intervals, on the oozy soil, or whirled over the
gloomy precipice; and a small steady rain fell, slow and
unintermitting, upon the deserts around.  Standing upon the path which
armies had once trodden, and which armies were still destined to tread,
and looking towards the solitary lake, you heard, at first, no sound
but the regular dripping of the rain-drops from rock to rock; you saw
no prospect but the motionless waters at your feet, and the dusky crags
which shadowed them from above.  When, however, impressed by the
mysterious loneliness of the place, the eye grew more penetrating and
the ear more attentive, a cavern became apparent in the precipices
round the lake; and, in the intervals of the heavy rain-drops, were
faintly perceptible the sounds of a human voice.

The mouth of the cavern was partly concealed by a large stone, on which
were piled some masses of rotten brushwood, as if for the purpose of
protecting any inhabitant it might contain from the coldness of the
atmosphere without.  Placed at the eastward boundary of the lake, this
strange place of refuge commanded a view not only of the rugged path
immediately below it, but of a large plot of level ground at a short
distance to the west, which overhung a second and lower range of rocks.
From this spot might be seen far beneath, on days when the atmosphere
was clear, the olive grounds that clothed the mountain's base, and
beyond, stretching away to the distant horizon, the plains of fated
Italy, whose destiny of defeat and shame was now hastening to its dark
and fearful accomplishment.

The cavern, within, was low and irregular in form.  From its rugged
walls the damp oozed forth upon its floor of decayed moss.  Lizards and
noisome animals had tenanted its comfortless recesses undisturbed,
until the period we have just described, when their miserable rights
were infringed on for the first time by human intruders.

A woman crouched near the entrance of the place.  More within, on the
driest part of the ground, lay a child asleep.  Between them were
scattered some withered branches and decayed leaves, which were
arranged as if to form a fire.  In many parts this scanty collection of
fuel was slightly blackened; but, wetted as it was by the rain, all
efforts to light it permanently had evidently been fruitless.

The woman's head was bent forwards, and her face, hid in her hands,
rested on her knees.  At intervals she muttered to herself in a hoarse,
moaning voice.  A portion of her scanty clothing had been removed to
cover the child.  What remained on her was composed, partly of skins of
animals, partly of coarse cotton cloth.  In many places this miserable
dress was marked with blood, and her long, flaxen hair bore upon its
dishevelled locks the same ominous and repulsive stain.

The child seemed scarcely four years of age, and showed on his pale,
thin face all the peculiarities of his Gothic origin.  His features
seemed to have been once beautiful, both in expression and form; but a
deep wound, extending the whole length of his cheek, had now deformed
him for ever.  He shivered and trembled in his sleep, and every now and
then mechanically stretched forth his little arms towards the dead cold
branches that were scattered before him.

Suddenly a large stone became detached from the rock in a distant part
of the cavern, and fell noisily to the ground.  At this sound he woke
with a scream--raised himself--endeavoured to advance towards the
woman, and staggered backward against the side of the cave.  A second
wound in the leg had wreaked that destruction on his vigour which the
first had effected on his beauty.  He was a cripple.

At the instant of his awakening the woman had started up.  She now
raised him from the ground, and taking some herbs from her bosom,
applied them to his wounded cheek.  By this action her dress became
discomposed:  it was stiff at the top with coagulated blood, which had
evidently flowed from a cut in her neck.

All her attempts to compose the child were in vain; he moaned and wept
piteously, muttering at intervals his disjointed exclamations of
impatience at the coldness of the place and the agony of his recent
wounds.  Speechless and tearless the wretched woman looked vacantly
down on his face.  There was little difficulty in discerning from that
fixed, distracted gaze the nature of the tie that bound the mourning
woman to the suffering boy.  The expression of rigid and awful despair
that lowered in her fixed, gloomy eyes, the livid paleness that
discoloured her compressed lips, the spasms that shook her firm,
commanding form, mutely expressing in the divine eloquence of human
emotion that between the solitary pair there existed the most intimate
of earth's relationships--the connection of mother and child.

For some time no change occurred in the woman's demeanour.  At last, as
if struck by some sudden suspicion, she rose, and clasping the child in
one arm, displaced with the other the brushwood at the entrance of her
place of refuge, cautiously looking forth on all that the mists left
visible of the western landscape.  After a short survey she drew back
as if reassured by the unbroken solitude of the place, and turning
towards the lake, looked down upon the black waters at her feet.

'Night has succeeded to night,' she muttered gloomily, 'and has brought
no succour to my body, and no hope to my heart!  Mile on mile have I
journeyed, and danger is still behind, and loneliness for ever before.
The shadow of death deepens over the boy; the burden of anguish grows
weightier than I can bear.  For me, friends are murdered, defenders are
distant, possessions are lost.  The God of the Christian priests has
abandoned us to danger and deserted us in woe.  It is for me to end the
struggle for us both.  Our last refuge has been in this place--our
sepulchre shall be here as well!'

With one last look at the cold and comfortless sky, she advanced to the
very edge of the lake's precipitous bank.  Already the child was raised
in her arms, and her body bent to accomplish successfully the fatal
spring, when a sound in the east--faint, distant, and fugitive--caught
her ear.  In an instant her eye brightened, her chest heaved, her cheek
flushed.  She exerted the last relics of her wasted strength to gain a
prominent position upon a ledge of the rocks behind her, and waited in
an agony of expectation for a repetition of that magic sound.


In a moment more she heard it again--for the child, stupefied with
terror at the action that had accompanied her determination to plunge
with him into the lake, now kept silence, and she could listen
undisturbed.  To unpractised ears the sound that so entranced her would
have been scarcely audible.  Even the experienced traveller would have
thought it nothing more than the echo of a fallen stone among the rocks
in the eastward distance.  But to her it was no unimportant sound, for
it gave the welcome signal of deliverance and delight.

As the hour wore on, it came nearer and nearer, tossed about by the
sportive echoes, and now clearly betraying that its origin was, as she
had at first divined, the note of the Gothic trumpet. Soon the distant
music ceased, and was succeeded by another sound, low and rumbling, as
of an earthquake afar off or a rising thunderstorm, and changing, ere
long, to a harsh confused noise, like the rustling of a mighty wind
through whole forests of brushwood.

At this instant the woman lost all command over herself; her former
patience and caution deserted her; reckless of danger, she placed the
child upon the ledge on which she had been standing; and, though
trembling in every limb, succeeded in mounting so much higher on the
crag as to gain a fissure near the top of the rock, which commanded an
uninterrupted view of the vast tracts of uneven ground leading in an
easterly direction to the next range of precipices and ravines.

One after another the long minutes glided on, and, though much was
still audible, nothing was yet to be seen.  At length the shrill sound
of the trumpet again rang through the dull, misty air, and the next
instant the advance guard of an army of Goths emerged from the distant
woods.

Then, after an interval, the multitudes of the main body thronged
through every outlet in the trees, and spread in dusky masses over the
desert ground that lay between the woods and the rocks about the
borders of the lake.  The front ranks halted, as if to communicate with
the crowds of the rearguard and the stragglers among the baggage
waggons, who still poured forth, apparently in interminable hosts, from
the concealment of the distant trees.  The advanced troops, evidently
with the intention of examining the roads, still marched rapidly on,
until they gained the foot of the ascent leading to the crags to which
the woman still clung, and from which, with eager attention, she still
watched their movements.

Placed in a situation of the extremest peril, her strength was her only
preservative against the danger of slipping from her high and narrow
elevation.  Hitherto the moral excitement of expectation had given her
the physical power necessary to maintain her position; but just as the
leaders of the guard arrived at the cavern, her over-wrought energies
suddenly deserted her; her hands relaxed their grasp; she tottered, and
would have sunk backwards to instant destruction, had not the skins
wrapped about her bosom and waist become entangled with a point of one
of the jagged rocks immediately around her.  Fortunately--for she could
utter no cry--the troops halted at this instant to enable their horses
to gain breath.  Two among them at once perceived her position and
detected her nation.  They mounted the rocks; and, while one possessed
himself of the child, the other succeeded in rescuing the mother and
bearing her safely to the ground.

The snorting of horses, the clashing of weapons, the confusion of loud,
rough voices, which now startled the native silence of the solitary
lake, and which would have bewildered and overwhelmed most persons in
the woman's exhausted condition, seemed, on the contrary, to reassure
her feelings and reanimate her powers.  She disengaged herself from her
preserver's support, and taking her child in her arms, advanced towards
a man of gigantic stature, whose rich armour sufficiently announced
that his position in the army was one of command.

'I am Goisvintha,' said she, in a firm, calm voice--'sister to
Hermanric.  I have escaped from the massacre of the hostages of
Aquileia with one child.  Is my brother with the army of the king?'

This declaration produced a marked change in the bystanders.  The looks
of indifference or curiosity which they had at first cast on the
fugitive, changed to the liveliest expression of wonder and respect.
The chieftain whom she had addressed raised the visor of his helmet so
as to uncover his face, answered her question in the affirmative, and
ordered two soldiers to conduct her to the temporary encampment of the
main army in the rear.  As she turned to depart, an old man advanced,
leaning on his long, heavy sword, and accosted her thus--

'I am Withimer, whose daughter was left hostage with the Romans in
Aquileia.  Is she of the slain or of the escaped?'

'Her bones rot under the city walls,' was the answer.  'The Romans made
of her a feast for the dogs.'

No word or tear escaped the old warrior.  He turned in the direction of
Italy; but, as he looked downwards towards the plains, his brow
lowered, and his hands tightened mechanically round the hilt of his
enormous weapon.

The same gloomy question was propounded to Goisvintha by the two men
who guided her to the army that had been asked by their aged comrade.
It received the same terrible answer, which was borne with the same
stern composure, and followed by the same ominous glance in the
direction of Italy, as in the instance of the veteran Withimer.

Leading the horse that carried the exhausted woman with the utmost
care, and yet with wonderful rapidity, down the paths which they had so
recently ascended, the men in a short space of time reached the place
where the army had halted, and displayed to Goisvintha, in all the
majesty of numbers and repose, the vast martial assemblage of the
warriors of the North.

No brightness gleamed from their armour; no banners waved over their
heads; no music sounded among their ranks.  Backed by the dreary woods,
which still disgorged unceasing additions to the warlike multitude
already encamped; surrounded by the desolate crags which showed dim,
wild, and majestic through the darkness of the mist; covered with the
dusky clouds which hovered motionless over the barren mountain tops,
and poured their stormy waters on the uncultivated plains--all that the
appearance of the Goths had of solemnity in itself was in awful harmony
with the cold and mournful aspect that the face of Nature had assumed.
Silent--menacing--dark,--the army looked the fit embodiment of its
leader's tremendous purpose--the subjugation of Rome.

Conducting Goisvintha quickly through the front files of warriors, her
guides, pausing at a spot of ground which shelved upwards at right
angles with the main road from the woods, desired her to dismount; and
pointing to the group that occupied the place, said, 'Yonder is Alaric
the king, and with him is Hermanric thy brother.'

At whatever point of view it could have been regarded, the assemblage
of persons thus indicated to Goisvintha must have arrested inattention
itself.  Near a confused mass of weapons, scattered on the ground,
reclined a group of warriors apparently listening to the low, muttered
conversation of three men of great age, who rose above them, seated on
pieces of rock, and whose long white hair, rough skin dresses, and lean
tottering forms appeared in strong contrast with the iron-clad and
gigantic figures of their auditors beneath.  Above the old men, on the
highroad, was one of Alaric's waggons; and on the heaps of baggage
piled against its clumsy wheels had been chosen resting-place of the
future conqueror of Rome.  The top of the vehicle seemed absolutely
teeming with a living burden.  Perched in every available nook and
corner were women and children of all ages, and weapons and live stock
of all varieties. Now, a child--lively, mischievous,
inquisitive--peered forth over the head of a battering-ram. Now, a
lean, hungry sheep advanced his inquiring nostrils sadly to the open
air, and displayed by the movement the head of a withered old woman
pillowed on his woolly flanks.  Here, appeared a young girl struggling,
half entombed in shields.  There, gasped an emaciated camp-follower,
nearly suffocated in heaps of furs. The whole scene, with its
background of great woods, drenched in a vapour of misty rain, with its
striking contrasts at one point and its solemn harmonies at another,
presented a vast combination of objects that either startled or awed--a
gloomy conjunction of the menacing and the sublime.


Bidding Goisvintha wait near the waggon, one of her conductors
approached and motioned aside a young man standing near the king.  As
the warrior rose to obey the demand, he displayed, with all the
physical advantages of his race, and ease and elasticity of movement
unusual among the men of his nation.  At the instant when he joined the
soldier who had accosted him, his face was partially concealed by an
immense helmet, crowned with a boar's head, the mouth of which, forced
open at death, gaped wide, as if still raging for prey.  But the man
had scarcely stated his errand, when he started violently, removed the
grim appendage of war, and hastened bare-headed to the side of the
waggon where Goisvintha awaited his approach.

The instant he was beheld by the woman, she hastened to meet him;
placed the wounded child in his arms, and greeted him with these
words:--

'Your brother served in the armies of Rome when our people were at
peace with the Empire. Of his household and his possessions this is all
that the Romans have left!'

She ceased, and for an instant the brother and sister regarded each
other in touching and expressive silence.  Though, in addition to the
general characteristics of country, the countenances of the two
naturally bore the more particular evidences of community of blood, all
resemblance between them at this instant--so wonderful is the power of
expression over feature--had utterly vanished.  The face and manner of
the young man (he had numbered only twenty years) expressed a deep
sorrow, manly in its stern tranquility, sincere in its perfect
innocence of display.  As he looked on the child, his blue
eyes--bright, piercing, and lively--softened like a woman's; his lips,
hardly hidden by his short beard, closed and quivered; and his chest
heaved under the armour that lay upon its noble proportions.  There was
in this simple, speechless, tearless melancholy--this exquisite
consideration of triumphant strength for suffering weakness--something
almost sublime; opposed as it was to the emotions of malignity and
despair that appeared in Goisvintha's features.  The ferocity that
gleamed from her dilated, glaring eyes, the sinister markings that
appeared round her pale and parted lips, the swelling of the large
veins, drawn to their extremest point of tension on her lofty forehead,
so distorted her countenance, that the brother and sister, as they
stood together, seemed in expression to have changed sexes for the
moment.  From the warrior came pity for the sufferer; from the mother,
indignation for the offence.

Arousing himself from his melancholy contemplation of the child, and as
yet answering not a word to Goisvintha, Hermanric mounted the waggon,
and placing the last of his sister's offspring in the arms of a
decrepid old woman, who sat brooding over some bundles of herbs spread
out upon her lap, addressed her thus:--

'These wounds are from the Romans.  Revive the child, and you shall be
rewarded from the spoils of Rome.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' chuckled the crone; 'Hermanric is an illustrious warrior,
and shall be obeyed. Hermanric is great, for his arm can slay; but
Brunechild is greater than he, for her cunning can cure!'

As if anxious to verify this boast before the warrior's eyes, the old
woman immediately began the preparation of the necessary dressings from
her store of herbs; but Hermanric waited not to be a witness of her
skill.  With one final look at the pale, exhausted child, he slowly
descended from the waggon, and approaching Goisvintha, drew her towards
a sheltered position near the ponderous vehicle.  Here he seated
himself by her side, prepared to listen with the deepest attention to
her recital of the scenes of terror and suffering through which she had
so recently passed.

'You,' she began, 'born while our nation was at peace; transported from
the field of war to those distant provinces where tranquility still
prevailed; preserved throughout your childhood from the chances of
battle; advanced to the army in your youth, only when its toils are
past and its triumphs are already at hand--you alone have escaped the
miseries of our people, to partake in the glory of their approaching
revenge.

'Hardly had a year passed since you had been removed from the
settlements of the Goths when I wedded Priulf.  The race of triflers to
whom he was then allied, spite of their Roman haughtiness, deferred to
him in their councils, and confessed among their legions that he was
brave.  I saw myself with joy the wife of a warrior of renown; I
believed, in my pride, that I was destined to be the mother of a race
of heroes; when suddenly there came news to us that the Emperor
Theodosius was dead.  Then followed anarchy among the people of the
soil, and outrages on the liberties of their allies, the Goths.  Ere
long the call to arms arose among our nation.  Soon our waggons of war
were rolled across the frozen Danube; our soldiers quitted the Roman
camp; our husbandmen took their weapons from their cottage walls; we
that were women prepared with our children to follow our husbands to
the field; and Alaric, the king, came forth as the leader of our hosts.

'We marched upon the territories of the Greeks.  But how shall I tell
you of the events of those years of war that followed our invasion; of
the glory of our victories; of the hardships of our defences; of the
miseries of our retreats; of the hunger that we vanquished; of the
diseases that we endured; of the shameful peace that was finally
ratified, against the wishes of our king!  How shall I tell of all
this, when my thoughts are on the massacre from which I have just
escaped--when these first evils, though once remembered in anguish,
are, even now, forgotten in the superior horrors that ensued!

'The truce was made.  Alaric departed with the remnant of his army, and
encamped at AEmona, on the confines of that land which he had already
invaded, and which he is now prepared to conquer.  Between our king and
Stilicho, the general of the Romans, passed many messages, for the
leaders disputed on the terms of the peace that should be finally
ordained. Meanwhile, as an earnest of the Gothic faith, bands of our
warriors, and among them Priulf, were despatched into Italy to be
allies once more of the legions of Rome, and with them they took their
wives and their children, to be detained as hostages in the cities
throughout the land.

'I and my children were conducted to Aquileia.  In a dwelling within
the city we were lodged with our possessions.  It was night when I took
leave of Priulf, my husband, at the gates.  I watched him as he
departed with the army, and, when the darkness hid him from my eyes, I
re-entered the town; from which I am the only woman of our nation who
has escaped alive.'

As she pronounced these last words, Goisvintha's manner, which had
hitherto been calm and collected, began to change:  she paused abruptly
in her narrative, her head sunk upon her breast, her frame quivered as
if convulsed with violent agony.  When she turned towards Hermanric
after an interval of silence to address him again, the same malignant
expression lowered over her countenance that had appeared on it when
she presented to him her wounded child; her voice became broken,
hoarse, and unfeminine; and pressing closely to the young man's side,
she laid her trembling fingers on his arm, as if to bespeak his most
undivided attention.

'Time grew on,' she continued, 'and still there came no tidings that
the peace was finally secured.  We, that were hostages, lived separate
from the people of the town; for we felt enmity towards each other even
then. In my captivity there was no employment for me but patience--no
pursuit but hope.  Alone with my children, I was wont to look forth
over the sea towards the camp of our king; but day succeeded to day,
and his warriors appeared not on the plains; nor did Priulf return with
the legions to encamp before the gates of the town.  So I mourned in my
loneliness; for my heart yearned towards the homes of my people; I
longed once more to look upon my husband's face, and to behold again
the ranks of our warriors, and the majesty of their battle array.


'But already, when the great day of despair was quickly drawing near, a
bitter outrage was preparing for me alone.  The men who had hitherto
watched us were changed, and of the number of the new guards was one
who cast on me the eyes of lust.  Night after night he poured his
entreaties into my unwilling ear; for, in his vanity and shamelessness,
he believed that I, who was Gothic and the wife of a Goth, might be won
by him whose parentage was but Roman!  Soon from prayers he rose to
threats; and one night, appearing before me with smiles, he cried out
that Stilicho, whose desire was to make peace with the Goths, had
suffered, for his devotion to our people, the penalty of death; that a
time of ruin was approaching for us all, and that he alone--whom I
despised--could preserve me from the anger of Rome.  As he ceased he
approached me; but I, who had been in many battle-fields, felt no dread
at the prospect of war, and I spurned him with laughter from my
presence.

'Then, for a few nights more, my enemy approached me not again.  Until
one evening, as I sat on the terrace before the house, with the child
that you have beheld, a helmet-crest suddenly fell at my feet, and a
voice cried to me from the garden beneath:  'Priulf thy husband has
been slain in a quarrel by the soldiers of Rome!  Already the legions
with whom he served are on their way to the town; for a massacre of the
hostages is ordained.  Speak but the word, and I can save thee even
yet!'

'I looked on the crest.  It was bloody, and it was his!  For an instant
my heart writhed within me as I thought on my warrior whom I had loved!
Then, as I heard the messenger of death retire, cursing, from his
lurking-place in the garden, I recollected that now my children had
none but their mother to defend them, and that peril was preparing for
them from the enemies of their race.  Besides the little one in my
arms, I had two that were sleeping in the house.  As I looked round,
bewildered and in despair, to see if a chance were left us to escape,
there rang through the evening stillness the sound of a trumpet, and
the tramp of armed men was audible in the street beneath.  Then, from
all quarters of the town rose, as one sudden sound, the shrieks of
women and the yells of men.  Already, as I rushed towards my children's
beds, the fiends of Rome had mounted the stairs, and waved in bloody
triumph their reeking swords!  I gained the steps; and, as I looked up,
they flung down at me the body of my youngest child.  O Hermanric!
Hermanric! it was the most beautiful and the most beloved!  What the
priests say that God should be to us, that, the fairest one of my
offspring, was to me!  As I saw it mutilated and dead--I, who but an
hour before had hushed it on my bosom to rest!--my courage forsook me,
and when the murderers advanced on me I staggered and fell.  I felt the
sword-point enter my neck; I saw the dagger gleam over the child in my
arms; I heard the death-shriek of the last victim above; and then my
senses failed me, and I could listen and move no more!

'Long must I have lain motionless at the foot of those fatal stairs;
for when I awoke from my trance the noises in the city were hushed, and
from her place in the firmament the moon shone softly into the deserted
house.  I listened, to be certain that I was alone with my murdered
children.  No sound was in the dwelling; the assassins had departed,
believing that their labour of blood was ended when I fell beneath
their swords; and I was able to crawl forth in security, and to look my
last upon my offspring that the Romans had slain.  The child that I
held to my breast still breathed.  I stanched with some fragments of my
garment the wounds that he had received, and laying him gently by the
stairs--in the moonlight, so that I might see him when he moved--I
groped in the shadow of the wall for my first murdered and my last
born; for that youngest and fairest one of my offspring whom they had
slaughtered before my eyes!  When I touched the corpse, it was wet with
blood; I felt its face, and it was cold beneath my hands; I raised its
body in my arms, and its limbs already were rigid in death!  Then I
thought of the eldest child, who lay dead in the chamber above.  But my
strength was failing me fast.  I had an infant who might yet be
preserved; and I knew that if morning dawned on me in the house, all
chances of escape were lost for ever.  So, though my heart was cold
within me at leaving my child's corpse to the mercy of the Romans, I
took up the dead and the wounded one in my arms, and went forth into
the garden, and thence towards the seaward quarter of the town.


'I passed through the forsaken streets.  Sometimes I stumbled against
the body of a child--sometimes the moonlight showed me the death-pale
face of some woman of my nation whom I had loved, stretched upward to
the sky; but I still advanced until I gained the wall of the town, and
heard on the other side the waters of the river running onward to the
Port of Aquileia and the sea.

'I looked around.  The gates I knew were guarded and closed.  By the
wall was the only prospect of escape; but its top was high and its
sides were smooth when I felt them with my hands.  Despairing and
wearied, I laid my burdens down where they were hidden by the shade,
and walked forward a few paces, for to remain still was a torment that
I could not endure.  At a short distance I saw a soldier sleeping
against the wall of a house.  By his side was a ladder placed against
the window.  As I looked up I beheld the head of a corpse resting on
its top. The victim must have been lately slain, for her blood still
dripped slowly down into an empty wine-pot that stood within the
soldier's reach.  When I saw the ladder, hope revived within me. I
removed it to the wall--I mounted, and laid my dead child on the great
stones at its top--I returned, and placed my wounded boy by the corpse.
Slowly, and with many efforts, I dragged the ladder upwards, until from
its own weight one end fell to the ground on the other side.  As I had
risen so I descended.  In the sand of the river-bank I scraped a hole,
and buried there the corpse of the infant; for I could carry the weight
of two no longer.  Then with my wounded child I reached some caverns
that lay onward near the seashore.  There throughout the next day I lay
hidden--alone with my sufferings of body and my affliction of
heart--until the night came on, when I set forth on my journey to the
mountains; for I knew that at AEmona, in the camp of the warriors of my
people, lay the only refuge that was left to me on earth.  Feebly and
slowly, hiding by day and travelling by night, I kept on my way until I
gained that lake among the rocks, where the guards of the army came
forward and rescued me from death.'

She ceased.  Throughout the latter portion of her narrative her
demeanour had been calm and sad; and as she dwelt, with the painful
industry of grief, over each minute circumstance connected with the
bereavements she had sustained, her voice softened to those accents of
quiet mournfulness, which make impressive the most simple words, and
render musical the most unsteady tones.  It seemed as if those tenderer
and kinder emotions, which the attractions of her offspring had once
generated in her character, had at the bidding of memory become
revivified in her manner while she lingered over the recital of their
deaths.  For a brief space of time she looked fixedly and anxiously
upon the countenance of Hermanric, which was half averted from her, and
expressed a fierce and revengeful gloom that sat unnaturally on it
noble lineaments.  Then turning from him, she buried her face in her
hands, and made no effort more to attract him to attention or incite
him to reply.

This solemn silence kept by the bereaved woman and the brooding man had
lasted but a few minutes, when a harsh, trembling voice was heard from
the top of the waggon, calling at intervals, 'Hermanric!  Hermanric!'

At first the young man remained unmoved by those discordant and
repulsive tones.  They repeated his name, however, so often and so
perseveringly, that he noticed them ere long; and rising suddenly, as
if impatient of the interruption, advanced towards the side of the
waggon from which the mysterious summons appeared to come.

As he looked up towards the vehicle the voice ceased, and he saw that
the old woman to whom he had confided the child was the person who had
called him so hurriedly but a few moments before.  Her tottering body,
clothed in bear-skins, was bent forward over a large triangular shield
of polished brass, on which she leant her lank, shrivelled arms.  Her
head shook with a tremulous, palsied action; a leer, half smile, half
grimace, distended her withered lips and lightened her sunken eyes.
Sinister, cringing, repulsive; her face livid with the reflection from
the weapon that was her support, and her figure scarcely human in the
rugged garments that encompassed its gaunt proportions, she seemed a
deformity set up by evil spirits to mock the majesty of the human
form--an embodied satire on all that is most deplorable in infirmity
and most disgusting in age.


The instant she discerned Hermanric, she stretched her body out still
farther over the shield; and pointing to the interior of the waggon,
muttered softly that one fearful and expressive word--dead!

Without waiting for any further explanation, the young Goth mounted the
vehicle, and gaining the old woman's side, saw stretched on her
collection of herbs--beautiful in the sublime and melancholy stillness
of death--the corpse of Goisvintha's last child.

'Is Hermanric wroth?' whined the hag, quailing before the steady,
rebuking glance of the young man.  'When I said that Brunechild was
greater than Hermanric, I lied.  It is Hermanric that is most powerful!
See, the dressings were placed on the wounds; and, though the child has
died, shall not the treasures that were promised me be mine?  I have
done what I could, but my cunning begins to desert me, for I am
old--old--old!  I have seen my generation pass away! Aha!  I am old,
Hermanric, I am old!'

When the young warrior looked on the child, he saw that the hag had
spoken truth, and that the victim had died from no fault of hers.  Pale
and serene, the countenance of the boy showed how tranquil had been his
death.  The dressings had been skilfully composed and carefully applied
to his wounds, but suffering and privation had annihilated the
feebleness of human resistance in their march toward the last dread
goal, and the treachery of Imperial Rome had once more triumphed as was
its wont, and triumphed over a child!

As Hermanric descended with the corpse Goisvintha was the first object
that met his eyes when he alighted on the ground.  The mother received
from him the lifeless burden without an exclamation or a tear.  That
emanation from her former and kinder self which had been produced by
the closing recital of her sufferings was henceforth, at the signal of
her last child's death, extinguished in her for ever!

'His wounds had crippled him,' said the young man gloomily.  'He could
never have fought with the warriors!  Our ancestors slew themselves
when they were no longer vigorous for the fight.  It is better that he
has died!'

'Vengeance!' gasped Goisvintha, pressing up closely to his side.  'We
will have vengeance for the massacre of Aquileia!  When blood is
streaming in the palaces of Rome, remember my murdered children, and
hasten not to sheathe thy sword!'

At this instant, as if to rouse still further the fierce determination
that appeared already in the face of the young Goth, the voice of
Alaric was heard commanding the army to advance. Hermanric started, and
drew the panting woman after him to the resting-place of the king.
There, armed at all points, and rising, by his superior stature, high
above the throng around him, stood the dreaded captain of the Gothic
hosts.  His helmet was raised so as to display his clear blue eyes
gleaming over the multitude around him; he pointed with his sword in
the direction of Italy; and as rank by rank the men started to their
arms, and prepared exultingly for the march, his lips parted with a
smile of triumph, and ere he moved to accompany them he spoke thus:--

'Warriors of the Goths, our halt is a short one among the mountains;
but let not the weary repine, for the glorious resting-place that
awaits our labours is the city of Rome!  The curse of Odin, when in the
infancy of our nation he retired before the myriads of the Empire, it
is our privilege to fulfil!  That future destruction which he denounced
against Rome, it is ours to effect!  Remember your hostages that the
Romans have slain; your possessions that the Romans have seized; your
trust that the Romans have betrayed!  Remember that I, your king, have
within me that supernatural impulse which never deceives, and which
calls to me in a voice of encouragement--Advance, and the Empire is
thine!  Assemble the warriors, and the City of the World shall be
delivered to the conquering Goths!  Let us onward without delay! Our
prey awaits us!  Our triumph is near!  Our vengeance is at hand!'

He paused; and at that moment the trumpet gave signal for the march.


'Up! up!' cried Hermanric, seizing Goisvintha by the arm, and pointing
to the waggon which had already begun to move; 'make ready for the
journey!  I will charge myself with the burial of the child.  Yet a few
days and our encampment may be before Aquileia.  Be patient, and I will
avenge thee in the palaces of Rome!'

The mighty mass moved.  The multitude stretched forth over the barren
ground; and even now the warriors in front of the army might be seen by
those in the rear mounting the last range of passes that lay between
the plains of Italy and the Goths.



CHAPTER 2.

THE COURT.

The traveller who so far departs from the ordinary track of tourists in
modern Italy as to visit the city of Ravenna, remembers with
astonishment, as he treads its silent and melancholy streets, and
beholds vineyards and marshes spread over an extent of four miles
between the Adriatic and the town, that this place, now half deserted,
was once the most populous of Roman fortresses; and that where fields
and woods now present themselves to his eyes the fleets of the Empire
once rode securely at anchor, and the merchant of Rome disembarked his
precious cargoes at his warehouse door.

As the power of Rome declined, the Adriatic, by a strange fatality,
began to desert the fortress whose defence it had hitherto secured.
Coeval with the gradual degeneracy of the people was the gradual
withdrawal of the ocean from the city walls; until, at the beginning of
the sixth century, a grove of pines already appeared where the port of
Augustus once existed.

At the period of our story--though the sea had even then receded
perceptibly--the ditches round the walls were yet filled, and the
canals still ran through the city in much the same manner as they
intersect Venice at the present time.

On the morning that we are about to describe, the autumn had advanced
some days since the events mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Although the sun was now high in the eastern horizon, the restlessness
produced by the heat emboldened a few idlers of Ravenna to brave the
sultriness of the atmosphere, in the vain hope of being greeted by a
breeze from the Adriatic as they mounted the seaward ramparts of the
town.  On attaining their destined elevation, these sanguine citizens
turned their faces with fruitless and despairing industry towards every
point of the compass, but no breath of air came to reward their
perseverance. Nothing could be more thoroughly suggestive of the
undiminished universality of the heat than the view, in every
direction, from the position they then occupied.  The stone houses of
the city behind them glowed with a vivid brightness overpowering to the
strongest eyes. The light curtains hung motionless over the lonely
windows.  No shadows varied the brilliant monotony of the walls, or
softened the lively glitter on the waters of the fountains beneath. Not
a ripple stirred the surface of the broad channel, that now replaced
the ancient harbour. Not a breath of wind unfolded the scorching sails
of the deserted vessels at the quay.  Over the marshes in the distance
hung a hot, quivering mist; and in the vineyards, near the town, not a
leaf waved upon its slender stem.  On the seaward side lay, vast and
level, the prospect of the burning sand; and beyond it the main
ocean--waveless, torpid, and suffused in a flood of fierce
brightness--stretched out to the cloudless horizon that closed the
sunbright view.


Within the town, in those streets where the tall houses cast a deep
shadow on the flagstones of the road, the figures of a few slaves might
here and there be seen sleeping against the walls, or gossiping
languidly on the faults of their respective lords.  Sometimes an old
beggar might be observed hunting on the well-stocked preserves of his
own body the lively vermin of the South.  Sometimes a restless child
crawled from a doorstep to paddle in the stagnant waters of a kennel;
but, with the exception of these doubtful evidences of human industry,
the prevailing characteristic of the few groups of the lowest orders of
the people which appeared in the streets was the most listless and
utter indolence.  All that gave splendour to the city at other hours of
the day was at this period hidden from the eye.  The elegant courtiers
reclined in their lofty chambers; the guards on duty ensconced
themselves in angles of walls and recesses of porticoes; the graceful
ladies slumbered on perfumed couches in darkened rooms; the gilded
chariots were shut into the carriage-houses; the prancing horses were
confined in the stables; and even the wares in the market-places were
removed from exposure to the sun.  It was clear that the luxurious
inhabitants of Ravenna recognised no duties of sufficient importance,
and no pleasures of sufficient attraction, to necessitate the exposure
of their susceptible bodies to the noontide heat.

To give the reader some idea of the manner in which the indolent
patricians of the Court loitered away their noon, and to satisfy, at
the same time, the exigencies attaching to the conduct of this story,
it is requisite to quit the lounging-places of the plebeians in the
streets for the couches of the nobles in the Emperor's palace.

Passing through the massive entrance gates, crossing the vast hall of
the Imperial abode, with its statues, its marbles, and its guards in
attendance, and thence ascending the noble staircase, the first object
that might on this occasion have attracted the observer, when he gained
the approaches to the private apartments, was a door at an extremity of
the corridor, richly carved and standing half open.  At this spot were
grouped some fifteen or twenty individuals, who conversed by signs, and
maintained in all their movements the most decorous and complete
silence.  Sometimes one of the party stole on tiptoe to the door, and
looked cautiously through, returning almost instantaneously, and
expressing to his next neighbour, by various grimaces, his immense
interest in the sight he had just beheld.  Occasionally there came from
this mysterious chamber sounds resembling the cackling of poultry,
varied now and then by a noise like the falling of a shower of small,
light substances upon a hard floor.  Whenever these sounds were
audible, the members of the party outside the door looked round upon
each other and smiled--some sarcastically, some triumphantly.  A few
among these patient expectants grasped rolls of vellum in their hands;
the rest held nosegays of rare flowers, or supported in their arms
small statues and pictures in mosaic.  Of their number, some were
painters and poets, some orators and philosophers, and some statuaries
and musicians. Among such a motley assemblage of professions,
remarkable in all ages of the world for fostering in their votaries the
vice of irritability, it may seem strange that so quiet and orderly a
behaviour should exist as that just described.  But it is to be
observed that in attending at the palace, these men of genius made sure
at least of outward unanimity among their ranks, by coming equally
prepared with one accomplishment, and equally animated by one hope:
they waited to employ a common agent--flattery; to attain a common
end--gain.

The chamber thus sacred, even from the intrusion of intellectual
inspiration, although richly ornamented, was of no remarkable extent.
At other times the eye might have wandered with delight on the
exquisite plants and flowers, scattered profusely over a noble terrace,
to which a second door in the apartment conducted; but, at the present
moment, the employment of the occupant of the room was of so
extraordinary a nature, that the most attentive observation must have
missed all the inferior characteristics of the place, to settle
immediately on its inhabitant alone.


In the midst of a large flock of poultry, which seemed strangely
misplaced on a floor of marble and under a gilded roof, stood a pale,
thin, debilitated youth, magnificently clothed, and holding in his hand
a silver vase filled with grain, which he ever and anon distributed to
the cackling multitude at his feet.  Nothing could be more pitiably
effeminate than the appearance of this young man.  His eyes were heavy
and vacant, his forehead low and retiring, his cheeks sallow, and his
form curved as if with a premature old age.  An unmeaning smile dilated
his thin, colourless lips; and as he looked down on his strange
favourites, he occasionally whispered to them a few broken expressions
of endearment, almost infantine in their simplicity.  His whole soul
seemed to be engrossed by the labour of distributing his grain, and he
followed the different movements of the poultry with an earnestness of
attention which seemed almost idiotic in its ridiculous intensity.  If
it be asked, why a person so contemptible as this solitary youth has
been introduced with so much care, and described with so much
minuteness, it must be answered, that, though destined to form no
important figure in this work, he played, from his position, a
remarkable part in the great drama on which it is founded--for this
feeder of chickens was no less a person than Honorius, Emperor of Rome.

It is the very imbecility of this man, at such a time as that we now
write on, which invests his character with a fearful interest in the
eye of posterity.  In himself the impersonation of the meanest vices
inherent in the vicious civilisation of his period, to his feebleness
was accorded the terrible responsibility of liberating the
long-prisoned storm whose elements we have attempted to describe in the
preceding chapter.  With just intellect enough to be capricious, and
just determination enough to be mischievous, he was an instrument
fitted for the uses of every ambitious villain who could succeed in
gaining his ear.  To flatter his puerile tyranny, the infatuated
intriguers of the Court rewarded the heroic Stilicho for the rescue of
his country with the penalty of death, and defrauded Alaric of the
moderate concessions that they had solemnly pledged themselves to
perform.  To gratify his vanity, he was paraded in triumph through the
streets of Rome for a victory that others had gained.  To pander to his
arrogance, by an exhibition of the vilest privilege of that power which
had been intrusted to him for good, the massacre of the helpless
hostages, confided by Gothic honour to Roman treachery, was
unhesitatingly ordained; and, finally, to soothe the turbulence of his
unmanly fears, the last act of his unscrupulous councillors, ere the
Empire fell, was to authorise his abandoning his people in the hour of
peril, careless who suffered in defenceless Rome, while he was secure
in fortified Ravenna.  Such was the man under whom the mightiest of the
world's structures was doomed to totter to its fall!  Such was the
figure destined to close a scene which Time and Glory had united to
hallow and adorn!  Raised and supported by a superhuman daring, that
invested the nauseous horrors of incessant bloodshed with a rude and
appalling magnificence, the mistress of nations was now fated to sink
by the most ignoble of defeats, under the most abject of tremblers.
For this had the rough old kingdom shaken off its enemies by swarms
from its vigorous arms!  For this had the doubtful virtues of the
Republic, and the perilous magnificence of the Empire, perplexed and
astonished the world! In such a conclusion as Honorius ended the
dignified barbarities of a Brutus, the polished splendours of an
Augustus, the unearthly atrocities of a Nero, and the immortal virtues
of a Trajan!  Vainly, through the toiling ages, over the ruin of her
noblest hearts, and the prostitution of her grandest intellects, had
Rome striven pitilessly onward, grasping at the shadow--Glory; the fiat
had now gone forth that doomed her to possess herself finally of the
substance--Shame!

When the imperial trifler had exhausted his store of grain, and
satisfied the cravings of his voracious favourites, he was relieved of
his silver vase by two attendants.  The flock of poultry was then
ushered out at one door, while the flock of geniuses was ushered in at
the other.

Leaving the emperor to cast his languid eyes over objects of art for
which he had no admiration, and to open his unwilling ears to
panegyrical orations for which he had no comprehension, we proceed to
introduce the reader to an apartment on the opposite side of the
palace, in which are congregated all the beauty and elegance of his
Court.


Imagine a room two hundred feet long and proportionably broad.  Its
floor is mosaic, wrought into the loveliest patterns.  Its sides are
decorated with immense pillars of variegated marble, the recesses
formed by which are occupied by statues, all arranged in exquisite
variety of attitude, so as to appear to be offering to whoever
approaches them the rare flowers which it is the duty of the attendants
to place in their hands.  The ceiling is painted in fresco, in patterns
and colours harmonising with those on the mosaic floor.  The cornices
are of silver, and decorated with mottoes from the amatory poets of the
day, the letters of which are formed by precious stones.  In the middle
of the room is a fountain throwing up streams of perfumed water, and
surrounded by golden aviaries containing birds of all sizes and
nations.  Three large windows, placed at the eastern extremity of the
apartment, look out upon the Adriatic, but are covered at this hour,
from the outside, with silk curtains of a delicate green shade, which
cast a soft, luxurious light over every object, but are so thinly woven
and so skilfully arranged that the slightest breath of air which moves
without finds its way immediately to the languid occupants of the Court
waiting-room.  The number of these individuals amounts to about fifty
or sixty persons.  By far the larger half of the assemblage are women.
Their black hair tastefully braided into various forms, and adorned
with flowers or precious stones, contrasts elegantly with the brilliant
whiteness of the robes in which they are for the most part clothed.
Some of them are occupied in listlessly watching the movements of the
birds in the aviaries; others hold a languid and whispered conversation
with such of the courtiers as happen to be placed near them.  The men
exhibit in their dresses a greater variety of colour, and in their
occupations a greater fertility of resource, than the women.  Their
garments, of the lightest rose, violet, or yellow tints, diversify
fantastically the monotonous white robes of their gentle companions.
Of their employments, the most conspicuous are playing on the lute,
gaming with dice, teasing their lapdogs, and insulting their parasites.
Whatever their occupation, it is performed with little attention, and
less enthusiasm.  Some recline on their couches with closed eyes, as if
the heat made the labour of using their organs of vision too much for
them; others, in the midst of a conversation, suddenly leave a sentence
unfinished, apparently incapacitated by lassitude from giving
expression to the simplest ideas.  Every sight in the apartment that
attracts the eye, every sound that gains the ear, expresses a luxurious
repose. No brilliant light mars the pervading softness of the
atmosphere; no violent colour materialises the light, ethereal hues of
the dresses; no sudden noises interrupt the fitful and plaintive notes
of the lute, jar with the soft twittering of the birds in the aviaries,
or drown the still, regular melody of the ladies' voices.  All objects,
animate and inanimate, are in harmony with each other.  It is a scene
of spiritualised indolence--a picture of dreamy beatitude in the inmost
sanctuary of unruffled repose.

Amid this assemblage of beauty and nobility, the members of which were
rather to be generally noticed than particularly observed, there was,
however, one individual who, both by the solitary occupation he had
chosen and his accidental position in the room, was personally
remarkable among the listless patricians around him.

His couch was placed nearer the window than that of any other occupant
of the chamber. Some of his indolent neighbours--especially those of
the gentler sex--occasionally regarded him with mingled looks of
admiration and curiosity; but no one approached him, or attempted to
engage him in conversation.  A piece of vellum lay by his side, on
which, from time to time, he traced a few words, and then resumed his
reclining position, apparently absorbed in reflection, and utterly
regardless of all the occupants, male and female, of the imperial
apartment.  Judging from his general appearance, he could scarcely be
twenty-five years of age.  The conformation of the upper part of his
face was thoroughly intellectual--the forehead high, broad, and
upright; the eyes clear, penetrating, and thoughtful;--but the lower
part was, on the other hand, undeniably sensual.  The lips, full and
thick, formed a disagreeable contrast to the delicate chiselling of the
straight Grecian nose; while the fleshiness of the chin, and the jovial
redundancy of the cheeks, were, in their turn, utterly at variance with
the character of the pale, noble forehead, and the expression of the
quick, intelligent eyes.  In stature he was barely of the middle size;
but every part of his body was so perfectly proportioned that he
appeared, in any position, taller than he really was.  The upper part
of his dress, thrown open from the heat, partly disclosed the fine
statuesque formation of his neck and chest. His ears, hands, and feet
were of that smallness and delicacy which is held to denote the
aristocracy of birth; and there was in his manner that indescribable
combination of unobtrusive dignity and unaffected elegance, which in
all ages and countries, and through all changes of manners and customs,
has rendered the demeanour of its few favoured possessors the
instantaneous interpreter of their social rank.


While the patrician was still occupied over his vellum, the following
conversation took place in whispers between two ladies placed near the
situation he occupied.

'Tell me, Camilla,' said the eldest and stateliest of the two, 'who is
the courtier so occupied in composition?  I have endeavoured, I know
not how often, to catch his eye; but the man will look at nothing but
his roll of vellum or the corners of the room.'

'What, are you so great a stranger in Italy as not to know him!'
replied the other, a lively girl of small delicate form, who fidgeted
with persevering restlessness on her couch, and seemed incapable of
giving an instant's steady attention to any of the objects around her.
'By all the saints, martyrs, and relics of my uncle the bishop!'

'Hush!  You should not swear!'

'Not swear!  Why, I am making a new collection of oaths, intended
solely for ladies' use!  I intend to set the fashion of swearing by
them myself!'

'But answer my question, I beseech you!  Will you never learn to talk
on one subject at a time?'

'Your question--ah, your question!  It was about the Goths?'

'No, no!  It was about that man who is incessantly writing, and will
look at nobody.  He is almost as provoking as Camilla herself!'

'Don't frown so!  That man, as you call him, is the senator Vetranio.'

The lady started.  It was evident that Vetranio had a reputation.

'Yes!' continued the lively Camilla, 'that is the accomplished
Vetranio; but he will be no favourite of yours, for he sometimes
swears--swears by the ancient gods, too, which is forbidden!'

'He is handsome.'

'Handsome! he is beautiful!  Not a woman in Italy but is languishing
for him!'

'I have heard that he is clever.'

'Who has not?  He is the author of some of the most celebrated sauces
of the age.  Cooks of all nations worship him as an oracle.  Then he
writes poetry, and composes music, and paints pictures!  And as for
philosophy--he talks it better than my uncle the bishop!'

'Is he rich?'

'Ah! my uncle the bishop!--I must tell you how I helped Vetranio to
make a satire on him! When I was staying with him at Rome, I used often
to see a woman in a veil taken across the garden to his study; so, to
perplex him, I asked him who she was.  And he frowned and stammered,
and said at first that I was disrespectful; but he told me afterwards
that she was an Arian whom he was labouring to convert.  So I thought I
should like to see how this conversion went on, and I hid myself behind
a bookcase.  But it is a profound secret; I tell it you in confidence.'

'I don't care to know it.  Tell me about Vetranio.'

'How ill-natured you are!  Oh! I shall never forget how we laughed when
I told Vetranio what I had seen.  He took up his writing materials, and
made the satire immediately.  The next day all Rome heard of it.  My
uncle was speechless with rage!  I believe he suspected me; but he gave
up converting the Arian lady, and--'

'I ask you again--Is Vetranio rich?'


'Half Sicily is his.  He has immense estates in Africa, olive-grounds
in Syria, and corn-fields in Gaul.  I was present at an entertainment
he gave at his villa in Sicily.  He fitted up one of his vessels from
the descriptions of the furnishing of Cleopatra's galley, and made his
slaves swim after us as attendant Tritons.  Oh! it was magnificent!'

'I should like to know him.'

'You should see his cats!  He has a perfect legion of them at his
villa. Twelve slaves are employed to attend on them.  He is mad about
cats, and declares that the old Egyptians were right to worship them.
He told me yesterday, that when his largest cat is dead he will
canonise her, in spite of the Christians!  And then he is so kind to
his slaves!  They are never whipped or punished, except when they
neglect or disfigure themselves; for Vetranio will allow nothing that
is ugly or dirty to come near him.  You must visit his banqueting-hall
in Rome.  It is perfection!'

'But why is he here?'

'He has come to Ravenna, charged with some secret message from the
Senate, and has presented a rare breed of chickens to that foolish--'

'Hush! you may be overheard!'

'Well!--to that wise emperor of ours!  Ah! the palace has been so
pleasant since he has been here!'

At this instant the above dialogue--from the frivolity of which the
universally-learned readers of modern times will, we fear, recoil with
contempt--was interrupted by a movement on the part of its hero which
showed that his occupation was at an end.  With the elaborate
deliberation of a man who disdains to exhibit himself as liable to be
hurried by any mortal affair, Vetranio slowly folded up the vellum he
had now filled with writing, and depositing it in his bosom, made a
sign to a slave who happened to be then passing near him with a dish of
fruit.

Having received his message, the slave retired to the entrance of the
apartment, and beckoning to a man who stood outside the door, motioned
him to approach Vetranio's couch.

This individual immediately hurried across the room to the window where
the elegant Roman awaited him.  Not the slightest description of him is
needed; for he belonged to a class with which moderns are as well
acquainted as ancients--a class which has survived all changes of
nations and manners--a class which came in with the first rich man in
the world, and will only go out with the last.  In a word, he was a
parasite.

He enjoyed, however, one great superiority over his modern successors:
in his day flattery was a profession--in ours it has sunk to a pursuit.

'I shall leave Ravenna this evening,' said Vetranio.

The parasite made three low bows and smiled ecstatically.

'You will order my travelling equipage to be at the palace gates an
hour before sunset.'

The parasite declared he should never forget the honour of the
commission, and left the room.

The sprightly Camilla, who had overheard Vetranio's command, jumped off
her couch, as soon as the parasite's back was turned, and running up to
the senator, began to reproach him for the determination he had just
formed.

'Have you no compunction at leaving me to the dulness of this horrible
palace, to satisfy your idle fancy for going to Rome,' said she,
pouting her pretty lip, and playing with a lock of the dark brown hair
that clustered over Vetranio's brow.


'Has the senator Vetranio so little regard for his friends as to leave
them to the mercy of the Goths?' said another lady, advancing with a
winning smile to Camilla's side.

'Ah, those Goths!' exclaimed Vetranio, turning to the last speaker.
'Tell me, Julia, is it not reported that the barbarians are really
marching into Italy?'

'Everybody has heard of it.  The emperor is so discomposed by the
rumour, that he has forbidden the very name of the Goths to be
mentioned in his presence again.'

'For my part,' continued Vetranio, drawing Camilla towards him, and
playfully tapping her little dimpled hand, 'I am in anxious expectation
of the Goths, for I have designed a statue of Minerva, for which I can
find no model so fit as a woman of that troublesome nation.  I am
informed upon good authority, that their limbs are colossal, and their
sense of propriety most obediently pliable under the discipline of the
purse.'

'If the Goths supply you with a model for anything,' said a courtier
who had joined the group while Vetranio was speaking, 'it will be with
a representation of the burning of your palace at Rome, which they will
enable you to paint from the inexhaustible reservoir of your own
wounds.'

The individual who uttered this last observation was remarkable among
the brilliant circle around him by his excessive ugliness.  Urged by
his personal disadvantages, and the loss of all his property at the
gaming-table, he had latterly personated a character, the
accomplishments attached to which rescued him, by their disagreeable
originality in that frivolous age, from oblivion or contempt.  He was a
Cynic philosopher.

His remark, however, produced no other effect on his hearers' serenity
than to excite their merriment.  Vetranio laughed, Camilla laughed,
Julia laughed.  The idea of a troop of barbarians ever being able to
burn a palace at Rome was too wildly ridiculous for any one's gravity;
and as the speech was repeated in other parts of the room, in spite of
their dulness and lassitude the whole Court laughed.

'I know not why I should be amused by that man's nonsense,' said
Camilla, suddenly becoming grave at the very crisis of a most
attractive smile, 'when I am so melancholy at the thought of Vetranio's
departure. What will become of me when he is gone?  Alas! who will be
left in the palace to compose songs to my beauty and music for my lute?
Who will paint me as Venus, and tell me stories about the ancient
Egyptians and their cats?  Who at the banquet will direct what dishes I
am to choose, and what I am to reject?  Who?'--and poor little Camilla
stopped suddenly in her enumeration of the pleasures she was about to
lose, and seemed on the point of weeping as piteously as she had been
laughing rapturously but the instant before.

Vetranio was touched--not by the compliment to his more intellectual
powers, but by the admission of his convivial supremacy as a guide to
the banquet, contained in the latter part of Camilla's remonstrance.
The sex were then, as now, culpably deficient in gastronomic
enthusiasm. It was, therefore, a perfect triumph to have made a convert
to the science of the youngest and loveliest of the ladies of the Court.

'If she can gain leave of absence,' said the gratified senator,
'Camilla shall accompany me to Rome, and shall be present at the first
celebration of my recent discovery of a Nightingale Sauce.'

Camilla was in ecstasies.  She seized Vetranio's cheeks between her
rosy little fingers, kissed him as enthusiastically as a child kisses a
new toy, and darted gaily off to prepare for her departure.


'Vetranio would be better employed,' sneered the Cynic, 'in inventing
new salves for future wounds than new sauces for future nightingales!
His carcase will be carved by Gothic swords as a feast for the worms
before his birds are spitted with Roman skewers as a feast for his
guests!  Is this a time for cutting statues and concocting sauces?  Fie
on the senators who abandon themselves to such pursuits as Vetranio's!'

'I have other designs,' replied the object of all this moral
indignation, looking with insulting indifference on the Cynic's
repulsive countenance, 'which, from their immense importance to the
world, must meet with universal approval.  The labour that I have just
achieved forms one of a series of three projects which I have for some
time held in contemplation.  The first is an analysis of the new
priesthood; the second, a true personification, both by painting and
sculpture, of Venus; the third, a discovery of what has been hitherto
uninvented--a nightingale sauce.  By the inscrutable wisdom of Fate, it
has been so willed that the last of the objects I proposed to myself
has been the first attained.  The sauce is composed, and I have just
concluded on this vellum the ode that is to introduce it at my table.
The analysation will be my next labour.  It will take the form of a
treatise, in which, making the experience of past years the groundwork
of prophecy for the future, I shall show the precise number of
additional dissensions, controversies, and quarrels that will be
required to enable the new priesthood to be themselves the destroyers
of their own worship.  I shall ascertain by an exact computation the
year in which this destruction will be consummated; and I have by me as
the materials for my work an historical summary of Christian schisms
and disputes in Rome for the last hundred years.  As for my second
design, the personification of Venus, it is of appalling difficulty.
It demands an investigation of the women of every nation under the sun;
a comparison of the relative excellences and peculiarities of their
several charms; and a combination of all that is loveliest in the
infinite variety of their most prominent attractions, under one form.
To forward the execution of this arduous project, my tenants at home
and my slave-merchants abroad have orders to send to my villa in Sicily
all women who are born most beautiful in the Empire, or can be brought
most beautiful from the nations around.  I will have them displayed
before me, of every shade in complexion and of every peculiarity in
form!  At the fitting period I shall commence my investigations,
undismayed by difficulty, and determined on success.  Never yet has the
true Venus been personified!  Should I accomplish the task, how
exquisite will be my triumph!  My work will be the altar at which
thousands will offer up the softest emotions of the heart.  It will
free the prisoned imagination of youth, and freshen the fading
recollections on the memory of age!'

Vetranio paused.  The Cynic was struck dumb with indignation.  A
solitary zealot for the Church, who happened to be by, frowned at the
analysation.  The ladies tittered at the personification.  The
gastronomists chuckled at the nightingale sauce; but for the first few
minutes no one spoke.  During this temporary embarrassment, Vetranio
whispered a few words in Julia's ear; and--just as the Cynic was
sufficiently recovered to retort--accompanied by the lady, he quitted
the room.

Never was popularity more unalloyed than Vetranio's.  Gifted with a
disposition the pliability of which adapted itself to all emergencies,
his generosity disarmed enemies, while his affability made friends.
Munificent without assumption, successful without pride, he obliged
with grace and shone with safety.  People enjoyed his hospitality, for
they knew that it was disinterested; and admired his acquirements, for
they felt that they were unobtrusive.  Sometimes (as in his dialogue
with the Cynic) the whim of the moment, or the sting of a sarcasm, drew
from him a hint at his station, or a display of his eccentricities;
but, as he was always the first soon afterwards to lead the laugh at
his own outbreak, his credit as a noble suffered nothing by his
infirmity as a man.  Gaily and attractively he moved in all grades of
the society of his age, winning his social laurels in every rank,
without making a rival to dispute their possession, or an enemy to
detract from their value.


On quitting the Court waiting-room, Vetranio and Julia descended the
palace stairs and passed into the emperor's garden.  Used generally as
an evening lounge, this place was now untenanted, save by the few
attendants engaged in cultivating the flower-beds and watering the
smooth, shady lawns.  Entering one of the most retired of the numerous
summer-houses among the trees, Vetranio motioned his companion to take
a seat, and then abruptly addressed her in the following words:--

'I have heard that you are about to depart for Rome--is it true?'

He asked this question in a low voice, and with a manner in its
earnestness strangely at variance with the volatile gaiety which had
characterised him, but a few moments before, among the nobles of the
Court.  As Julia answered him in the affirmative, his countenance
expressed a lively satisfaction; and seating himself by her side, he
continued the conversation thus:--

'If I thought that you intended to stay for any length of time in the
city, I should venture upon a fresh extortion from your friendship by
asking you to lend me your little villa at Aricia!'

'You shall take with you to Rome an order on my steward to place
everything there at your entire disposal.'

'My generous Julia!  You are of the gifted few who really know how to
confer a favour!  Another woman would have asked me why I wanted the
villa--you give it unreservedly.  So delicate an unwillingness to
intrude on a secret reminds me that the secret should now be yours!'

To explain the easy confidence that existed between Vetranio and Julia,
it is necessary to inform the reader that the lady--although still
attractive in appearance--was of an age to muse on her past, rather
than to meditate on her future conquests.  She had known her eccentric
companion from his boyhood, had been once flattered in his verses, and
was sensible enough--now that her charms were on the wane--to be as
content with the friendship of the senator as she had formerly been
enraptured with the adoration of the youth.

'You are too penetrating,' resumed Vetranio, after a short pause, 'not
to have already suspected that I only require your villa to assist me
in the concealment of an intrigue.  So peculiar is my adventure in its
different circumstances, that to make use of my palace as the scene of
its development would be to risk a discovery which might produce the
immediate subversion of all my designs.  But I fear the length of my
confession will exceed the duration of your patience!'

'You have aroused my curiosity.  I could listen to you for ever!'

'A short time before I took my departure from Rome for this place,'
continued Vetranio, 'I encountered an adventure of the most
extraordinary nature, which has haunted me with the most extraordinary
perseverance, and which will have, I feel assured, the most
extraordinary results.  I was sitting one evening in the garden of my
palace on the Pincian Mount, occupied in trying a new composition on my
lute.  In one of the pauses of the melody, which was tender and
plaintive, I heard sounds that resembled the sobbing of some one in
distress among the trees behind me.  I looked cautiously round, and
discerned, half-hidden by the verdure, the figure of a young girl, who
appeared to be listening to the music with the most entranced
attention. Flattered by such a testimony to my skill, and anxious to
gain a nearer view of my mysterious visitant, I advanced towards her
hiding-place, forgetting in my haste to continue playing on the lute.
The instant the music ceased, she discerned me and disappeared.
Determined to behold her, I again struck the chords, and in a few
minutes I saw her white robe once more among the trees.  I redoubled my
efforts.  I played with the utmost expression the most pathetic parts
of the melody.  As if under the influence of a charm, she began to
advance towards me, now hesitating, now moving back a few steps, now
approaching, half-reluctantly, half willingly, until, utterly
vanquished by the long trembling close of the last cadence of the air,
she ran suddenly up to me, and falling at my feet, raised her hands as
if to implore my pardon.'

'Truly this was no common tribute to your skill!  Did she speak to you?'


'She uttered not a word,' continued Vetranio.  'Her large soft eyes,
bright with tears, looked piteously up in my face; her delicate lips
trembled, as if she wished to speak, but dared not; her smooth round
arms were the very perfection of beauty.  Child as she seemed in years
and emotions, she looked a woman in loveliness and form.  For the
moment I was too much astonished by the suddenness of her supplicating
action to move or speak.  As soon as I recovered myself I attempted to
fondle and console her, but she shrunk from my embrace, and seemed
inclined to escape from me again; until I touched once more the strings
of the lute, and then she uttered a subdued exclamation of delight,
nestled close up to me, and looked into my face with such a strange
expression of mingled adoration and rapture, that I declare to you,
Julia, I felt as bashful before her as a boy.'

'You bashful!  The Senator Vetranio bashful!' exclaimed Julia, looking
up with an expression of the most unfeigned incredulity and
astonishment.

'The lute,' pursued Vetranio gravely, without heeding the interruption,
'was my sole means of procuring any communication with her.  If I
ceased playing, we were as strangers; if I resumed, we were as friends.
So, subduing the notes of the instrument while she spoke to me in a
soft tremulous musical voice, I still continued to play.  By this plan
I discovered at our first interview that she was the daughter of one
Numerian, that she was on the point of completing her fourteenth year,
and that she was called Antonina.  I had only succeeded in gaining this
mere outline of her story, when, as if struck by some sudden
apprehension, she tore herself from me with a look of the utmost
terror, and entreating me not to follow her if I ever desired to see
her again, she disappeared rapidly among the trees.'

'More and more wonderful!  And, in your new character of a bashful man,
you doubtless obeyed her injunctions?'

'I did,' replied the senator; 'but the next evening I revisited the
garden grove, and, as soon as I struck the chords, as if by magic, she
again approached.  At this second interview I learned the reason of her
mysterious appearances and departures.  Her father, she told me, was
one of a new sect, who imagine--with what reason it is impossible to
comprehend--that they recommend themselves to their Deity by making
their lives one perpetual round of bodily suffering and mental anguish.
Not content with distorting all his own feelings and faculties, this
tyrant perpetrated his insane austerities upon the poor child as well.
He forbade her to enter a theatre, to look on sculpture, to read
poetry, to listen to music.  He made her learn long prayers, and attend
to interminable sermons.  He allowed her no companions of her own
age--not even girls like herself.  The only recreation that she could
obtain was the permission--granted with much reluctance and many
rebukes--to cultivate a little garden which belonged to the house they
lived in, and joined at one point the groves round my palace.  There,
while she was engaged over her flowers, she first heard the sound of my
lute for many months before I had discovered her, she had been in the
habit of climbing the enclosure that bounded her garden, and hiding
herself among the trees to listen to the music, whenever her father's
concerns took him abroad.  She had been discovered in this occupation
by an old man appointed to watch her in his master's absence.  The
attendant, however, on hearing her confession, not only promised to
keep her secret, but permitted her to continue her visits to my grove
whenever I chanced to be playing there on the lute.  Now the most
mysterious part of this matter is, that the girl seemed--in spite of
his severity towards her--to have a great affection for her surly; for,
when I offered to deliver her from his custody, she declared that
nothing could induce her to desert him--not even the attraction of
living among fine pictures and hearing beautiful music every hour in
the day.  But I see I weary you; and, indeed, it is evident from the
length of the shadows that the hour of my departure is at hand.  Let me
then pass from my introductory interviews with Antonina, to the
consequences that had resulted from them when I set forth on my journey
to Ravenna.'

'I think I can imagine the consequences already!'  said Julia, smiling
maliciously.


'Begin then,' retorted Vetranio, 'by imagining that the strangeness of
this girl's situation, and the originality of her ideas, invested her
with an attraction for me, which the charms of her person and age
contributed immensely to heighten.  She delighted my faculties as a
poet, as much as she fired my feelings as a man; and I determined to
lure her from the tyrannical protection of her father by the employment
of every artifice that my ingenuity could suggest. I began by teaching
her to exercise for herself the talent which had so attracted her in
another. By the familiarity engendered on both sides by such an
occupation, I hoped to gain as much in affection from her as she
acquired in skill from me; but to my astonishment, I still found her as
indifferent towards the master, and as tender towards the music, as she
had appeared at our first interview.  If she had repelled my advances,
if they had overwhelmed her with confusion, I could have adapted myself
to her humour, I should have felt the encouragement of hope; but the
coldness, the carelessness, the unnatural, incomprehensible ease with
which she received even my caresses, utterly disconcerted me.  It
seemed as if she could only regard me as a moving statue, as a mere
impersonation, immaterial as the science I was teaching her. If I
spoke, she hardly looked on me; if I moved, she scarcely noticed the
action.  I could not consider it dislike; she seemed to gentle to
nourish such a feeling for any creature on earth.  I could not believe
it coldness; she was all life, all agitation, if she heard only a few
notes of music. When she touched the chords of the instrument, her
whole frame trembled. Her eyes, mild, serious, and thoughtful when she
looked on me, now brightened with delight, now softened with tears,
when she listened to the lute.  As day by day her skill in music
increased, so her manner towards me grew more inexplicably indifferent.
At length, weary of the constant disappointments that I experienced,
and determined to make a last effort to touch her heart by awakening
her gratitude, I presented her with the very lute which she had at
first heard, and on which she had now learned to play.  Never have I
seen any human being so rapturously delighted as this incomprehensible
girl when she received the instrument from my hands.  She alternately
wept and laughed over it, she kissed it, fondled it, spoke to it, as if
it had been a living thing.  But when I approached to suppress the
expressions of thankfulness that she poured on me for the gift, she
suddenly hid the lute in her robe, as if afraid that I should deprive
her of it, and hurried rapidly from my sight.  The next day I waited
for her at our accustomed meeting-place, but she never appeared.  I
sent a slave to her father's house, but she would hold no communication
with him.  It was evident that, now she had gained her end, she cared
no more to behold me.  In my first moments of irritation, I determined
to make her feel my power, if she despised my kindness; but reflection
convinced me, from my acquaintance with her character, that in such a
matter force was impolitic, that I should risk my popularity in Rome,
and engage myself in an unworthy quarrel to no purpose.  Dissatisfied
with myself, and disappointed in the girl, I obeyed the first dictates
of my impatience, and seizing the opportunity afforded by my duties in
the senate of escaping from the scene of defeated hopes, I departed
angrily for Ravenna.'

'Departed for Ravenna!' cried Julia, laughing outright.  'Oh, what a
conclusion to the adventure! I confess it, Vetranio, such consequences
as these are beyond all imagination!'

'You laugh, Julia,' returned the senator, a little piqued; 'but hear me
to the end, and you will find that I have not yet resigned myself to
defeat.  For the few days that I have remained here, Antonina's image
has incessantly troubled my thoughts.  I perceive that my inclination,
as well as my reputation, is concerned in subduing her ungrateful
aversion.  I suspect that my anxiety to gain her will, if unremoved, so
far influence my character, that from Vetranio the Serene, I shall be
changed into Vetranio the Sardonic.  Pride, honour, curiosity, and love
all urge me to her conquest.  To prepare for my banquet is an excuse to
the Court for my sudden departure from this place; the real object of
my journey is Antonina alone.'

'Ah, now I recognise my friend again in his own character,' remarked
the lady approvingly.


'You will ask me how I purpose to obtain another interview with her?'
continued Vetranio. 'I answer, that the girl's attendant has
voluntarily offered himself as an instrument for the prosecution of my
plans.  The very day before I departed from Rome, he suddenly presented
himself to my in my garden, and proposed to introduce me into
Numerian's house--having first demanded, with the air more of an equal
than an inferior, whether the report that I was still a secret adherent
of the old religion, of the worship of the gods, was true.  Suspicious
of the fellow's motives (for he abjured all recompense as the reward of
his treachery), and irritated by the girl's recent ingratitude, I
treated his offer with contempt.  Now, however, that my dissatisfaction
is calmed and my anxiety aroused, I am determined, at all hazards, to
trust myself to this man, be his motives for aiding me what they may.
If my efforts at my expected interview--and I will not spare them--are
rewarded with success, it will be necessary to obtain some refuge for
Antonina that will neither be suspected nor searched.  For such a
hiding-place, nothing can be more admirably adapted than your Arician
villa.  Do you--now that you know for what use it is intended--repent
of your generous disposal of it in aid of my design?'

'I am delighted to have had it to bestow on you,' replied the liberal
Julia, pressing Vetranio's hand.  'Your adventure is indeed uncommon--I
burn with impatience to hear how it will end. Whatever happens, you may
depend on my secrecy and count on my assistance.  But see, the sun is
already verging towards the west; and yonder comes one of your slaves
to inform you, I doubt not, that your equipage is prepared.  Return
with me to the palace, and I will supply you with the letter necessary
to introduce you as master to my country abode.'

      *      *      *      *      *

The worthy citizens of Ravenna assembled in the square before the
palace to behold the senator's departure, had entirely exhausted such
innocent materials for amusement as consisted in staring at the guards,
catching the clouds of gnats that hovered about their ears, and
quarrelling with each other; and were now reduced to a state of very
noisy and unanimous impatience, when their discontent was suddenly and
most effectually appeased by the appearance of the travelling equipage
with Vetranio and Camilla outside the palace gates.

Uproarious shouts greeted the appearance of the senator and his
magnificent retinue; but they were increased a hundred-fold when the
chief slaves, by their master's command, each scattered a handful of
small coin among the poorer classes of the spectators.  Every man among
that heterogeneous assemblage of rogues, fools, and idlers roared his
loudest and capered his highest, in honour of the generous patrician.
Gradually and carefully the illustrious travellers moved through the
crowd around them to the city gate; and thence, amid incessant shouts
of applause, raised with imposing unanimity of lung, and wrought up to
the most distracting discordancy of noise, Vetranio and his lively
companion departed in triumph for Rome.

      *      *      *      *      *

A few days after this event the citizens were again assembled at the
same place and hour--probably to witness another patrician
departure--when their ears were assailed by the unexpected sound
produced by the call to arms, which was followed immediately by the
closing of the city gates.  They had scarcely asked each other the
meaning of these unusual occurrences, when a peasant, half frantic with
terror, rushed into the square, shouting out the terrible intelligence
that the Goths were in sight!

The courtiers heard the news, and starting from a luxurious repast,
hurried to the palace windows to behold the portentous spectacle.  For
the remainder of the evening the banqueting tables were unapproached by
the guests.


The wretched emperor was surprised among his poultry by that dreaded
intelligence.  He, too, hastened to the windows, and looking forth, saw
the army of avengers passing in contempt his solitary fortress, and
moving swiftly onward towards defenceless Rome.  Long after the
darkness had hidden the masses of that mighty multitude from his eyes,
did he remain staring helplessly upon the fading landscape, in a stupor
of astonishment and dread; and, for the first time since he had
possessed them, his flocks of fowls were left for that night unattended
by their master's hand.



CHAPTER 3.

ROME.

The perusal of the title to this chapter will, we fear, excite emotions
of apprehension, rather than of curiosity, in the breasts of
experienced readers.  They will doubtless imagine that it is portentous
of long rhapsodies on those wonders of antiquity, the description of
which has long become absolutely nauseous to them by incessant
iteration.  They will foresee wailings over the Palace of the Caesars,
and meditations among the arches of the Colosseum, loading a long
series of weary paragraphs to the very chapter's end; and,
considerately anxious to spare their attention a task from which it
recoils, they will unanimously hurry past the dreaded desert of
conventional reflection, to alight on the first oasis that may present
itself, whether it be formed by a new division of the story, or
suddenly indicated by the appearance of a dialogue. Animated,
therefore, by apprehensions such as these, we hasten to assure them
that in no instance will the localities of our story trench upon the
limits of the well-worn Forum, or mount the arches of the exhausted
Colosseum.  It is with the beings, and not the buildings of old Rome,
that their attention is to be occupied.  We desire to present them with
a picture of the inmost emotions of the times--of the living, breathing
actions and passions of the people of the doomed Empire.  Antiquarian
topography and classical architecture we leave to abler pens, and
resign to other readers.

It is, however, necessary that the sphere in which the personages of
our story are about to act should be in some measure indicated, in
order to facilitate the comprehension of their respective movements.
That portion of the extinct city which we design to revive has left few
traces of its existence in the modern town.  Its sites are
traditionary--its buildings are dust. The church rises where the temple
once stood, and the wine-shop now lures the passing idler where the
bath invited his ancestor of old.

The walls of Rome are in extent, at the present day, the same as they
were at the period of which we now write.  But here all analogy between
the ancient and modern city ends.  The houses that those walls were
once scarcely wide enough to enclose have long since vanished, and
their modern successors occupy but a third of the space once allotted
to the capital of the Empire.

Beyond the walls immense suburbs stretched forth in the days of old.
Gorgeous villas, luxurious groves, temples, theatres,
baths--interspersed by colonies of dwellings belonging to the lower
orders of the people--surrounded the mighty city.  Of these innumerable
abodes hardly a trace remains.  The modern traveller, as he looks forth
over the site of the famous suburbs, beholds, here and there, a ruined
aqueduct, or a crumbling tomb, tottering on the surface of a
pestilential marsh.

The present entrance to Rome by the Porta del Popolo occupies the same
site as the ancient Flaminian Gate.  Three great streets now lead from
it towards the southern extremity of the city, and form with their
tributaries the principal portion of modern Rome.  On one side they are
bounded by the Pincian Hill, on the other by the Tiber.  Of these
streets, those nearest the river occupy the position of the famous
Campus Martius; those on the other side, the ancient approaches to the
gardens of Sallust and Lucullus, on the Pincian Mount.

On the opposite bank of the Tiber (gained by the Ponte St. Angelo,
formerly the Pons Elius), two streets pierced through an irregular and
populous neighbourhood, conduct to the modern Church of St. Peter.  At
the period of our story this part of the city was of much greater
consequence, both in size and appearance, than it is at present, and
led directly to the ancient Basilica of St. Peter, which stood on the
same site as that now occupied by the modern edifice.


The events about to be narrated occur entirely in the parts of the city
just described.  From the Pincian Hill, across the Campus Martius, over
the Pons Elius, and on to the Basilica of St. Peter, the reader may be
often invited to accompany us, but he will be spared all necessity of
penetrating familiar ruins, or mourning over the sepulchres of departed
patriots.

Ere, however, we revert to former actors or proceed to new characters,
it will be requisite to people the streets that we here attempt to
rebuild.  By this process it is hoped that the reader will gain that
familiarity with the manners and customs of the Romans of the fifth
century on which the influence of this story mainly depends, and which
we despair of being able to instil by a philosophical disquisition on
the features of the age.  A few pages of illustration will serve our
purpose better, perhaps, than volumes of historical description.  There
is no more unerring index to the character of a people than the streets
of their cities.

It is near evening.  In the widest part of the Campus Martius crowds of
people are assembled before the gates of a palace.  They are
congregated to receive several baskets of provisions, distributed with
ostentatious charity by the owner of the mansion.  The incessant
clamour and agitation of the impatient multitude form a strange
contrast to the stately serenity of the natural and artificial objects
by which they are enclosed on all sides.

The space they occupy is oblong in shape and of great extent in size.
Part of it is formed by a turf walk shaded with trees, part by the
paved approaches to the palace and the public baths which stand in its
immediate neighbourhood.  These two edifices are remarkable by their
magnificent outward adornments of statues, and the elegance and number
of the flights of steps by which they are respectively entered.  With
the inferior buildings, the market-places and the gardens attached to
them, they are sufficiently extensive to form the boundary of one side
of the immediate view.  The appearance of monotony which might at other
times be remarked in the vastness and regularity of their white fronts,
is at this moment agreeably broken by several gaily-coloured awnings
stretched over their doors and balconies.  The sun is now shining on
them with overpowering brightness; the metallic ornaments on their
windows glitter like gems of fire; even the trees which form their
groves partake of the universal flow of light, and fail, like the
objects around them, to offer to the weary eye either refreshment or
repose.

Towards the north, the Mausoleum of Augustus, towering proudly up into
the brilliant sky, at once attracts the attention.  From its position,
parts of this noble building are already in shade. Not a human being is
visible on any part of its mighty galleries--it stands solitary and
sublime, an impressive embodiment of the emotions which it was raised
to represent.

On the side opposite the palace and the baths is the turf walk already
mentioned.  Trees, thickly planted and interlaced by vines, cast a
luxurious shade over this spot.  In their interstices, viewed from a
distance, appear glimpses of gay dresses, groups of figures in repose,
stands loaded with fruit and flowers, and innumerable white marble
statues of fauns and wood-nymphs.  From this delicious retreat the
rippling of fountains is to be heard, occasionally interrupted by the
rustling of leaves, or the plaintive cadences of the Roman flute.


Southward two pagan temples stand in lonely grandeur among a host of
monuments and trophies.  The symmetry of their first construction still
remains unimpaired, their white marble pillars shine in the sunlight
brightly as of old, yet they now present to the eye an aspect of
strange desolation, of unnatural mysterious gloom.  Although the laws
forbid the worship for which they were built, the hand of reform has as
yet not ventured to doom them to ruin or adapt them to Christian
purposes.  None venture to tread their once-crowded colonnades.  No
priest appears to give the oracles from their doors; no sacrifices reek
upon their naked altars. Under their roofs, visited only by the light
that steals through their narrow entrances, stand unnoticed,
unworshipped, unmoved, the mighty idols of old Rome.  Human emotion,
which made them Omnipotence once, has left them but stone now.  The
'Star in the East' has already dimmed the fearful halo which the
devotion of bloodshed once wreathed round their forms. Forsaken and
alone, they stand but as the gloomy monuments of the greatest delusion
ever organised by the ingenuity of man.

We have now, so to express it, exhibited the frame surrounding the
moving picture, which we shall next attempt to present to the reader by
mixing with the multitude before the palace gates.

This assembly resolved itself into three divisions:  that collected
before the palace steps, that loitering about the public baths, and
that reposing in the shade of the groves.  The first was of the most
consequence in numbers, and of the greatest variety in appearance.
Composed of rogues of the worst order from every quarter of the world,
it might be said to present, in its general aspect of numerical
importance, the very sublime of degradation.  Confident in their rude
union of common avidity, these worthy citizens vented their insolence
on all objects, and in every direction, with a careless impartiality
which would have shamed the most victorious efforts of modern mobs.
The hubbub of voices was perfectly fearful.  The coarse execrations of
drunken Gauls, the licentious witticisms of effeminate Greeks, the
noisy satisfaction of native Romans, the clamorous indignation of
irritable Jews--all sounded together in one incessant chorus of
discordant noises. Nor were the senses of sight and smell more
agreeably assailed than the faculty of hearing, by this anomalous
congregation.  Immodest youth and irreverent age; woman savage, man
cowardly; the swarthy Ethiopian beslabbered with stinking oil; the
stolid Briton begrimed with dirt--these, and a hundred other varying
combinations, to be imagined rather than expressed, met the attention
in every direction.  To describe the odours exhaled by the heat from
this seething mixture of many pollutions, would be to force the reader
to close the book; we prefer to return to the distribution which was
the cause of this degrading tumult, and which consisted of small
baskets of roasted meat packed with common fruits and vegetables, and
handed, or rather flung down, to the mob by the servants of the
nobleman who gave the feast.  The people revelled in the abundance thus
presented to them. They threw themselves upon it like wild beasts; they
devoured it like hogs, or bore it off like plunderers; while, secure in
the eminence on which they were placed, the purveyors of this public
banquet expressed their contempt for its noisy recipients, by holding
their noses, stopping their ears, turning their backs, and other
pantomimic demonstrations of lofty and excessive disgust.  These
actions did not escape the attention of those members of the assembly
who, having eaten their fill, were at leisure to make use of their
tongues, and who showered an incessant storm of abuse on the heads of
their benefactor's retainers.

'See those fellows!' cried one; 'they are the waiters at our feast, and
they mock us to our faces! Down with the filthy kitchen thieves!'

'Excellently well said, Davus!--but who is to approach them?  They
stink at this distance!'

'The rotten-bodied knaves have the noses of dogs and the carcases of
goats.'

Then came a chorus of voices--'Down with them!  Down with them!'  In
the midst of which an indignant freedman advanced to rebuke the mob,
receiving, as the reward of his temerity, a shower of missiles and a
volley of curses; after which he was thus addressed by a huge, greasy
butcher, hoisted on his companions' shoulders:--

'By the soul of the emperor, could I get near you, you rogue, I would
quarter you with my fingers alone!--A grinning scoundrel that jeers at
others!  A filthy flatterer that dirts the very ground he walks on!  By
the blood of the martyrs, should I fling the sweepings of the
slaughter-house at him, he knows not where to get himself dried!'


'Thou rag of a man,' roared a neighbour of the indignant butcher's,
'dost thou frown upon the guests of thy master, the very scrapings of
whose skin are worth more than thy whole carcase! It is easier to make
a drinking-vessel of the skull of a flea than to make an honest man of
such a villainous night-walker as thou art!'

'Health and prosperity to our noble entertainer!' shouted one section
of the grateful crowd as the last speaker paused for breath.

'Death to all knaves of parasites!'  chimed in another.

'Honour to the citizens of Rome!' roared a third party with modest
enthusiasm.

'Give that freedman our bones to pick!' screamed an urchin from the
outskirts of the crowd.

This ingenious piece of advice was immediately followed; and the
populace gave vent to a shout of triumph as the unfortunate freedman,
scared by a new volley of missiles, retreated with ignominious
expedition to the shelter of his patron's halls.

In the slight and purified specimen of the 'table talk' of a Roman mob
which we have here ventured to exhibit, the reader will perceive that
extraordinary mixture of servility and insolence which characterised
not only the conversation but the actions of the lower orders of
society at the period of which we write.  Oppressed and degraded, on
the one hand, to a point of misery scarcely conceivable to the public
of the present day, the poorer classes in Rome were, on the other,
invested with such a degree of moral license, and permitted such an
extent of political privilege, as flattered their vanity into blinding
their sense of indignation. Slaves in their season of servitude,
masters in their hours of recreation, they presented, as a class, one
of the most amazing social anomalies ever existing in any nation; and
formed, in their dangerous and artificial position, one of the most
important of the internal causes of the downfall of Rome.

The steps of the public baths were almost as crowded as the space
before the neighbouring building.  Incessant streams of people, either
entering or departing, poured over the broad flagstones of its marble
colonnades. This concourse, although composed in some parts of the same
class of people as that assembled before the palace, presented a
certain appearance of respectability.  Here and there--chequering the
dusky monotony of masses of dirty tunics--might be discerned the
refreshing vision of a clean robe, or the grateful indication of a
handsome person. Little groups, removed as far as possible from the
neighbourhood of the noisy plebeians, were scattered about, either
engaged in animated conversation, or listlessly succumbing to the
lassitude induced by a recent bath.  An instant's attention to the
subject of discourse among the more active of these individuals will
aid us in pursuing our social revelations.

The loudest voice among the speakers at this particular moment
proceeded from a tall, thin, sinister-looking man, who was haranguing a
little group of listeners with great vehemence and fluency.

'I tell you, Socius,' said he, turning suddenly upon one of his
companions, 'that, unless new slave-laws are made, my calling is at an
end.  My patron's estate requires incessant supplies of these wretches.
I do my best to satisfy the demand, and the only result of my labour
is, that the miscreants either endanger my life, or fly with impunity
to join the gangs of robbers infesting our woods.'

'Truly I am sorry for you; but what alteration would you have made in
the slave-laws?'

'I would empower bailiffs to slay upon the spot all slaves whom they
thought disorderly, as an example to the rest!'

'What would such a permission avail you?  These creatures are
necessary, and such a law would exterminate them in a few months.  Can
you not break their spirit with labour, bind their strength with
chains, and vanquish their obstinacy with dungeons?'


'All this I have done, but they die under the discipline, or escape
from their prisons.  I have now three hundred slaves on my patron's
estates. Against those born on our lands I have little to urge.  Many
of them, it is true, begin the day with weeping and end it with death;
but for the most part, thanks to their diurnal allowance of stripes,
they are tolerably submissive.  It is with the wretches that I have
been obliged to purchase from prisoners of war and the people of
revolted towns that I am so dissatisfied.  Punishments have no effect
on them, they are incessantly indolent, sulky, desperate.  It was but
the other day that ten of them poisoned themselves while at work in the
fields, and fifty more, after setting fire to a farm-house while my
back was turned, escaped to join a gang of their companions, who are
now robbers in the woods.  These fellows, however, are the last of the
troop who will perpetrate such offences. With the concurrence of my
patron, I have adopted a plan that will henceforth tame them
efficiently!'

'Are you at liberty to communicate it?'

'By the keys of St. Peter, I wish I could see it practised on every
estate in the land!  It is this:--Near a sulphur lake at some distance
from my farm-house is a tract of marshy ground, overspread here and
there by the ruins of an ancient slaughter-house.  I propose to dig in
this place several subterranean caverns, each of which shall be capable
of holding twenty men. Here my mutinous slaves shall sleep after their
day's labour.  The entrances shall be closed until morning with a large
stone, on which I will have engraven this inscription:  'These are the
dormitories invented by Gordian, bailiff of Saturninus, a nobleman, for
the reception of refractory slaves.'

'Your plan is ingenious; but I suspect your slaves (so insensible to
hardships are the brutal herd) will sleep as unconcernedly in their new
dormitories as in their old.'

'Sleep!  It will be a most original species of repose that they will
taste there!  The stench of the sulphur lake will breathe Sabian odours
for them over a couch of mud!  Their anointing oil will be the slime of
attendant reptiles!  Their liquid perfumes will be the stagnant oozings
from their chamber roof!  Their music will be the croaking of frogs and
the humming of gnats; and as for their adornments, why, they will be
decked forth with head-garlands of twining worms, and movable brooches
of cockchafers and toads!  Tell me now, most sagacious Socius, do you
still think that amidst such luxuries as these my slaves will sleep?'

'No; they will die.'

'You are again wrong.  They will curse and rave perhaps, but that is of
no consequence.  They will work the longer above ground to shorten the
term of their repose beneath.  They will wake at an instant's notice,
and come forth at a moment's signal.  I have no fear of their dying!'

'Do you leave Rome soon?'

'I go this evening, taking with me such a supply of trustworthy
assistants as will enable me to execute my plan without delay.
Farewell, Socius!'

'Most ingenious of bailiffs, I bid you farewell!'

As the worthy Gordian stalked off, big with the dignity of his new
projects, the gestures and tones of a man who formed one of a little
group collected in a remote part of the portico he was about to quit
attracted his attention.  Curiosity formed as conspicuous an ingredient
in this man's character as cruelty.  He stole behind the base of a
neighbouring pillar; and, as the frequent repetition of the word
'Goths' struck his ear (the report of that nation's impending invasion
having by this time reached Rome), he carefully disposed himself to
listen with the most implicit attention to the speaker's voice.


'Goths!' cried the man, in the stern, concentrated accents of despair.
'Is there one among us to whom this report of their advance upon Rome
does not speak of hope rather than of dread? Have we a chance of rising
from the degradation forced on us by our superiors until this den of
heartless triflers and shameless cowards is swept from the very earth
that it pollutes!'

'Your sentiments on the evils of our condition are undoubtedly most
just,' observed a fat, pompous man, to whom the preceding remarks had
been addressed, 'but I cannot desire the reform you so ardently hope
for.  Think of the degradation of being conquered by barbarians!'

'I am the exile of my country's privileges.  What interest have I in
upholding her honour--if honour she really has!' replied the first
speaker.

'Nay!  Your expressions are too severe.  You are too discontented to be
just.'

'Am I!  Hear me for a moment, and you will change your opinion.  You
see me now by my bearing and appearance superior to yonder plebeian
herd. You doubtless think that I live at my ease in the world, that I
can feel no anxiety for the future about my bodily necessities.  What
would you say were I to tell you that if I want another meal, a lodging
for to-night, a fresh robe for tomorrow, I must rob or flatter some
great man to gain them?  Yet so it is.  I am hopeless, friendless,
destitute.  In the whole of the Empire there is not an honest calling
in which I can take refuge.  I must become a pander or a parasite--a
hired tyrant over slaves, or a chartered groveller beneath nobles--if I
would not starve miserably in the streets, or rob openly in the woods!
This is what I am.  Now listen to what I was.  I was born free.  I
inherited from my father a farm which he had successfully defended from
the encroachments of the rich, at the expense of his comfort, his
health, and his life. When I succeeded to his lands, I determined to
protect them in my time as studiously as he had defended them in his.
I worked unintermittingly:  I enlarged my house, I improved my fields,
I increased my flocks.  One after another I despised the threats and
defeated the wiles of my noble neighbours, who desired possession of my
estate to swell their own territorial grandeur.  In process of time I
married and had a child.  I believed that I was picked out from my race
as a fortunate man--when one night I was attacked by robbers:  slaves
made desperate by the cruelty of their wealthy masters.  They ravaged
my cornfields, they deprived me of my flocks.  When I demanded redress,
I was told to sell my lands to those who could defend them--to those
rich nobles whose tyranny had organised the band of wretches who had
spoiled me of my possessions, and to whose fraud-gotten treasures the
government were well pleased to grant that protection which they had
denied to my honest hoards.  In my pride I determined that I would
still be independent.  I planted new crops.  With the little remnant of
my money I hired fresh servants and bought more flocks.  I had just
recovered from my first disaster when I became the victim of a second.
I was again attacked.  This time we had arms, and we attempted to
defend ourselves. My wife was slain before my eyes; my house was burnt
to the ground; I myself only escaped, mutilated with wounds; my child
soon afterwards pined and died.  I had no wife, no offspring, no house,
no money.  My fields still stretched round me, but I had none to
cultivate them.  My walls still tottered at my feet, but I had none to
rear them again, none to inhabit them if they were reared.  My father's
lands were now become a wilderness to me.  I was too proud to sell them
to my rich neighbour; I preferred to leave them before I saw them the
prey of a tyrant, whose rank had triumphed over my industry, and who is
now able to boast that he can travel over ten leagues of senatorial
property untainted by the propinquity of a husbandman's farm.
Houseless, homeless, friendless, I have come to Rome alone in my
affliction, helpless in my degradation! Do you wonder now that I am
careless about the honour of my country?  I would have served her with
my life and my possessions when she was worthy of my service; but she
has cast me off, and I care not who conquers her.  I say to the
Goths--with thousands who suffer the same tribulation that I now
undergo--"Enter our gates!  Level our palaces to the ground!  Confound,
if you will, in one common slaughter, we that are victims with those
that are tyrants!  Your invasion will bring new lords to the land.
They cannot crush it more--they may oppress it less.  Our posterity may
gain their rights by the sacrifice of lives that our country has made
worthless.  Romans though we are, we are ready to suffer and submit!"'


He stopped; for by this time he had lashed himself into fury.  His eyes
glared, his cheeks flushed, his voice rose.  Could he then have seen
the faintest vision of the destiny that future ages had in store for
the posterity of the race that now suffered throughout civilised
Europe, like him--could he have imagined how, in after years, the
'middle class', despised in his day, was to rise to privilege and
power; to hold in its just hands the balance of the prosperity of
nations; to crush oppression and regulate rule; to soar in its mighty
flight above thrones and principalities, and rank and riches,
apparently obedient, but really commanding;--could he but have
foreboded this, what a light must have burst upon his gloom, what a
hope must have soothed him in his despair!

To what further extremities his anger might have carried him, to what
proceedings the indignant Gordian, who still listened from his
concealment, might have had recourse, it is difficult to say; for the
complaints of the ill-fated landholder and the cogitations of the
authoritative bailiff were alike suddenly suspended by an uproar raging
at this moment round a carriage which had just emerged from the palace
we have elsewhere described.

This vehicle looked one mass of silver.  Embroidered silk curtains
fluttered all around it, gold ornaments studded its polished sides, and
it held no less a person than the nobleman who had feasted the people
with baskets of meat.  This fact had become known to the rabble before
the palace gates.  Such an opportunity of showing their exultation in
their bondage, their real servility in their imaginary independence,
was not to be lost; and accordingly they let loose such a torrent of
clamorous gratitude on their entertainer's appearance, that a stranger
in Rome would have thought the city in revolt.  They leapt, they ran,
they danced round the prancing horses, they flung their empty baskets
into the air, and patted approvingly their 'fair round bellies'.  From
every side, as the carriage moved on, they gained fresh recruits and
acquired new importance.  The timid fled before them, the noisy shouted
with them, the bold plunged into their ranks; and the constant burden
of their rejoicing chorus was--'Health to the noble Pomponius!
Prosperity to the senators of Rome, who feast us with their food and
give us the freedom of their theatres!  Glory to Pomponius!  Glory to
the senators!'

Fate seemed on this day to take pleasure in pampering the insatiable
curiosity of Gordian, the bailiff.  The cries of the multitude had
scarcely died away in the distance, as they followed the departing
carriage, when the voices of two men, pitched to a low, confidential
tone, reached his ear from the opposite side of the pillar.  He peeped
cautiously round, and saw that they were priests.

'What an eternal jester is that Pomponius!' said one voice.  'He is
going to receive absolution, and he journeys in his chariot of state,
as if he were preparing to celebrate his triumph, instead of to confess
his sins!'

'Has he committed, then, a fresh imprudence?'

'Alas, yes!  For a senator he is dreadfully wanting in caution!  A few
days since, in a fit of passion, he flung a drinking-cup at one of his
female slaves.  The girl died on the spot, and her brother, who is also
in his service, threatened immediate vengeance.  To prevent
disagreeable consequences to his body, Pomponius has sent the fellow to
his estates in Egypt; and now, from the same precaution for the welfare
of his soul, he goes to demand absolution from our holy and beneficent
Church.'

'I am afraid these incessant absolutions, granted to men who are too
careless even to make a show of repentance for their crimes, will
prejudice us with the people at large.'

'Of what consequence are the sentiments of the people while we have
their rulers on our side! Absolution is the sorcery that binds these
libertines of Rome to our will.  We know what converted
Constantine--politic flattery and ready absolution; the people will
tell you it was the sign of the Cross.'

'It is true this Pomponius is rich, and may increase our revenues, but
still I fear the indignation of the people.'

'Fear nothing:  think how long their old institutions imposed on them,
and then doubt, if you can, that we may shape them to our wishes as we
will.  Any deceptions will be successful with a mob, if the instrument
employed to forward them be a religion.'

The voices ceased.  Gordian, who still cherished a vague intention of
denouncing the fugitive landholder to the senatorial authorities,
employed the liberty afforded to his attention by the silence of the
priests in turning to look after his intended victim.  To his surprise
he saw that the man had left the auditors to whom he had before
addressed himself, and was engaged in earnest conversation in another
part of the portico, with an individual who seemed to have recently
joined him, and whose appearance was so remarkable that the bailiff had
moved a few steps forwards to gain a nearer view of him, when he was
once more arrested by the voices of the priests.

Irresolute for an instant to which party to devote his unscrupulous
attention, he returned mechanically to his old position.  Ere long,
however, his anxiety to hear the mysterious communications proceeding
between the landholder and his friend overbalanced his delight in
penetrating the theological secrets of the priests.  He turned once
more, but to his astonishment the objects of his curiosity had
disappeared.  He stepped to the outside of the portico and looked for
them in every direction, but they were nowhere to be seen.  Peevish and
disappointed, he returned as a last resource to the pillar where he had
left the priests, but the time consumed in his investigations after one
party had been fatal to his reunion with the other.  The churchmen were
gone.

Sufficiently punished for his curiosity by his disappointment, the
bailiff walked doggedly off towards the Pincian Hill.  Had he turned in
the contrary direction, towards the Basilica of St. Peter, he would
have found himself once more in the neighbourhood of the landholder and
his remarkable friend, and would have gained that acquaintance with the
subjects of their conversation, which we intend that the reader shall
acquire in the course of the next chapter.



CHAPTER 4.

THE CHURCH.

In the year 324, on the locality assigned by rumour to the martyrdom of
St. Peter, and over the ruins of the Circus of Nero, Constantine
erected the church called the Basilica of St. Peter.

For twelve centuries, this building, raised by a man infamous for his
murders and his tyrannies, stood uninjured amid the shocks which during
that long period devastated the rest of the city. After that time it
was removed, tottering to its base from its own reverend and
illustrious age, by Pope Julius II, to make way for the foundations of
the modern church.

It is towards this structure of twelve hundred years' duration, erected
by hands stained with blood, and yet preserved as a star of peace in
the midst of stormy centuries of war, that we would direct the reader's
attention.  What art has done for the modern church, time has effected
for the ancient.  If the one is majestic to the eye by its grandeur,
the other is hallowed to the memory by its age.


As this church by its rise commemorated the triumphant establishment of
Christianity as the religion of Rome, so in its progress it reflected
every change wrought in the spirit of the new worship by the ambition,
the prodigality, or the frivolity of the priests.  At first it stood
awful and imposing, beautiful in all its parts as the religion for
whose glory it was built.  Vast porphyry colonnades decorated its
approaches, and surrounded a fountain whose waters issued from the
representation of a gigantic pine-tree in bronze.  Its double rows of
aisles were each supported by forty-eight columns of precious marble.
Its flat ceiling was adorned with beams of gilt metal, rescued from the
pollution of heathen temples.  Its walls were decorated with large
paintings of religious subjects, and its tribunal was studded with
elegant mosaics. Thus it rose, simple and yet sublime, awful and yet
alluring; in this its beginning, a type of the dawn of the worship
which it was elevated to represent.  But when, flushed with success,
the priests seized on Christianity as their path to politics and their
introduction to power, the aspect of the church gradually began to
change.  As, slowly and insensibly, ambitious man heaped the garbage of
his mysteries, his doctrines, and his disputes, about the pristine
purity of the structure given him by God, so, one by one, gaudy
adornments and meretricious alterations arose to sully the once
majestic basilica, until the threatening and reproving apparition of
the pagan Julian, when both Church and churchmen received in their
corrupt progress a sudden and impressive check.

The short period of the revival of idolatry once passed over, the
priests, unmoved by the warning they had received, returned with
renewed vigour to confuse that which both in their Gospel and their
Church had been once simple.  Day by day they put forth fresh
treatises, aroused fierce controversies, subsided into new sects; and
day by day they altered more and more the once noble aspect of the
ancient basilica. They hung their nauseous relics on its mighty walls,
they stuck their tiny tapers about its glorious pillars, they wreathed
their tawdry fringes around its massive altars.  Here they polished,
there they embroidered. Wherever there was a window, they curtained it
with gaudy cloths; wherever there was a statue, they bedizened it with
artificial flowers; wherever there was a solemn recess, they outraged
its religious gloom with intruding light; until (arriving at the period
we write of) they succeeded so completely in changing the aspect of the
building, that it looked, within, more like a vast pagan toyshop than a
Christian church.  Here and there, it is true, a pillar or an altar
rose unencumbered as of old, appearing as much at variance with the
frippery that surrounded it as a text of Scripture quoted in a sermon
of the time.  But as regarded the general aspect of the basilica, the
decent glories of its earlier days seemed irrevocably departed and
destroyed.

After what has been said of the edifice, the reader will have little
difficulty in imagining that the square in which it stood lost whatever
elevation of character it might once have possessed, with even greater
rapidity than the church itself.  If the cathedral now looked like an
immense toyshop, assuredly its attendant colonnades had the appearance
of the booths of an enormous fair.


The day, whose decline we have hinted at in the preceding chapter, was
fast verging towards its close, as the inhabitants of the streets on
the western bank of the Tiber prepared to join the crowds that they
beheld passing by their windows in the direction of the Basilica of St.
Peter. The cause of this sudden confluence of the popular current in
once common direction was made sufficiently apparent to all inquirers
who happened to be near a church or a public building, by the
appearance in such situations of a large sheet of vellum elaborately
illuminated, raised on a high pole, and guarded from contact with the
inquisitive rabble by two armed soldiers.  The announcements set forth
in these strange placards were all of the same nature and directed to
the same end.  In each of them the Bishop of Rome informed his 'pious
and honourable brethren', the inhabitants of the city, that, as the
next days was the anniversary of the Martyrdom of St. Luke, the vigil
would necessarily be held on that evening in the Basilica of St. Peter;
and that, in consideration of the importance of the occasion, there
would be exhibited, before the commencement of the ceremony, those
precious relics connected with the death of the saint, which had become
the inestimable inheritance of the Church; and which consisted of a
branch of the olive-tree to which St. Luke was hung, a piece of the
noose--including the knot--which had been passed round his neck, and a
picture of the Apotheosis of the Virgin painted by his own hand.  After
some sentences expressive of lamentation for the sufferings of the
saint, which nobody read, and which it is unnecessary to reproduce
here, the proclamation went on to state that a sermon would be preached
in the course of the vigil, and that at a later hour the great
chandelier, containing two thousand four hundred lamps, would be lit to
illuminate the church.  Finally, the worthy bishop called upon all
members of his flock, in consideration of the solemnity of the day, to
abstain from sensual pleasures, in order that they might the more
piously and worthily contemplate the sacred objects submitted to their
view, and digest the spiritual nourishment to be offered to their
understandings.

From the specimen we have already given of the character of the
populace of Rome, it will perhaps be unnecessary to say that the great
attractions presented by this theological bill of fare were the relics
and the chandelier.  Pulpit eloquence and vigil solemnities alone must
have long exhibited their more sober allurements, before they could
have drawn into the streets a fiftieth part of the immense crowd that
now hurried towards the desecrated basilica. Indeed, so vast was the
assemblage soon congregated, that the advanced ranks of sightseers had
already filled the church to overflowing, before those in the rear had
come within view of the colonnades.

However dissatisfied the unsuccessful portion of the citizens might
feel at their exclusion from the church, they found a powerful
counter-attraction in the amusements going forward in the Place, the
occupants of which seemed thoroughly regardless of the bishop's
admonitions upon the sobriety of behaviour due to the solemnity of the
day.  As if in utter defiance of the decency and order recommended by
the clergy, popular exhibitions of all sorts were set up on the broad
flagstones of the great space before the church.  Street dancing-girls
exercised at every available spot those 'gliding gyrations' so
eloquently condemned by the worthy Ammianus Marcellinus of orderly and
historical memory. Booths crammed with relics of doubtful authenticity,
baskets filled with neat manuscript abstracts of furiously
controversial pamphlets, pagan images regenerated into portraits of
saints, pictorial representations of Arians writhing in damnation, and
martyrs basking in haloes of celestial light, tempted, in every
direction, the more pious among the spectators.  Cooks perambulated
with their shops on their backs; rival slave-merchants shouted
petitions for patronage; wine-sellers taught Bacchanalian philosophy
from the tops of their casks; poets recited compositions for sale;
sophisters held arguments destined to convert the wavering and perplex
the ignorant.

Incessant motion and incessant noise seemed to be the sole
compensations sought by the multitude for the disappointment of
exclusion from the church.  If a stranger, after reading the
proclamation of the day, had proceeded to the basilica, to feast his
eyes on the contemplation of the illustrious aggregate of humanity,
entitled by the bishop 'his pious and honourable brethren,' he must, on
mixing at this moment with the assemblage, have either doubted the
truth of the episcopal appellation, or have given the citizens credit
for that refinement of intrinsic worth which is of too elevated a
nature to influence the character of the outward man.


At the time when the sun set, nothing could be more picturesque than
the distant view of this joyous scene.  The deep red rays of the
departing luminary cast their radiance, partly from behind the church,
over the vast multitude in the Place.  Brightly and rapidly the rich
light roved over the waters that leaped towards it from the fountain in
all the loveliness of natural and evanescent form.  Bathed in that
brilliant glow, the smooth porphyry colonnades reflected, chameleon
like, ethereal and varying hues; the white marble statues became
suffused in a delicate rose-colour, and the sober-tinted trees gleamed
in the innermost of their leafy depths as if steeped in the exhalations
of a golden mist. While, contrasting strangely with the wondrous
radiance around them, the huge bronze pine-tree in the middle of the
Place, and the wide front of the basilica, rose up in gloomy shadow,
indefinite and exaggerated, lowering like evil spirits over the joyous
beauty of the rest of the scene, and casting their great depths of
shade into the midst of the light whose dominion they despised.  Beheld
from a distance, this wild combination of vivid brightness and solemn
gloom; these buildings, at one place darkened till they looked
gigantic, at another lightened till they appeared ethereal; these
crowded groups, seeming one great moving mass gleaming at this point in
radiant light, obscured at that in thick shadow, made up a whole so
incongruous and yet so beautiful, so grotesque and yet so sublime, that
the scene looked, for the moment, more like some inhabited meteor, half
eclipsed by its propinquity to earth, than a mortal and material
prospect.

The beauties of this atmospheric effect were of far too serious and
sublime a nature to interest the multitude in the Place.  Out of the
whole assemblage, but two men watched that glorious sunset with even an
appearance of the admiration and attention which it deserved.  One was
the landholder whose wrongs were related in the preceding chapter--the
other his remarkable friend.

These two men formed a singular contrast to each other, both in
demeanour and appearance, as they gazed forth upon the crimson heaven.
The landholder was an under-sized, restless-looking man, whose
features, naturally sharp, were now distorted by a fixed expression of
misery and discontent.  His quick, penetrating glance wandered
incessantly from place to place, perceiving all things, but resting on
none.  In his attention to the scene before him, he appeared to have
been led more by the influence of example than by his own spontaneous
feelings; for ever and anon he looked impatiently round upon his friend
as if expecting him to speak--but no word or movement escaped his
thoughtful companion. Occupied exclusively in his own contemplations,
he appeared wholly insensible to any ordinary outward appeal.

In age and appearance this individual was in the decline of life; for
he had numbered sixty years, his hair was completely grey, and his face
was covered with deep wrinkles.  Yet, in spite of these disadvantages,
he was in the highest sense of the word a handsome man.  Though worn
and thin, his features were still bold and regular; and there was an
elevation about the habitual mournfulness of his expression, and an
intelligence about his somewhat severe and earnest eyes, that bore
eloquent testimony to the superiority of his intellectual powers.  As
he now stood gazing fixedly out into the glowing sky, his tall, meagre
figure half supported upon his staff, his lips firmly compressed, his
brow slightly frowning, and his attitude firm and motionless, the most
superficial observer must have felt immediately that he looked on no
ordinary being.  The history of a life of deep thought--perhaps of long
sorrow--seemed written in every lineament of his meditative
countenance; and there was a natural dignity in his manner, which
evidently restrained his restless companion from offering any
determined interruption to the course of his reflections.

Slowly and gorgeously the sun had continued to wane in the horizon
until he was now lost to view.  As his last rays sunk behind the
distant hills, the stranger started from his reverie and approached the
landholder, pointing with his staff towards the fast-fading brightness
of the western sky.

'Probus,' said he, in a low, melancholy voice, 'as I looked on that
sunset I thought on the condition of the Church.'

'I see little in the Church to think of, or in the sunset to observe,'
replied his companion.

'How pure, how vivid,' murmured the other, scarcely heeding the
landholder's remark, 'was the light which that sun cast upon this earth
at our feet!  How nobly for a time its brightness triumphed over the
shadows around; and yet, in spite of the promise of that radiance, how
swiftly did it fade ere long in its conflict with the gloom--how
thoroughly, even now, has it departed from the earth, and withdrawn the
beauty of its glory from the heavens!  Already the shadows are
lengthening around us, and shrouding in their darkness every object in
the Place.  But a short hour hence, and--should no moon arise--the
gloom of night will stretch unresisted over Rome!'

'To what purpose do you tell me this?'


'Are you not reminded, by what we have observed, of the course of the
worship which it is our privilege to profess?  Does not that first
beautiful light denote its pure and perfect rise; that short conflict
between the radiance and the gloom, its successful preservation, by the
Apostles and the Fathers; that rapid fading of the radiance, its
desecration in later times; and the gloom which now surrounds us, the
destruction which has encompassed it in this age we live in?--a
destruction which nothing can avert but a return to that pure first
faith that should now be the hope of our religion, as the moon is the
hope of night!'

'How should we reform?  Do people who have no liberties care about a
religion?  Who is to teach them?'

'I have--I will.  It is the purpose of my life to restore to them the
holiness of the ancient Church; to rescue them from the snare of
traitors to the faith, whom men call priests.  They shall learn through
me that the Church knew no adornment once, but the presence of the
pure; that the priest craved no finer vestment than his holiness; that
the Gospel, which once taught humility and now raises dispute, was in
former days the rule of faith--sufficient for all wants, powerful over
all difficulties.  Through me they shall know that in times past it was
the guardian of the heart; through me they shall see that in times
present it is the plaything of the proud; through me they shall fear
that in times future it may become the exile of the Church!  To this
task I have vowed myself; to overthrow this idolatry--which, like
another paganism, rises among us with its images, its relics, its
jewels, and its gold--I will devote my child, my life, my energies, and
my possessions.  From this attempt I will never turn aside--from this
determination I will never flinch.  While I have a breath of life in
me, I will persevere in restoring to this abandoned city the true
worship of the Most High!'

He ceased abruptly.  The intensity of his agitation seemed suddenly to
deny to him the faculty of speech.  Every muscle in the frame of that
stern, melancholy man quivered at the immortal promptings of the soul
within him.  There was something almost feminine in his universal
susceptibility to the influence of one solitary emotion.  Even the
rough, desperate landholder felt awed by the enthusiasm of the being
before him, and forgot his wrongs, terrible as they were--and his
misery, poignant as it was--as he gazed upon his companion's face.

For some minutes neither of the men said more.  Soon, however, the last
speaker calmed his agitation with the facility of a man accustomed to
stifle the emotions that he cannot crush, and advancing to the
landholder, took him sorrowfully by the hand.

'I see, Probus, that I have amazed you,' said he; 'but the Church is
the only subject on which I have no discretion.  In all other matters I
have conquered the rashness of my early manhood; in this I have to
wrestle with my hastier nature still.  When I look on the mockeries
that are acting around us; when I behold a priesthood deceivers, a
people deluded, a religion defiled, then, I confess it, my indignation
overpowers my patience, and I burn to destroy, where I ought only to
hope to reform.'

'I knew you always violent of imagination; but when I last saw you your
enthusiasm was love. Your wife--'

'Peace!  She deceived me!'

'Your child--'

'Lives with me at Rome.'

'I remember her an infant, when, fourteen years since, I was your
neighbour in Gaul.  On my departure from the province, you had just
returned from a journey into Italy, unsuccessful in your attempts to
discover there a trace either of your parents, or of that elder brother
whose absence you were wont so continually to lament.  Tell me, have
you, since that period, discovered the members of your ancient
household?  Hitherto you have been so occupied in listening to the
history of my wrongs that you have scarcely spoken of the changes in
your life since we last met.'


'If, Probus, I have been silent to you concerning myself, it is because
for me retrospection has little that attracts.  While yet it was in my
power to return to those parents whom I deserted in my boyhood, I
thought not of repentance; and now that they must be but too surely
lost to me, my yearning towards them is of no avail.  Of my brother,
from whom I parted in a moment of childish jealousy and anger, and
whose pardon and love I would give up even my ambition to acquire, I
have never yet discovered a trace.  Atonement to those whom I  injured
in early life is a privilege denied to the prayers of my age.  From my
parents and my brother I departed unblest, and unforgiven by them I
feel that I am doomed to die!  My life has been careless, useless,
godless, passing from rapine and violence to luxury and indolence, and
leading me to the marriage which I exulted in when I last saw you, but
which I now feel was unworthy alike in its motives and its results.
But blessed and thrice blessed by that last calamity of my wicked
existence, for it opened my eyes to the truth--it made a Christian of
me while I was yet alive!'

'Is it thus that the Christian can view his afflictions?  I would,
then, that I were a Christian like you!' murmured the landholder, in
low, earnest tones.

'It was in those first days, Probus,' continued the other, 'when I
found myself deserted and dishonoured, left alone to be the guardian of
my helpless child, exiled for ever from a home that I had myself
forsaken, that I repented me in earnest of my misdeeds, that I sought
wisdom from the book of salvation, and the conduct of life from the
Fathers of the Church.  It was at that time that I determined to devote
my child, like Samuel of old, to the service of heaven, and myself to
the reformation of our degraded worship.  As I have already told you, I
forsook my abode and changed my name (remember it is as 'Numerian' that
you must henceforth address me), that of my former self no remains
might be left, that of my former companions not one might ever discover
and tempt me again.  With incessant care have I shielded my daughter
from the contamination of the world.  As a precious jewel in a miser's
hands she has been watched and guarded in her father's house.  Her
destiny is to soothe the afflicted, to watch the sick, to succour the
forlorn, when I, her teacher, have restored to the land the dominion of
its ancient faith and the guidance of its faultless Gospel.  We have
neither of us an affection or a hope that can bind us to the things of
earth.  Our hearts look both towards heaven; our expectations are only
from on high!'

'Do not set your hopes too firmly on your child.  Remember how the
nobles of Rome have destroyed the household I once had, and tremble for
your own.'

'I have no fear for my daughter; she is cared for in my absence by one
who is vowed to aid me in my labours for the Church.  It is now nearly
a year since I first met Ulpius, and from that time forth he has
devoted himself to my service and watched over my child.'

'Who is this Ulpius, that you should put such faith in him?'

'He is a man of age like mine.  I found him, like me, worn down by the
calamities of his early life, and abandoned, as I had once been, to the
delusions of the pagan gods.  He was desolate, suffering, forlorn, and
I had pity on him in his misery.  I proved to him that the worship he
still professed was banished for its iniquities from the land; that the
religion which had succeeded it had become defiled by man, and that
there remained but one faith for him to choose, if he would be
saved--the faith of the early Church.  He heard me and was converted.
From that moment he has served me patiently and helped me willingly.
Under the roof where I assemble the few who as yet are true believers,
he is always the first to come and the last to remain.  No word of
anger has ever crossed his lips--no look of impatience has ever
appeared in his eyes. Though sorrowful, he is gentle; though suffering,
he is industrious.  I have trusted him with all I possess, and I glory
in my credulity!  Ulpius is incorruptible!'

'And your daughter?--is Ulpius reverenced by her as he is respected by
you?'


'She knows that her duty is to love whom I love, and to avoid whom I
avoid.  Can you imagine that a Christian virgin has any feelings
disobedient to her father's wishes?  Come to my house; judge with your
own eyes of my daughter and my companion.  You, whose misfortunes have
left you no home, shall find one, if you will, with me.  Come then and
labour with me in my great undertaking!  You will withdraw your mind
from the contemplation of your woes, and merit by your devotion the
favour of the Most High.'

'No, Numerian, I will still be independent, even of my friends!  Nor
Rome nor Italy are abiding-places for me.  I go to another land to
abide among another people, until the arms of a conqueror shall have
restored freedom to the brave and protection to the honest throughout
the countries of the Empire.'

'Probus, I implore you stay!'

'Never!  My determination is taken, Numerian--farewell!'

For a few minutes Numerian stood motionless, gazing wistfully in the
direction taken by his companion on his departure.  At first an
expression of grief and pity softened the austerity which seemed the
habitual characteristic of his countenance when in repose, but soon
these milder and tenderer feelings appeared to vanish from his heart as
suddenly as they had arisen; his features reassumed their customary
sternness, and he muttered to himself as he mixed with the crowd
struggling onwards in the direction of the basilica:  'Let him depart
unregretted; he has denied himself to the service of his Maker.  He
should no longer be my friend.'

In this sentence lay the index to the character of the man.  His
existence was one vast sacrifice, one scene of intrepid
self-immolation. Although, in the brief hints at the events of his life
which he had communicated to his friend, he had exaggerated the extent
of his errors, he had by no means done justice to the fervour of his
penitence--a penitence which outstripped the usual boundaries of
repentance, and only began in despair to terminate in fanaticism.  His
desertion of his father's house (into the motives of which it is not
our present intention to enter), and his long subsequent existence of
violence and excess, indisposed his naturally strong passions to submit
to the slightest restraint.  In obedience to their first impulses, he
contracted, at a mature age, a marriage with a woman thoroughly
unworthy of the ardent admiration that she had inspired.  When he found
himself deceived and dishonoured by her, the shock of such an
affliction thrilled through his whole being--crushed all his
energies--struck him prostrate, heart and mind, at one blow.  The
errors of his youth, committed in his prosperity with moral impunity,
reacted upon him in his adversity with an influence fatal to his future
peace.  His repentance was darkened by despondency; his resolutions
were unbrightened by hope. He flew to religion as the suicide flies to
the knife--in despair.

Leaving all remaining peculiarities in Numerian's character to be
discussed at a future opportunity, we will now follow him in his
passage through the crowd, to the entrance of the basilica--continuing
to designate him, here and elsewhere, by the name which he had assumed
on his conversion, and by which he had insisted on being addressed
during his interview with the fugitive landholder.

Although at the commencement of his progress towards the church, our
enthusiast found himself placed among the hindermost of the members of
the advancing throng, he soon contrived so thoroughly to outstrip his
dilatory and discursive neighbours as to gain, with little delay, the
steps of the sacred building.  Here, in common with many others, he was
compelled to stop, while those nearest the basilica squeezed their way
through its stately doors.  In such a situation his remarkable figure
could not fail to be noticed, and he was silently recognised by many of
the bystanders, some of whom looked on him with wonder, and some with
aversion. Nobody, however, approached or spoke to him.  Every one felt
the necessity of shunning a man whose bold and daily exposures of the
abuses of the Church placed in incessant peril his liberty, and even
his life.


Among the bystanders who surrounded Numerian, there were nevertheless
two who did not remain content with carelessly avoiding any
communication with the intrepid and suspected reformer.  These two men
belonged to the lowest order of the clergy, and appeared to be occupied
in cautiously watching the actions and listening to the conversation of
the individuals immediately around them.  The instant they beheld
Numerian they moved so as to elude his observation, taking care at the
same time to occupy such a position as enabled them to keep in view the
object of their evident distrust.

'Look, Osius,' said one, 'that man is here again!'

'And doubtless with the same motives which brought him here yesterday,'
replied the other. 'You will see that he will again enter the church,
listen to the service, retire to his little chapel near the Pincian
Mount, and there, before his ragged mob of adherents, attack the
doctrines which our brethren have preached, as we know he did last
night, and as we suspect he will continue to do until the authorities
think proper to give the signal for his imprisonment.'

'I marvel that he should have been permitted to persist so long a time
as he has in his course of contumacy towards the Church.  Have we not
evidence enough in his writings alone to convict him of heresy?  The
carelessness of the bishop upon such a matter as this is quite
inexplicable!'

'You should consider, Numerian not being a priest, that the
carelessness about our interests lies more with the senate than the
bishop.  What time our nobles can spare from their debaucheries has
been lately given to discussions on the conduct of the Emperor in
retiring to Ravenna, and will now be dedicated to penetrating the basis
of this rumour about the Goths.  Besides, even were they at liberty,
what care the senate about theological disputes? They only know this
Numerian as a citizen of Rome, a man of some influence and possessions,
and, consequently, a person of political importance as a member of the
population.  In addition to which, it would be no easy task for us at
the present moment to impugn the doctrines broached by our assailant;
for the fellow has a troublesome facility of supporting what he says by
the Bible.  Believe me, in this matter, our only way of righting
ourselves will be to convict him of scandal against the highest
dignitaries of the Church.'

'The order that we have lately received to track his movements and
listen to his discourses, leads me to believe that our superiors are of
your opinion.'

'Whether my convictions are correct or not, of this I feel
assured--that his days of liberty are numbered.  It was but a few hours
ago that I saw the bishop's chamberlain's head-assistant, and he told
me that he had heard, through the crevice of a door--'

'Hush! he moves; he is pressing forward to enter the church.  You can
tell me what you were about to say as we follow him.  Quick! let us mix
with the crowd.'

Ever enthusiastic in the performance of their loathsome duties, these
two discreet pastors of a Christian flock followed Numerian with the
most elaborate caution into the interior of the sacred building.


Although the sun still left a faint streak of red in the western sky,
and the moon had as yet scarcely risen, the great chandelier of two
thousand four hundred lamps, mentioned by the bishop in his address to
the people, was already alight.  In the days of its severe and sacred
beauty, the appearance of the church would have suffered fatally by
this blaze of artificial brilliancy; but now that the ancient character
of the basilica was completely changed, now that from a solemn temple
it had been altered to the semblance of a luxurious palace, it gained
immensely by its gaudy illumination.  Not an ornament along the vast
extent of its glorious nave but glittered in vivid distinctness in the
dazzling light that poured downwards from the roof.  The gilded
rafters, the smooth inlaid marble pillars, the rich hangings of the
windows, the jewelled candlesticks on the altars, the pictures, the
statues, the bronzes, the mosaics, each and all glowed with a steady
and luxurious transparency absolutely intoxicating to the eye. Not a
trace of wear, not a vestige of tarnish now appeared on any object.
Each portion of the nave to which the attention was directed appeared
too finely, spotlessly radiant, ever to have been touched by mortal
hands. Entranced and bewildered, the observation roamed over the
surface of the brilliant scene, until, wearied by the unbroken
embellishment of the prospect, it wandered for repose upon the dimly
lighted aisles, and dwelt with delight upon the soft shadows that
hovered about their distant pillars, and the gliding forms that peopled
their dusky recesses, or loitered past their lofty walls.

At the moment when Numerian entered the basilica, a part of the service
had just concluded. The last faint echo from the voices of the choir
still hung upon the incense-laden air, and the vast masses of the
spectators were still grouped in their listening and various attitudes,
as the devoted reformer looked forth upon the church.  Even he, stern
as he was, seemed for a moment subdued by the ineffable enchantment of
the scene; but ere long, as if displeased with his own involuntary
emotions of admiration, his brow contracted, and he sighed heavily, as
(still followed by the attentive spies) he sought the comparative
seclusion of the aisles.

During the interval between the divisions of the service, the
congregation occupied themselves in staring at the relics, which were
enclosed in a silver cabinet with crystal doors, and placed on the top
of the high altar.  Although it was impossible to obtain a satisfactory
view of these ecclesiastical treasures, they nevertheless employed the
attention of every one until the appearance of a priest in the pulpit
gave signal of the commencement of the sermon, and admonished all those
who had seats to secure them without delay.

Passing through the ranks of the auditors of the sermon--some of whom
were engaged in counting the lights in the chandelier, to be certain
that the bishop had not defrauded them of one out of the two thousand
four hundred lamps; others in holding whispered conversations, and
opening small boxes of sweetmeats--we again conduct the reader to the
outside of the church.

The assemblage here had by this time much diminished; the shadows flung
over the ground by the lofty colonnades had deepened and increased; and
in many of the more remote recesses of the Place hardly a human being
was to be observed.  At one of these extremities, where the pillars
terminated in the street and the obscurity was most intense, stood a
solitary old man keeping himself cautiously concealed in the darkness,
and looking out anxiously upon the public way immediately before him.

He had waited but a short time when a handsome chariot, preceded by a
body-guard of gaily-attired slaves, stopped within a few paces of his
lurking-place, and the voice of the person it contained pronounced
audibly the following words:--

'No! no!  Drive on--we are later than I thought.  If I stay to see this
illumination of the basilica, I shall not be in time to receive my
guests for to-night's banquet.  Besides, this inestimable kitten of the
breed most worshipped by the ancient Egyptians has already taken cold,
and I would not for the world expose the susceptible animal any longer
than is necessary to the dampness of the night-air.  Drive on, good
Carrio, drive on!'

The old man scarcely waited for the conclusion of this speech before he
ran up to the chariot, where he was immediately confronted by two
heads--one that of Vetranio the senator, the other that of a glossy
black kitten adorned with a collar of rubies, and half enveloped in its
master's ample robes.  Before the astonished noble could articulate a
word, the man whispered in hoarse, hurried accents, 'I am
Ulpius--dismiss your servants--I have something important to say!'

'Ha! my worthy Ulpius!  You have a most unhappy faculty of delivering a
message with the manner of an assassin!  But I must pardon your
unpleasant abruptness in consideration of your diligence.  My excellent
Carrio, If you value my approbation, remove your companions and
yourself out of hearing!'


The freedman yielded instant obedience to his master's mandate.  The
following conversation then took place, the strange man opening it
thus:--

'You remember your promise?'

'I do.'

'Upon your honour, as a nobleman and a senator, you are prepared to
abide by it whenever it is necessary?'

'I am.'

'Then at the dawn of morning meet me at the private gate of your palace
garden, and I will conduct you to Antonina's bedchamber.'

'The time will suit me.  But why at the dawn of morning?'

'Because the Christian dotard will keep a vigil until midnight, which
the girl will most probably attend.  I wished to tell you this at your
palace, but I heard there that you had gone to Aricia, and would return
by way of the basilica; so I posted myself to intercept you thus.'

'Industrious Ulpius!'

'Remember your promise!'

Vetranio leaned forward to reply, but Ulpius was gone.

As the senator again commanded his equipage to move on, he looked
anxiously around him, as if once more expecting to see his strange
adherent still lurking near the chariot.  He only perceived, however, a
man whom he did not know, followed by two other, walking rapidly past
him.  They were Numerian and the spies.

'At last, my projects are approaching consummation,' exclaimed Vetranio
to himself, as he and his kitten rolled off in the chariot.  'It is
well that I thought of securing possession of Julia's villa to-day, for
I shall now, assuredly, want to use it to-morrow.  Jupiter!  What a
mass of dangers, contradictions, and mysteries encompass this affair!
When I think that I, who pride myself on my philosophy, have quitted
Ravenna, borrowed a private villa, leagued myself with an uncultivated
plebeian, and all for the sake of a girl who has already deceived my
expectations by gaining me as a music-master without admitting me as a
lover, I am positively astonished at my own weakness!  Still it must be
owned that the complexion my adventure has lately assumed renders it of
some interest in itself.  The mere pleasure of penetrating the secrets
of this Numerian's household is by no means the least among the
numerous attraction of my design.  How has he gained his influence over
the girl? Why does he keep her in such strict seclusion?  Who is this
old half-frantic, unceremonious man-monster calling himself Ulpius;
refusing all reward for his villainy; raving about a return to the old
religion of the gods; and exulting in the promise he has extorted from
me, as a good pagan, to support the first restoration of the ancient
worship that may be attempted in Rome?  Where does he come from?  Why
does he outwardly profess himself a Christian?  What sent him into
Numerian's service?  By the girdle of Venus! everything connected with
the girl is as incomprehensible as herself!  But patience--patience!  A
few hours more, and these mysteries will be revealed.  In the meantime,
let me think of my banquet, and of its presiding deity, the Nightingale
Sauce!'



CHAPTER 5.

ANTONINA.

Who that has been at Rome does not remember with delight the
attractions of the Pincian Hill?  Who, after toiling through the
wonders of the dark, melancholy city, has not been revived by a visit
to its shady walks, and by breathing its fragrant breezes?  Amid the
solemn mournfulness that reigns over declining Rome, this delightful
elevation rises light, airy, and inviting, at once a refreshment to the
body and a solace to the spirit.  From its smooth summit the city is
seen in its utmost majesty, and the surrounding country in its
brightest aspect. The crimes and miseries of Rome seem deterred from
approaching its favoured soil; it impresses the mind as a place set
apart by common consent for the presence of the innocent and the
joyful--as a scene that rest and recreation keep sacred from the
intrusion of tumult and toil.

Its appearance in modern days is the picture of its character for ages
past.  Successive wars might dull its beauties for a time, but peace
invariably restored them in all their pristine loveliness.  The old
Romans called it 'The Mount of Gardens'.  Throughout the disasters of
the Empire and the convulsions of the Middle Ages, it continued to
merit its ancient appellation, and a 'Mount of Gardens' it still
triumphantly remains to the present day.

At the commencement of the fifth century the magnificence of the
Pincian Hill was at its zenith. Were it consistent with the conduct of
our story to dwell upon the glories of its palaces and its groves, its
temples and its theatres, such a glowing prospect of artificial
splendour, aided by natural beauty, might be spread before the reader
as would tax his credulity, while it excited his astonishment.  This
task, however, it is here unnecessary to attempt.  It is not for the
wonders of ancient luxury and taste, but for the abode of the zealous
and religious Numerian, that we find it now requisite to arouse
interest and engage attention.

At the back of the Flaminian extremity of the Pincian Hill, and
immediately overlooking the city wall, stood, at the period of which we
write, a small but elegantly built house, surrounded by a little garden
of its own, and protected at the back by the lofty groves and
outbuildings of the palace of Vetranio the senator.  This abode had
been at one time a sort of summer-house belonging to the former
proprietor of a neighbouring mansion.

Profligate necessities, however, had obliged the owner to part with
this portion of his possessions, which was purchased by a merchant well
known to Numerian, who received it as a legacy at his friend's death.
Disgusted, as soon as his reforming projects took possession of his
mind, at the bare idea of propinquity to the ennobled libertines of
Rome, the austere Christian determined to abandon his inheritance, and
to sell it to another; but, at the repeated entreaties of his daughter,
he at length consented to change his purpose, and sacrifice his
antipathy to his luxurious neighbours to his child's youthful
attachment to the beauties of Nature as displayed in his legacy on the
Pincian Mount.  In this instance only did the natural affection of the
father prevail over the acquired severity of the reformer.  Here he
condescended, for the first and the last time, to the sweet
trivialities of youth.  Here, indulgent in spite of himself, he fixed
his little household, and permitted to his daughter her sole
recreations of tending the flowers in the garden and luxuriating in the
loveliness of the distant view.

      *      *      *      *      *

The night has advanced an hour since the occurrence mentioned in the
preceding chapter. The clear and brilliant moonlight of Italy now
pervades every district of the glorious city, and bathes in its pure
effulgence the groves and palaces on the Pincian Mount.  From the
garden of Numerian the irregular buildings of the great suburbs of
Rome, the rich undulating country beyond, and the long ranges of
mountains in the distance, are now all visible in the soft and
luxurious light.  Near the spot which commands this view, not a living
creature is to be seen on a first examination; but on a more
industrious and patient observation, you are subsequently able to
detect at one of the windows of Numerian's house, half hidden by a
curtain, the figure of a young girl.


Soon this solitary form approaches nearer to the eye.  The moonbeams,
that have hitherto shone only upon the window, now illuminate other
objects.  First they display a small, white arm; then a light, simple
robe; then a fair, graceful neck; and finally a bright, youthful,
innocent face, directed steadfastly towards the wide moon-brightened
prospect of the distant mountains.

For some time the girl remains in contemplation at her window.  Then
she leaves her post, and almost immediately reappears at a door leading
into the garden.  Her figure, as she advances towards the lawn before
her, is light and small--a natural grace and propriety appear in her
movements--she holds pressed to her bosom and half concealed by her
robe, a gilt lute.  When she reaches a turf bank commanding the same
view as the window, she arranges her instrument upon her knees, and
with something of restraint in her manner gently touches the chords.
Then, as if alarmed at the sound she has produced, she glances
anxiously around her, apparently fearful of being overheard.  Her
large, dark, lustrous eyes have in them an expression of apprehension;
her delicate lips are half parted; a sudden flush rises in her soft,
olive complexion as she examines every corner of the garden.  Having
completed her survey without discovering any cause for the suspicions
she seems to entertain, she again employs herself over her instrument.
Once more she strikes the chords, and now with a bolder hand.  The
notes she produces resolve themselves into a wild, plaintive, irregular
melody, alternately rising and sinking, as if swayed by the fickle
influence of a summer wind. These sounds are soon harmoniously
augmented by the young minstrel's voice, which is calm, still, and
mellow, and adapts itself with exquisite ingenuity to every arbitrary
variation in the tone of the accompaniment.  The song that she has
chosen is one of the fanciful odes of the day.  Its chief merit to her
lies in its alliance to the strange Eastern air which she heard at her
first interview with the senator who presented her with the lute.
Paraphrased in English, the words of the composition would run thus:--

THE ORIGIN OF MUSIC

I.

    Spirit, whose dominion reigns
    Over Music's thrilling strains,
    Whence may be thy distant birth?
    Say what tempted thee to earth?

    Mortal, listen: I was born
    In Creation's early years,
    Singing, 'mid the stars of morn,
    To the music of the spheres.

    Once as, within the realms of space,
    I view'd this mortal planet roll,
    A yearning towards they hapless race,
    Unbidden, filled my seraph soul!

    Angels, who had watched my birth,
    Heard me sigh to sing to earth;
    'Twas transgression ne'er forgiv'n
    To forget my native Heav'n;
    So they sternly bade me go--
    Banish'd to the world below.


II.

    Exil'd here, I knew no fears;
    For, though darkness round me clung,
    Though none heard me in the spheres,
    Earth had listeners while I sung.

    Young spirits of the Spring sweet breeze
    Came thronging round me, soft and coy,
    Light wood-nymphs sported in the trees,
    And laughing Echo leapt for joy!

    Brooding Woe and writhing Pain
    Soften'd at my gentle strain;
    Bounding Joy, with footstep fleet,
    Ran to nestle at my feet;
    While, aroused, delighted Love
    Softly kiss'd me from above!


III.

    Since those years of early time,
    Faithful still to earth I've sung;
    Flying through each distant clime,
    Ever welcome, ever young!

    Still pleas'd, my solace I impart
    Where brightest hopes are scattered dead;
    'Tis mine--sweet gift!--to charm the heart,
    Though all its other joys have fled!

    Time, that withers all beside,
    Harmless past me loves to glide;
    Change, that mortals must obey,
    Ne'er shall shake my gentle sway;
    Still 'tis mine all hearts to move
    In eternity of love.

As the last sounds of her voice and her lute died softly away upon the
still night air, an indescribable elevation appeared in the girl's
countenance.  She looked up rapturously into the far, star-bright sky;
her lip quivered, her dark eyes filled with tears, and her bosom heaved
with the excess of the emotions that the music and the scene inspired.
Then she gazed slowly around her, dwelling tenderly upon the fragrant
flower-beds that were the work of her own hands, and looking forth with
an expression half reverential, half ecstatic over the long, smooth,
shining plains, and the still, glorious mountains, that had so long
been the inspiration of her most cherished thoughts, and that now
glowed before her eyes, soft and beautiful as her dreams on her virgin
couch. Then, overpowered by the artless thoughts and innocent
recollections which on the magic wings of Nature and Night came wafted
over her mind, she bent down her head upon her lute, pressed her round,
dimpled cheek against its smooth frame, and drawing her fingers
mechanically over its strings, abandoned herself unreservedly to the
reveries of maidenhood and youth.

Such was the being devoted by her father's fatal ambition to a lifelong
banishment from all that is attractive in human art and beautiful in
human intellect!  Such was the daughter whose existence was to be one
long acquaintance with mortal woe, one unvaried refusal of mortal
pleasure, whose thoughts were to be only of sermons and fasts, whose
action were to be confined to the binding up of strangers' wounds and
the drying of strangers' tears; whose life, in brief, was doomed to be
the embodiment of her father's austere ideal of the austere virgins of
the ancient Church!

Deprived of her mother, exiled from the companionship of others of her
age, permitted no familiarity with any living being, no sympathies with
any other heart, commanded but never indulged, rebuked but never
applauded, she must have sunk beneath the severities imposed on her by
her father, but for the venial disobedience committed in the pursuit of
the solitary pleasure procured for her by her lute.  Vainly, in her
hours of study, did she read the fierce anathemas against love,
liberty, and pleasure, poetry, painting, and music, gold, silver, and
precious stones, which the ancient fathers had composed for the benefit
of the submissive congregations of former days; vainly did she imagine,
during those long hours of theological instruction, that her heart's
forbidden longings were banished and destroyed--that her patient and
childlike disposition was bowed in complete subserviency to the most
rigorous of her father's commands.  No sooner were her interviews with
Numerian concluded than the promptings of that nature within us, which
artifice may warp but can never destroy, lured her into a forgetfulness
of all that she had heard and a longing for much that was forbidden.
We live, in this existence, but by the companionship of some sympathy,
aspiration, or pursuit, which serves us as our habitual refuge from the
tribulations we inherit from the outer world. The same feeling which
led Antonina in her childhood to beg for a flower-garden, in her
girlhood induced her to gain possession of a lute.

The passion for music which prompted her visit to Vetranio, which alone
saved her affections from pining in the solitude imposed on them, and
which occupied her leisure hours in the manner we have already
described, was an inheritance of her birth.


Her Spanish mother had sung to her, hour after hour, in her cradle, for
the short time during which she was permitted to watch over her child.
The impression thus made on the dawning faculties of the infant,
nothing ever effaced.  Though her earliest perception were greeted only
by the sight of her father's misery; though the form which his
despairing penitence soon assumed doomed her to a life of seclusion and
an education of admonition, the passionate attachment to the melody of
sound, inspired by her mother's voice--almost imbibed at her mother's
breast--lived through all neglect, and survived all opposition.  It
found its nourishment in childish recollections, in snatches of street
minstrelsy heard through her window, in the passage of the night winds
of winter through the groves on the Pincian Mount, and received its
rapturous gratification in the first audible sounds from the Roman
senator's lute.  How her possession of an instrument, and her skill in
playing, were subsequently gained, the reader already knows from
Vetranio's narrative at Ravenna.  Could the frivolous senator have
discovered the real intensity of the emotions his art was raising in
his pupil's bosom while he taught her; could he have imagined how
incessantly, during their lessons, her sense of duty struggled with her
love for music--how completely she was absorbed, one moment by an agony
of doubt and fear, another by an ecstasy of enjoyment and hope--he
would have felt little of that astonishment at her coldness towards
himself which he so warmly expressed at his interview with Julia in the
gardens of the Court.  In truth, nothing could be more complete than
Antonina's childish unconsciousness of the feelings with which Vetranio
regarded her.  In entering his presence, whatever remnant of her
affections remained unwithered by her fears was solely attracted and
engrossed by the beloved and beautiful lute.  In receiving the
instrument, she almost forgot the giver in the triumph of possession;
or, if she thought of him at all, it was to be grateful for having
escaped uninjured from a member of that class, for whom her father's
reiterated admonitions had inspired her with a vague feeling of dread
and distrust, and to determine that, now she had acknowledged his
kindness and departed from his domains, nothing should ever induce her
to risk discovery by her father and peril to herself by ever entering
them again.

Innocent in her isolation, almost infantine in her natural simplicity,
a single enjoyment was sufficient to satisfy all the passions of her
age. Father, mother, lover, and companion; liberties, amusements, and
adornments--they were all summed up for her in that simple lute.  The
archness, the liveliness, and the gentleness of her disposition; the
poetry of her nature, and the affection of her heart; the happy bloom
of youth, which seclusion could not all wither nor distorted precept
taint, were now entirely nourished, expanded, and freshened--such is
the creative power of human emotion--by that inestimable possession.
She could speak to it, smile on it, caress it, and believe, in the
ecstasy of her delight, in the carelessness of her self-delusion, that
it sympathised with her joy.  During her long solitudes, when she was
silently watched in her father's absence by the brooding, melancholy
stranger whom he had set over her, it became a companion dearer than
the flower-garden, dearer even that the plains and mountains which
formed her favourite view.  When her father returned, and she was led
forth to sit in a dark place among strange, silent people, and to
listen to interminable declamations, it was a solace to think of the
instrument as it lay hidden securely in her chamber, and to ponder
delightedly on what new music of her own she could play upon it next.
And then, when evening arrived, and she was left alone in her
garden--then came the hour of moonlight and song; the moment of rapture
and melody that drew her out of herself, elevated her she felt not how,
and transported her she knew not whither.

But, while we thus linger over reflection on motives and examinations
into character, we are called back to the outer world of passing
interests and events by the appearances of another figure on the scene.
We left Antonina in the garden thinking over her lute.  She still
remains in her meditative position, but she is now no longer alone.

From the same steps by which she had descended, a man now advances into
the garden, and walks towards the place she occupies.  His gait is
limping, his stature crooked, his proportions distorted.  His large,
angular features stand out in gaunt contrast to his shrivelled cheeks.
His dry, matted hair has been burnt by the sun into a strange tawny
brown.  His expression is one of fixed, stern, mournful thought.  As he
steps stealthily along, advancing towards Antonina, he mutters to
himself, and clutches mechanically at his garments with his lank,
shapeless fingers. The radiant moonlight, falling fully upon his
countenance, invests it with a livid, mysterious, spectral appearance:
seen by a stranger at the present moment, he would have been almost
awful to look upon.

This was the man who had intercepted Vetranio on his journey home, and
who had now hurried back so as to regain his accustomed post before his
master's return, for he was the same individual mentioned by Numerian
as his aged convert, Ulpius, in his interview with the landholder at
the Basilica of St. Peter.

When Ulpius had arrived within a few paces of the girl he stopped,
saying in a hoarse, thick voice--

'Hide your toy--Numerian is at the gates!'


Antonina started violently as she listened to those repulsive accents.
The blood rushed into her cheeks; she hastily covered the lute with her
robe; paused an instant, as if intending to speak to the man, then
shuddered violently, and hurried towards the house.

As she mounted the steps Numerian met her in the hall.  There was now
no chance of hiding the lute in its accustomed place.

'You stay too late in the garden,' said the father, looking proudly, in
spite of all his austerity, upon his beautiful daughter as she stood by
his side.  'But what affects you?' he added, noticing her confusion.
'You tremble; your colour comes and goes; your lips quiver.  Give me
your hand!'

As Antonina obeyed him, a fold of the treacherous robe slipped aside,
and discovered a part of the frame of the lute.  Numerian's quick eye
discovered it immediately.  He snatched the instrument from her feeble
grasp.  His astonishment on beholding it was too great for words, and
for an instant he confronted the poor girl, whose pale face looked
rigid with terror, in ominous and expressive silence.

'This thing,' said he at length, 'this invention of libertines in my
house--in my daughter's possession!' and he dashed the lute into
fragments on the floor.

For one moment Antonina looked incredulously on the ruins of the
beloved companion, which was the centre of all her happiest
expectations for future days.  Then, as she began to estimate the
reality of her deprivation, her eyes lost all their heaven-born
brightness, and filled to overflowing with the tears of earth.

'To your chamber!' thundered Numerian, as she knelt, sobbing
convulsively, over those hapless fragments.  'To your chamber!
Tomorrow shall bring this mystery of iniquity to light!'

She rose humbly to obey him, for indignation had no part in the
emotions that shook her gentle and affectionate nature.  As she moved
towards the room that no lute was henceforth to occupy, as she thought
on the morrow that no lute was henceforth to enliven, her grief almost
overpowered her.  She turned back and looked imploringly at her father,
as if entreating permission to pick up even the smallest of the
fragments at his feet.

'To your chamber!' he reiterated sternly.  'Am I to be disobeyed to my
face?'

Without any repetition of her silent remonstrance, she instantly
retired.  As soon as she was out of sight, Ulpius ascended the steps
and stood before the angered father.

'Look, Ulpius,' cried Numerian, 'my daughter, whom I have so carefully
cherished, whom I intended for an example to the world, has deceived
me, even thus!'

He pointed, as he spoke, to the ruins of the unfortunate lute; but
Ulpius did not address to him a word in reply, and he hastily
continued:--

'I will not sully the solemn offices of tonight by interrupting them
with my worldly affairs. To-morrow I will interrogate my disobedient
child.  In the meantime, do not imagine, Ulpius, that I connect you in
any way with this wicked and unworthy deception!  In you I have every
confidence, in your faithfulness I have every hope.'

Again he paused, and again Ulpius kept silence.  Any one less agitated,
less confiding, than his unsuspicious master, would have remarked that
a faint sinister smile was breaking forth upon his haggard countenance.
But Numerian's indignation was still too violent to permit him to
observed, and, spite of his efforts to control himself, he again broke
forth in complaint.


'On this night too, of all others,' cried he, 'when I had hoped to lead
her among my little assembly of the faithful, to join in their prayers,
and to listen to my exhortations--on this night I am doomed to find her
a player on a pagan lute, a possessor of the most wanton of the world's
vanities!  God give me patience to worship this night with unwandering
thoughts, for my heart is vexed at the transgression of my child, as
the heart of Eli of old at the iniquities of his sons!'

He was moving rapidly away, when, as if struck with a sudden
recollection, he stopped abruptly, and again addressed his gloomy
companion.

'I will go by myself to the chapel to-night,' said he.  'You, Ulpius,
will stay to keep watch over my disobedient child.  Be vigilant, good
friend, over my house; for even now, on my return, I thought that two
strangers were following my steps, and I forebode some evil in store
for me as the chastisement for my sins, even greater than this misery
of my daughter's transgression.  Be watchful, good Ulpius--be watchful!'

And, as he hurried away, the stern, serious man felt as overwhelmed at
the outrage that had been offered to his gloomy fanaticism, as the
weak, timid girl at the destruction that had been wreaked upon her
harmless lute.

After Numerian had departed, the sinister smile again appeared on the
countenance of Ulpius. He stood for a short time fixed in thought, and
then began slowly to descend a staircase near him which led to some
subterranean apartments.  He had not gone far when a slight noise
became audible at an extremity of the corridor above.  As he listened
for a repetition of the sound, he heard a sob, and looking cautiously
up, discovered, by the moonlight, Antonina stepping cautiously along
the marble pavement of the hall.

She held in her hand a little lamp; her small, rosy feet were
uncovered; the tears still streamed over her cheeks.  She advanced with
the greatest caution (as if fearful of being overheard) until she
gained the part of the floor still strewn with the ruins of the broken
lute.  Here she knelt down, and pressed each fragment that lay before
her separately to her lips.  Then hurriedly concealing a single piece
in her bosom, she arose and stole quickly away in the direction by
which she had come.

'Be patient till the dawn,' muttered her faithless guardian, gazing
after her from his concealment as she disappeared; 'it will bring to
thy lute a restorer, and to Ulpius an ally!'



CHAPTER 6.

AN APPRENTICESHIP TO THE TEMPLE.

The action of our characters during the night included in the last two
chapters has now come to a pause.  Vetranio is awaiting his guests for
the banquet; Numerian is in the chapel, preparing for the discourse
that he is to deliver to his friends; Ulpius is meditating in his
master's house; Antonina is stretched upon her couch, caressing the
precious fragment that she had saved from the ruins of her lute.  All
the immediate agents of our story are, for the present, in repose.

It is our purpose to take advantage of this interval of inaction, and
direct the reader's attention to a different country from that selected
as the scene of our romance, and to such historical events of past
years as connect themselves remarkably with the early life of
Numerian's perfidious convert.  This man will be found a person of
great importance in the future conduct of our story.  It is necessary
to the comprehension of his character, and the penetration of such of
his purposes as have been already hinted at, and may subsequently
appear, that the long course of his existence should be traced upwards
to its source.

It was in the reign of Julian, when the gods of the Pagan achieved
their last victory over the Gospel of the Christian, that a decently
attired man, leading by the hand a handsome boy of fifteen years of
age, entered the gates of Alexandria, and proceeded hastily towards the
high priest's dwelling in the Temple of Serapis.


After a stay of some hours at his destination, the man left the city
alone as hastily as he entered it, and was never after seen at
Alexandria.  The boy remained in the abode of the high priest until the
next day, when he was solemnly devoted to the service of the temple.

The boy was the young Emilius, afterwards called Ulpius.  He was nephew
to the high priest, to whom he had been confided by his father, a
merchant of Rome.

Ambition was the ruling passion of the father of Emilius.  It had
prompted him to aspire to every distinction granted to the successful
by the state, but it had not gifted him with the powers requisite to
turn his aspirations in any instance into acquisitions.  He passed
through existence a disappointed man, planning but never performing,
seeing his more fortunate brother rising to the highest distinction in
the priesthood, and finding himself irretrievably condemned to exist in
the affluent obscurity ensured to him by his mercantile pursuits.

When his brother Macrinus, on Julian's accession to the imperial
throne, arrived at the pinnacle of power and celebrity as high priest
of the Temple of Serapis, the unsuccessful merchant lost all hope of
rivalling his relative in the pursuit of distinction.  His insatiable
ambition, discarded from himself, now settled on one of his infant
sons.  He determined that his child should be successful where he had
failed.  Now that his brother had secured the highest elevation in the
temple, no calling could offer more direct advantages to a member of
his household that the priesthood.  His family had been from their
earliest origin rigid Pagans.  One of them had already attained to the
most distinguished honours of his gorgeous worship.  He determined that
another should rival his kinsman, and that that other should be his
eldest son.

Firm in this resolution, he at once devoted his child to the great
design which he now held continually in view.  He knew well that
Paganism, revived though it was, was not the universal worship that it
had been; that it was now secretly resisted, and might soon be openly
opposed, by the persecuted Christians throughout the Empire; and that
if the young generation were to guard it successfully from all future
encroachments, and to rise securely to its highest honours, more must
be exacted from them than the easy attachment to the ancient religion
require from the votaries of former days.  Then, the performance of the
most important offices in the priesthood was compatible with the
possession of military or political rank.  Now, it was to the temple,
and to the temple only, that the future servant of the gods should be
devoted.  Resolving thus, the father took care that all the son's
occupations and rewards should, from his earliest years, be in some way
connected with the career for which he was intended.  His childish
pleasures were to be conducted to sacrifices and auguries; his childish
playthings and prizes were images of the deities.  No opposition was
offered on the boy's part to this plan of education.  Far different
from his younger brother, whose turbulent disposition defied all
authority, he was naturally docile; and his imagination, vivid beyond
his years, was easily led captive by any remarkable object presented to
it.  With such encouragement, his father became thoroughly engrossed by
the occupation of forming him for his future existence.  His mother's
influence over him was jealously watched; the secret expression of her
love, of her sorrow, at the prospect of parting with him, was
ruthlessly suppressed whenever it was discovered; and his younger
brother was neglected, almost forgotten, in order that the parental
watchfulness might be entirely and invariably devoted to the eldest son.

When Emilius had numbered fifteen years, his father saw with delight
that the time had come when he could witness the commencement of the
realisation of all his projects.  The boy was removed from home, taken
to Alexandria, and gladly left, by his proud and triumphant father,
under the especial guardianship of Macrinus, the high priest.


The chief of the temple full sympathised in his brother's designs for
the young Emilius.  As soon as the boy had entered on his new
occupations, he was told that he must forget all that he had left
behind him at Rome; that he must look upon the high priest as his
father, and upon the temple, henceforth, as his home; and that the sole
object of his present labours and future ambition must be to rise in
the service of the gods.  Nor did Macrinus stop here.  So thoroughly
anxious was he to stand to his pupil in the place of a parent, and to
secure his allegiance by withdrawing him in every way from the world in
which he had hitherto lived, that he even changed his name, giving to
him one of his own appellations, and describing it as a privilege to
stimulate him to future exertions.  From the boy Emilius, he was now
permanently transformed to the student Ulpius.

With such a natural disposition as we have already described, and under
such guardianship as that of the high priest, there was little danger
that Ulpius would disappoint the unusual expectations which had been
formed of him.  His attention to his new duties never relaxed; his
obedience to his new masters never wavered.  Whatever Macrinus demanded
of him he was sure to perform.  Whatever longings he might feel to
return to home, he never discovered them; he never sought to gratify
the tastes naturally peculiar to his age.  The high priest and his
colleagues were astonished at the extraordinary readiness with which
the boy himself forwarded their intentions for him.  Had they known how
elaborately he had been prepared for his future employments at his
father's house, they would have been less astonished at their pupil's
unusual docility.  Trained as he had been, he must have shown a more
than human perversity had he displayed any opposition to his uncle's
wishes.  He had been permitted no childhood either of thought or
action. His natural precocity had been seized as the engine to force
his faculties into a perilous and unwholesome maturity; and when his
new duties demanded his attention, he entered on them with the same
sincerity of enthusiasm which his boyish coevals would have exhibited
towards a new sport.  His gradual initiation into the mysteries of his
religion created a strange, voluptuous sensation of fear and interest
in his mind.  He heard the oracles, and he trembled; he attended the
sacrifices and the auguries, and he wondered.  All the poetry of the
bold and beautiful superstition to which he was devoted flowed
overwhelmingly into his young heart, absorbing the service of his fresh
imagination, and transporting him incessantly from the vital realities
of the outer world to the shadowy regions of aspiration and thought.


But his duties did not entirely occupy the attention of Ulpius.  The
boy had his peculiar pleasures as well as his peculiar occupations.
When his employments were over for the day, it was a strange,
unearthly, vital enjoyment to him to wander softly in the shade of the
temple porticoes, looking down from his great mysterious eminence upon
the populous and sun-brightened city at his feet; watching the
brilliant expanse of the waters of the Nile glittering joyfully in the
dazzling and pervading light; raising his eyes from the fields and
woods, the palaces and garden, that stretched out before him below, to
the lovely and cloudless sky that watched round him afar and above, and
that awoke all that his new duties had left of the joyfulness, the
affectionate sensibility, which his rare intervals of uninterrupted
intercourse with his mother had implanted in his heart.  Then, when the
daylight began to wane, and the moon and stars already grew beautiful
in their places in the firmament, he would pass into the subterranean
vaults of the edifice, trembling as his little taper scarcely dispelled
the dull, solemn gloom, and listening with breathless attention for the
voices of those guardian spirits whose fabled habitation was made in
the apartments of the sacred place.  Or, when the multitude had
departed for their amusements and their homes, he would steal into the
lofty halls and wander round the pedestals of the mighty statues,
breathing fearfully the still atmosphere of the temple, and watching
the passage of the cold, melancholy moonbeams through the openings in
the roof, and over the colossal limbs and features of the images of the
pagan gods. Sometimes, when the services of Serapis and the cares
attendant on his communications with the Emperor were concluded,
Macrinus would lead his pupil into the garden of the priests, and
praise him for his docility till his heart throbbed with gratitude and
pride.  Sometimes he would convey him cautiously outside the precincts
of the sacred place, and show him, in the suburbs of the city, silent,
pale, melancholy men, gliding suspiciously through the gay, crowded
streets.  Those fugitive figures, he would declare, were the enemies of
the temple and all that it contained; conspirators against the Emperor
and the gods; wretches who were to be driven forth as outcasts from
humanity; whose appellation was 'Christian'; and whose impious worship,
if tolerated, would deprive him of the uncle whom he loved, of the
temple that he reverenced, and of the priestly dignity and renown which
it should be his life's ambition to acquire.

Thus tutored in his duties by his guardian, and in his recreations by
himself, as time wore on, the boy gradually lost every remaining
characteristic of his age.  Even the remembrance of his mother and his
mother's love grew faint on his memory.  Serious, solitary, thoughtful,
he lived but to succeed in the temple; he laboured but to emulate the
high priest.  All his feelings and faculties were now enslaved by an
ambition, at once unnatural at his present age, and ominous of
affliction for his future life.  The design that Macrinus had
contemplated as the work of years was perfected in a few months.  The
hope that his father had scarce dared to entertain for his manhood was
already accomplished in his youth.

In these preparations for future success passed three years of the life
of Ulpius.  At the expiration of that period the death of Julian
darkened the brilliant prospects of the Pagan world.  Scarcely had the
priests of Serapis recovered the first shock of astonishment and grief
consequent upon the fatal news of the vacancy in the imperial throne,
when the edict of toleration issued by Jovian, the new Emperor, reached
the city of Alexandria, and was elevated on the walls of the temple.

The first sight of this proclamation (permitting freedom of worship to
the Christians) aroused in the highly wrought disposition of Ulpius the
most violent emotions of anger and contempt. The enthusiasm of his
character and age, guided invariably in the one direction of his
worship, took the character of the wildest fanaticism when he
discovered the Emperor's careless infringement of the supremacy of the
temple.  He volunteered in the first moments of his fury to tear down
the edict from the walls, to lead an attack on the meetings of the
triumphant Christians, or to travel to the imperial abode and exhort
Jovian to withdraw his act of perilous leniency ere it was too late.
With difficulty did his more cautious confederates restrain him from
the execution of his impetuous designs.  For two days he withdrew
himself from his companions, and brooded in solitude over the injury
offered to his beloved superstition, and the prospective augmentation
of the influence of the Christian sect.

But the despair of the young enthusiast was destined to be further
augmented by a private calamity, at once mysterious in its cause and
overwhelming in its effect.  Two days after the publication of the
edict the high priest Macrinus, in the prime of vigour and manhood,
suddenly died.

To narrate the confusion and horror within and without the temple on
the discovery of this fatal even; to describe the execrations and
tumults of the priests and the populace, who at once suspected the
favoured and ambitious Christians of causing, by poison, the death of
their spiritual ruler, might be interesting as a history of the manners
of the times, but is immaterial to the object of this chapter.  We
prefer rather to trace the effect on the mind of Ulpius of his personal
and private bereavement; of this loss--irretrievable to him--of the
master whom he loved and the guardian whom it was his privilege to
revere.


An illness of some months, during the latter part of which his
attendants trembled for his life and reason, sufficiently attested the
sincerity of the grief of Ulpius for the loss of his protector. During
his paroxysms of delirium the priests who watched round his bed drew
from his ravings many wise conclusions as to the effects that his
seizure and its causes were likely to produce on his future character;
but, in spite of all their penetration, they were still far from
appreciating to a tithe of its extent the revolution that his
bereavement had wrought in his disposition.  The boy himself, until the
moment of the high priest's death, had never been aware of the depth of
his devotion to his second father.  Warped as they had been by his
natural parent, the affectionate qualities that were the mainspring of
his nature had never been entirely destroyed; and they seized on every
kind word and gentle action of Macrinus as food which had been grudged
them since their birth.  Morally and intellectually, Macrinus had been
to him the beacon that pointed the direction of his course, the judge
that regulated his conduct, the Muse that he looked to for inspiration.
And now, when this link which had connected every ramification of his
most cherished and governing ideas was suddenly snapped asunder, a
desolation sunk down upon his mind which at once paralysed its
elasticity and withered its freshness.  He glanced back, and saw
nothing but a home from whose pleasures and affections his father's
ambition had exiled him for ever.  He looked forward, and as he thought
of his unfitness, both from character and education, to mix in the
world as others mixed in it, he saw no guiding star of social happiness
for the conduct of his existence to come.  There was now no resource
left for him but entirely to deliver himself up to those pursuits which
had made his home as a strange place to him, which were hallowed by
their connection with the lost object of his attachment, and which
would confer the sole happiness and distinction that he could hope for
in the wide world on his future life.

In addition to this motive for labour in his vocation, there existed in
the mind of Ulpius a deep and settled feeling that animated him with
unceasing ardour for the prosecution of his cherished occupations.
This governing principle was detestation of the Christian sect.  The
suspicion that others had entertained regarding the death of the high
priest was to his mind a certainty.  He rejected every idea which
opposed his determined persuasion that the jealousy of the Christians
had prompted them to the murder, by poison, of the most powerful and
zealous of the Pagan priests.  To labour incessantly until he attained
the influence and position formerly enjoyed by his relative, and to use
that influence and position, when once acquired, as the means of
avenging Macrinus, by sweeping every vestige of the Christian faith
from the face of the earth, were now the settled purposes of his heart.
Inspired by his determination with the deliberate wisdom which is in
most men the result only of the experience of years, he employed the
first days of his convalescence in cautiously maturing his future
plans, and impartially calculating his chances of success.  This
self-examination completed, he devoted himself at once and for ever to
his life's great design.  Nothing wearied, nothing discouraged, nothing
impeded him.  Outward events passed by him unnoticed; the city's
afflictions and the city's triumphs spoke no longer to his heart.  Year
succeeded to year, but Time had no tongue for him.  Paganism gradually
sank, and Christianity imperceptibly rose, but change spread no picture
before his eyes.  The whole outward world was a void to him, until the
moment arrived that beheld him successful in his designs.  His
preparations for the future absorbed every faculty of his nature, and
left him, as to the present, a mere automaton, reflecting no principle,
and animated by no event--a machine that moved, but did not perceive--a
body that acted, without a mind that thought.

Returning for a moment to the outward world, we find that on the death
of Jovian, in 364, Valentinian, the new Emperor, continued the system
of toleration adopted by his predecessor. On his death, in 375,
Gratian, the successor to the imperial throne, so far improved on the
example of the two former potentates as to range himself boldly on the
side of the partisans of the new faith.  Not content with merely
encouraging, both by precept and by example, the growth of
Christianity, the Emperor further testified to his zeal for the rising
religion by inflicting incessant persecutions upon the rapidly
decreasing advocates of the ancient worship; serving, by these acts of
his reign, as pioneer to his successor, Theodosius the Great, in the
religious revolution which that illustrious opponent of Paganism was
destined to effect.


The death of Gratian, in 383, saw Ulpius enrolled among the chief
priests of the temple, and pointed out as the next inheritor of the
important office once held by the powerful and active Macrinus.
Beholding himself thus secure of the distinction for which he had
laboured, the aspiring priest found leisure, at length, to look forth
upon the affairs of the passing day.  From every side desolation
darkened the prospect that he beheld.  Already, throughout many
provinces of the Empire, the temples of the gods had been overthrown by
the destructive zeal of the triumphant Christians.  Already hosts of
the terrified people, fearing that the fate of their idols might
ultimately be their own, finding themselves deserted by their disbanded
priests, and surrounded by the implacable enemies of the ancient faith,
had renounced their worship for the sake of saving their lives and
securing their property.  On the wide field of Pagan ruin there now
rose but one structure entirely unimpaired.  The Temple of Serapis
still reared its head--unshaken, unbending, unpolluted.  Here the
sacrifice still prospered and the people still bowed in worship. Before
this monument of the religious glories of ages, even the rising power
of Christian supremacy quailed in dismay.  Though the ranks of its once
multitudinous congregations were now perceptibly thinned, though the
new churches swarmed with converts, though the edicts from Rome
denounced it as a blot on the face of the earth, its gloomy and
solitary grandeur was still preserved.  No unhallowed foot trod its
secret recesses; no destroying hand was raised as yet against its
ancient and glorious walls.

Indignation, but not despondency, filled the heart of Ulpius as he
surveyed the situation of the Pagan world.  A determination nourished
as his had been by the reflections of years, and matured by incessant
industry of deliberation, is above all those shocks which affect a
hasty decision or destroy a wavering intention.  Impervious to failure,
disasters urge it into action, but never depress it to repose.  Its
existence is the air that preserves the vitality of the mind--the
spring that moves the action of the thoughts.  Never for a moment did
Ulpius waver in his devotion to his great design, or despair of its
ultimate execution and success.  Though every succeeding day brought
the news of fresh misfortunes for the Pagans and fresh triumphs for the
Christians, still, with a few of his more zealous comrades, he
persisted in expecting the advent of another Julian, and a day of
restoration for the dismantled shrines of the deities that he served.
While the Temple of Serapis stood uninjured, to give encouragement to
his labours and refuge to his persecuted brethren, there existed for
him such an earnest of success as would spur him to any exertion, and
nerve him against any peril.

And now, to the astonishment of priests and congregations, the silent,
thoughtful, solitary Ulpius suddenly started from his long repose, and
stood forth the fiery advocate of the rights of his invaded worship.
In a few days the fame of his addresses to the Pagans who still
attended the rites of Serapis spread throughout the whole city.  The
boldest among the Christians, as they passed the temple walls,
involuntarily trembled when they heard the vehemence of the applause
which arose from the audience of the inspired priest.  Addressed to all
varieties of age and character, these harangues woke an echo in every
breast they reached.  To the young they were clothed in all the poetry
of the worship for which they pleaded.  They dwelt on the altars of
Venus that the Christians would lay waste; on the woodlands that the
Christians would disenchant of their Dryads; on the hallowed Arts that
the Christians would arise and destroy.  To the aged they called up
remembrances of the glories of the past achieved through the favour of
the gods; of ancestors who had died in their service; of old forgotten
loves, and joys, and successes that had grown and prospered under the
gentle guardianship of the deities of old--while the unvarying burden
of their conclusion to all was the reiterated assertion that the
illustrious Macrinus had died a victim to the toleration of the
Christian sect.


But the efforts of Ulpius were not confined to the delivery of
orations. Every moment of his leisure time was dedicated to secret
pilgrimages into Alexandria.  Careless of peril, regardless of threats,
the undaunted enthusiast penetrated into the most private
meeting-places of the Christians; reclaiming on every side apostates to
the Pagan creed, and defying the hostility of half the city from the
stronghold of the temple walls.  Day after day fresh recruits arrived
to swell the ranks of the worshippers of Serapis.  The few members of
the scattered congregations of the provinces who still remained
faithful to the ancient worship were gathered together in Alexandria by
the private messengers of the unwearied Ulpius.  Already tumults began
to take place between the Pagans and the Christians; and even now the
priest of Serapis prepared to address a protest to the new Emperor in
behalf of the ancient religion of the land.  At this moment it seemed
probable that the heroic attempts of one man to prop the structure of
superstition, whose foundations were undermined throughout, and whose
walls were attacked by brigands, might actually be crowned with success.

But Time rolled on; and with him came inexorable change, trampling over
the little barriers set up against it by human opposition, and erecting
its strange and transitory fabrics triumphantly in their stead.  In
vain did the devoted priest exert all his powers to augment and combine
his scattered band; in vain did the mighty temple display its ancient
majesty, its gorgeous sacrifices, its mysterious auguries.  The spirit
of Christianity was forth for triumph on the earth--the last destinies
of Paganism were fast accomplishing.  Yet a few seasons more of
unavailing resistance passed by, and then the Archbishop of Alexandria
issued his decree that the Temple of Serapis should be destroyed.

At the rumour of their Primate's determination, the Christian fanatics
rose by swarms from every corner of Egypt, and hurried into Alexandria
to be present at the work of demolition. From the arid solitudes of the
desert, from their convents on rocks and their caverns in the earth,
hosts of rejoicing monks flew to the city gates, and ranged themselves
with the soldiery and the citizens, impatient for the assault.  At the
dawn of morning this assembly of destroyers was convened, and as the
sun rose over Alexandria they arrived before the temple walls.

The gates of the glorious structure were barred; the walls were crowded
with their Pagan defenders.  A still, dead, mysterious silence reigned
over the whole edifice; and, of all the men who thronged it, one only
moved from his appointed place--one only wandered incessantly from
point to point, wherever the building was open to assault.  Those among
the besiegers who were nearest the temple saw in this presiding genius
of the preparations for defence the object at once of their most
malignant hatred and their most ungovernable dread--Ulpius the priest.

As soon as the Archbishop gave the signal for the assault, a band of
monks--their harsh, discordant voices screaming fragments of psalms,
their tattered garments waving in the air, their cadaverous faces
gleaming with ferocious joy--led the way, placed the first ladders
against the walls, and began the attack.  From all sides the temple was
assailed by the infuriated besiegers, and on all sides it was
successfully defended by the resolute besieged.  Shock after shock fell
upon the massive gates without forcing them to recede; missile after
missile was hurled at the building, but no breach was made in its solid
surface.  Multitudes scaled the walls, gained the outer porticoes, and
slaughtered their Pagan defenders, but were incessantly repulsed in
their turn ere they could make their advantage good.  Over and over
again did the assailants seem on the point of storming the temple
successfully, but the figure of Ulpius, invariably appearing at the
critical moment among his disheartened followers, acted like a fatality
in destroying the effect of the most daring exertions and the most
important triumphs.  Wherever there was danger, wherever there was
carnage, wherever there was despair, thither strode the undaunted
priest, inspiring the bold, succouring the wounded, reanimating the
feeble.  Blinded by no stratagem, wearied by no fatigue, there was
something almost demoniac in his activity for destruction, in his
determination under defeat.  The besiegers marked his course round the
temple by the calamities that befell them at his every step.  If the
bodies of slaughtered Christians were flung down upon them from the
walls, they felt that Ulpius was there.  If the bravest of the soldiery
hesitated at mounting the ladders, it was known that Ulpius was
directing the defeat of their comrades above.  If a sally from the
temple drove back the advanced guard upon the reserves in the rear, it
was pleaded as their excuse that Ulpius was fighting at the head of his
Pagan bands.  Crowd on crowd of Christian warriors still pressed
forward to the attack; but though the ranks of the unbelievers were
perceptibly thinned, though the gates that defended them at last began
to quiver before the reiterated blows by which they were assailed,
every court of the sacred edifice yet remained in the possession of the
besieged, and was at the disposal of the unconquered captain who
organised the defence.


Depressed by the failure of his efforts, and horrified at the carnage
already perpetrated among his adherents, the Archbishop suddenly
commanded a cessation of hostilities, and proposed to the defenders of
the temple a short and favourable truce.  After some delay, and
apparently at the expense of some discord among their ranks, the Pagans
sent to the Primate an assurance of their acceptance of his terms,
which were that both parties should abstain from any further struggle
for the ascendancy until an edict from Theodosius determining the
ultimate fate of the temple should be applied for and obtained.

The truce once agreed on, the wide space before the respited edifice
was gradually cleared of its occupants.  Slowly and sadly the
Archbishop and his followers departed from the ancient walls whose
summits they had assaulted in vain; and when the sun went down, of the
great multitude congregated in the morning a few corpses were all that
remained.  Within the sacred building, Death and Repose ruled with the
night, where morning had brightly glittered on Life and Action. The
wounded, the wearied, and the cold, all now lay hushed alike, fanned by
the night breezes that wandered through the lofty porticoes, or soothed
by the obscurity that reigned over the silent halls.  Among the ranks
of the Pagan devotees but one man still toiled and thought.  Round and
round the temple, restless as a wild beast that is threatened in his
lair, watchful as a lonely spirit in a city of strange tombs, wandered
the solitary and brooding Ulpius.  For him there was no rest of
body--no tranquility of mind.  On the events of the next few days
hovered the fearful chance that was soon, either for misery or
happiness, to influence irretrievably the years of his future life.
Round and round the mighty walls he watched with mechanical and useless
anxiety. Every stone in the building was eloquent to his lonely
heart--beautiful to his wild imagination. On those barren structures
stretched for him the loved and fertile home; there was the shrine for
whose glory his intellect had been enslaved, for whose honour his youth
had been sacrificed! Round and round the secret recesses and sacred
courts he paced with hurried footstep, cleansing with gentle and
industrious hand the stains of blood and the defilements of warfare
from the statues at his side.  Sad, solitary, thoughtful, as in the
first days of his apprenticeship to the gods, he now roved in the same
moonlit recesses where Macrinus had taught him in his youth.  As the
menacing tumults of the day had aroused his fierceness, so the
stillness of the quiet night awakened his gentleness.  He had combated
for the temple in the morning as a son for a parent, and he now watched
over it at night as a miser over his treasure, as a lover over his
mistress, as a mother over her child!

The days passed on; and at length the memorable morning arrived which
was to determine the fate of the last temple that Christian fanaticism
had spared to the admiration of the world.  At an early hour of the
morning the diminished numbers of the Pagan zealots met their
reinforced and determined opponents--both sides being alike unarmed--in
the great square of Alexandria.  The imperial prescript was then
publicly read. It began by assuring the Pagans that their priest's plea
for protection for the temple had received the same consideration which
had been bestowed on the petition against the gods presented by the
Christian Archbishop, and ended by proclaiming the commands of the
Emperor that Serapis and all other idols in Alexandria should
immediately be destroyed.

The shout of triumph which followed the conclusion of the imperial
edict still rose from the Christian ranks when the advanced guard of
the soldiers appointed to ensure the execution of the Emperor's designs
appeared in the square.  For a few minutes the forsaken Pagans stood
rooted to the spot where they had assembled, gazing at the warlike
preparations around them in a stupor of bewilderment and despair.  Then
as they recollected how diminished were their numbers, how arduous had
been their first defence against a few, and how impossible would be a
second defence against many--from the boldest to the feeblest, a panic
seized on them; and, regardless of Ulpius, regardless of honour,
regardless of the gods, they turned with one accord and fled from the
place.


With the flight of the Pagans the work of demolition began.  Even women
and children hurried to join in the welcome task of indiscriminate
destruction.  No defenders on this occasion barred the gates of the
temple to the Christian hosts.  The sublime solitude of the tenantless
building was outraged and invaded in an instant.  Statues were broken,
gold was carried off, doors were splintered into fragments; but here
for a while the progress of demolition was delayed.  Those to whom the
labour of ruining the outward structure had been confided were less
successful than their neighbours who had pillaged its contents.  The
ponderous stones of the pillars, the massive surfaces of the walls,
resisted the most vigorous of their puny efforts, and forced them to
remain contented with mutilating that which they could not
destroy--with tearing off roofs, defacing marbles, and demolishing
capitals.  The rest of the buildings remained uninjured, and grander
even now in the wildness of ruin than ever it had been in the
stateliness of perfection and strength.

But the most important achievement still remained, the death-wound of
Paganism was yet to be struck--the idol Serapis, which had ruled the
hearts of millions, and was renowned in the remotest corners of the
Empire, was to be destroyed!  A breathless silence pervaded the
Christian ranks as they filled the hall of the god.  A superstitious
dread, to which they had hitherto thought themselves superior, overcame
their hearts, as a single soldier, bolder than his fellows, mounted by
a ladder to the head of the colossal statue, and struck at its cheek
with an axe.  The blow had scarcely been dealt when a deep groan was
heard from the opposite wall of the apartment, succeeded by a noise of
retreating footsteps, and then all was silent again.  For a few minutes
this incident stayed the feet of those who were about to join their
companion in the mutilation of the idol; but after an interval their
hesitation vanished, they dealt blow after blow at the statue, and no
more groans followed--no more sounds were heard, save the wild echoes
of the stroke of hammer, crowbar, and club, resounding through the
lofty hall.  In an incredibly short space of time the image of Serapis
lay in great fragments on the marble floor.  The multitude seized on
the limbs of the idol and ran forth to drag them in triumph through the
streets. Yet a few minutes more, and the ruins were untenanted, the
temple was silent--Paganism was destroyed!

Throughout the ravaging course of the Christians over the temple, they
had been followed with dogged perseverance, and at the same time with
the most perfect impunity, by the only Pagan of all his brethren who
had not sought safety by flight.  This man, being acquainted with every
private passage and staircase in the sacred building, was enabled to be
secretly present at each fresh act of demolition, in whatever part of
the edifice it might be perpetrated.  From hall to hall, and from room
to room, he tracked with noiseless step and glaring eye the movements
of the Christian mob--now hiding himself behind a pillar, now passing
into concealed cavities in the walls, now looking down from
imperceptible fissures in the roof; but, whatever his situation,
invariably watching from it, with the same industry of attention and
the same silence of emotion, the minutest acts of spoliation committed
by the most humble follower of the Christian ranks.  It was only when
he entered with the victorious ravagers into the vast apartment
occupied by the idol Serapis that the man's countenance began to give
evidence of the agony under which his heart was writhing within him.
He mounted a private staircase cut in the hollow of the massive wall of
the room, and gaining a passage that ran round the extremities of the
ceiling, looked through a sort of lattice concealed in the ornaments of
the cornice.  As he gazed down and saw the soldier mounting, axe in
hand, to the idol's head, great drops of perspiration trickled from his
forehead.  His hot, thick breath hissed through his closed teeth, and
his hands strained at the strong metal supports of the lattice until
they bent beneath his grasp.  When the stroke descended on the image,
he closed his eyes.  When the fragment detached by the blow fell on the
floor, a groan burst from his quivering lips.  For one moment more he
glared down with a gaze of horror upon the multitude at his feet, and
then with frantic speed he descended the steep stairs by which he had
mounted to the roof, and fled from the temple.


The same night this man was again seen by some shepherds whom curiosity
led to visit the desecrated building, weeping bitterly in its ruined
and deserted porticoes.  As they approached to address him, he raised
his head, and with a supplicating action signed to them to leave the
place. For the few moments during which he confronted them, the
moonlight shone full upon his countenance, and the shepherds, who had
in former days attended the ceremonies of the temple, saw with
astonishment that the solitary mourner whose meditations they had
disturbed was no other than Ulpius the priest.

At the dawn of day these shepherds had again occasion to pass the walls
of the pillaged temple. Throughout the hours of the night the
remembrance of the scene of unsolaced, unpartaken grief that they had
beheld--of the awful loneliness of misery in which they had seen the
heart-broken and forsaken man, whose lightest words they had once
delighted to revere--inspired them with a feeling of pity for the
deserted Pagan, widely at variance with the spirit of persecution which
the spurious Christianity of their day would fain have instilled in the
bosoms of its humblest votaries.  Bent on consolation, anxious to
afford help, these men, like the Samaritan of old, went up at their own
peril to succour a brother in affliction.  They searched every portion
of the empty building, but the object of their sympathy was nowhere to
be seen. They called, but heard no answering sound, save the dirging of
the winds of early morning through the ruined halls, which but a short
time since had resounded with the eloquence of the once illustrious
priest.  Except a few night-birds, already sheltered by the deserted
edifice, not a living being moved in what was once the temple of the
Eastern world. Ulpius was gone.

These events took place in the year 389.  In 390, Pagan ceremonies were
made treason by the laws throughout the whole Roman Empire.

From that period the scattered few who still adhered to the ancient
faith became divided into three parties; each alike insignificant,
whether considered as openly or secretly inimical to the new religion
of the State at large.

The first party unsuccessfully endeavoured to elude the laws
prohibitory of sacrifices and divinations by concealing their religious
ceremonies under the form of convivial meetings.

The second preserved their ancient respect for the theory of Paganism,
but abandoned all hope and intention of ever again accomplishing its
practice.  By such timely concessions many were enabled to
preserve--and some even to attain--high and lucrative employments as
officers of the State.

The third retired to their homes, the voluntary exiles of every
religion; resigning the practice of their old worship as a necessity,
and shunning the communion of Christians as a matter of choice.

Such were the unimportant divisions into which the last remnants of the
once powerful Pagan community now subsided; but to none of them was the
ruined and degraded Ulpius ever attached.

For five weary years--dating from the epoch of the prohibition of
Paganism--he wandered through the Empire, visiting in every country the
ruined shrines of his deserted worship--a friendless, hopeless,
solitary man!


Throughout the whole of Europe, and all of Asia and the East that still
belonged to Rome, he bent his slow and toilsome course.  In the fertile
valleys of Gaul, over the burning sands of Africa, through the
sun-bright cities of Spain, he travelled--unfriended as a man under a
curse, lonely as a second Cain.  Never for an instant did the
remembrance of his ruined projects desert his memory, or his mad
determination to revive his worship abandon his mind.  At every relic
of Paganism, however slight, that he encountered on his way, he found a
nourishment for his fierce anguish, and employment for his vengeful
thoughts. Often, in the little villages, children were frightened from
their sports in a deserted temple by the apparition of his gaunt, rigid
figure among the tottering pillars, or the sound of his hollow voice as
he muttered to himself among the ruins of the Pagan tombs.  Often, in
crowded cities, groups of men, congregated to talk over the fall of
Paganism, found him listening at their sides, and comforting them, when
they carelessly regretted their ancient faith, with a smiling and
whispered assurance that a time of restitution would yet come.  By all
opinions and in all places he was regarded as a harmless madman, whose
strange delusions and predilections were not to be combated, but to be
indulged.  Thus he wandered through the Christian world; regardless
alike of lapse of time and change of climate; living within himself;
mourning, as a luxury, over the fall of his worship; patient of wrongs,
insults, and disappointments; watching for the opportunity that he
still persisted in believing was yet to arrive; holding by his fatal
determination with all the recklessness of ambition and all the
perseverance of revenge.

The five years passed away unheeded, uncalculated, unregretted by
Ulpius.  For him, living but in the past, hoping but for the future,
space held no obstacles--time was an oblivion.  Years pass as days,
hours as moments, when the varying emotions which mark their existence
on the memory, and distinguish their succession on the dial of the
heart, exist no longer either for happiness or woe.  Dead to all
freshness of feeling, the mind of Ulpius, during the whole term of his
wanderings, lay numbed beneath the one idea that possessed it.  It was
only at the expiration of those unheeded years, when the chances of
travel turned his footsteps towards Alexandria, that his faculties
burst from the long bondage which had oppressed them.  Then--when he
passed through those gates which he had entered in former years a
proud, ambitious boy, when he walked ungreeted through the ruined
temple where he had once lived illustrious and revered--his dull, cold
thoughts arose strong and vital within him.  The spectacle of the scene
of his former glories, which might have awakened despair in others,
aroused the dormant passions, emancipated the stifled energies in him.
The projects of vengeance and the visions of restoration which he had
brooded over for five long years, now rose before him as realised
already under the vivid influence of the desecrated scenes around.  As
he stood beneath the shattered porticoes of the sacred place, not a
stone crumbling at his feet but rebuked him for his past inaction, and
strengthened him for daring, for conspiracy, for revenge, in the
service of the outraged gods. The ruined temples he had visited in his
gloomy pilgrimages now became revived by his fancy, as one by one they
rose on his toiling memory. Broken pillars soared from the ground;
desecrated idols reoccupied their vacant pedestals; and he, the exile
and the mourner, stood forth once again the ruler, the teacher, and the
priest.  The time of restitution was come; though his understanding
supplied him with no distinct projects, his heart urged him to rush
blindly on the execution of his reform.  The moment had
arrived--Macrinus should yet be avenged; the temple should at last be
restored.

He descended into the city; he hurried--neither welcomed nor
recognised--through the crowded streets; he entered the house of a man
who had once been his friend and colleague in the days that were past,
and poured forth to him his wild determinations and disjointed plans,
entreating his assistance, and promising him a glorious success.  But
his old companion had become, by a timely conversion to Christianity, a
man of property and reputation in Alexandria, and he turned from the
friendless enthusiast with indignation and contempt.  Repulsed, but not
disheartened, Ulpius sought others who he had known in his prosperity
and renown.  They had all renounced their ancient worship--they all
received him with studied coldness or careless disdain; but he still
persisted in his useless efforts.  He blinded his eyes to their
contemptuous looks; he shut his ears to their derisive words.
Persevering in his self-delusion, he appointed them messengers to their
brethren in other countries, captains of the conspiracy that was to
commence in Alexandria, orators before the people when the memorable
revolution had once begun.  It was in vain that they refused all
participation in his designs; he left them as the expressions of
refusal rose to their lips, and hurried elsewhere, as industrious in
his efforts, as devoted to his unwelcome mission, as if half the
population of the city had vowed themselves joyfully to aid him in his
frantic attempt.


Thus during the whole day he continued his labour of useless persuasion
among those in the city who had once been his friends.  When the
evening came, he repaired, weary but not despondent, to the earthly
paradise that he was determined to regain--to the temple where he had
once taught, and where he still imagined that he was again destined to
preside.  Here he proceeded, ignorant of the new laws, careless of
discovery and danger, to ascertain by divination, as in the days of
old, whether failure or success awaited him ultimately in his great
design.

Meanwhile the friends whose assistance Ulpius had determined to extort
were far from remaining inactive on their parts after the departure of
the aspiring priest.  They remembered with terror that the laws
affected as severely those concealing their knowledge of a Pagan
intrigue as those actually engaged in directing a Pagan conspiracy; and
their anxiety for their personal safety overcoming every consideration
of the dues of honour or the claims of ancient friendship, they
repaired in a body to the Prefect of the city, and informed him, with
all the eagerness of apprehension, of the presence of Ulpius in
Alexandria, and of the culpability of the schemes that he had proposed.

A search after the devoted Pagan was immediately commenced.  He was
found the same night before a ruined altar, brooding over the entrails
of an animal that he had just sacrificed.  Further proof of his guilt
could not be required.  He was taken prisoner; led forth the next
morning to be judged, amid the execrations of the very people who had
almost adored him once; and condemned the following day to suffer the
penalty of death.

At the appointed hour the populace assembled to behold the execution.
To their indignation and disappointment, however, when the officers of
the city appeared before the prison, it was only to inform the
spectators that the performance of the fatal ceremony had been
adjourned. After a mysterious delay of some weeks, they were again
convened, not to witness the execution, but to receive the
extraordinary announcement that the culprit's life had been spared, and
that his amended sentence now condemned him to labour as a slave for
life in the copper-mines of Spain.

What powerful influence induced the Prefect to risk the odium of
reprieving a prisoner whose guilt was so satisfactorily ascertained as
that of Ulpius never was disclosed.  Some declared that the city
magistrate was still at heart a Pagan, and that he consequently shrunk
from authorising the death of a man who had once been the most
illustrious among the professors of the ancient creed.  Others reported
that Ulpius had secured the leniency of his judges by acquainting them
with the position of one of those secret repositories of enormous
treasure supposed to exist beneath the foundations of the dismantled
Temple of Serapis.  But the truth of either of these rumours could
never be satisfactorily proved.  Nothing more was accurately discovered
than that Ulpius was removed from Alexandria to the place of earthly
torment set apart for him by the zealous authorities, at the dead of
night; and that the sentry at the gate through which he departed heard
him mutter to himself, as he was hurried onward, that his divinations
had prepared him for defeat, but that the great day of Pagan
restoration would yet arrive.

In the year 407, twelve years after the events above narrated, Ulpius
entered the city of Rome.

He had not advanced far, before the gaiety and confusion in the streets
appeared completely to bewilder him.  He hastened to the nearest public
garden that he could perceive, and avoiding the frequented paths, flung
himself down, apparently fainting with exhaustion, at the foot of a
tree.


For some time he lay on the shady resting-place which he had chosen,
gasping painfully for breath, his frame ever and anon shaken to its
centre by sudden spasms, and his lips quivering with an agitation which
he vainly endeavoured to suppress.  So changed was his aspect, that the
guards who had removed him from Alexandria, wretched as was his
appearance even then, would have found it impossible to recognise him
now as the same man whom they had formerly abandoned to slavery in the
mines of Spain.  The effluvia exhaled from the copper ore in which he
had been buried for twelve years had not only withered the flesh upon
his bones, but had imparted to its surface a livid hue, almost
death-like in its dulness.  His limbs, wasted by age and distorted by
suffering, bent and trembled beneath him; and his form, once so
majestic in its noble proportions, was now so crooked and misshapen,
that whoever beheld him could only have imagined that he must have been
deformed from his birth.  Of the former man no characteristic remained
but the expression of the stern, mournful eyes; and these, the truthful
interpreters of the indomitable mind whose emotions they seemed created
to express, preserved, unaltered by suffering and unimpaired by time,
the same look, partly of reflection, partly of defiance, and partly of
despair, which had marked them in those past days when the temple was
destroyed and the congregations of the Pagans dispersed.

But the repose at this moment demanded by his worn-out body was even
yet denied to it by his untamed, unwearied mind, and, as the voice of
his old delusion spoke within him again, the devoted priest rose from
his solitary resting-place, and looked forth upon the great city, whose
new worship he was vowed to overthrow.

'By years of patient watchfulness,' he whispered to himself, 'have I
succeeded in escaping successfully from my dungeon among the mines.
Yet a little more cunning, a little more endurance, a little more
vigilance, and I shall still live to people, by my own exertions, the
deserted temples of Rome.'

As he spoke he emerged from the grove into the street.  The joyous
sunlight--a stranger to him for years--shone warmly down upon his face,
as if to welcome him to liberty and the world.  The sounds of gay
laughter rang in his ears, as if to woo him back to the blest
enjoyments and amenities of life; but Nature's influence and man's
example were now silent alike to his lonely heart.  Over its dreary
wastes still reigned the ruthless ambition which had exiled love from
his youth, and friendship from his manhood, and which was destined to
end its mission of destruction by banishing tranquility from his age.
Scowling fiercely at all around and above him, he sought the loneliest
and shadiest streets.  Solitude had now become a necessity to his
heart.  The 'great gulph' of his unshared aspirations had long since
socially separated him for ever from his fellow-men.  He thought,
laboured, and suffered for himself alone.

To describe the years of unrewarded labour and unalleviated hardship
endured by Ulpius in the place of his punishment; to dwell on the day
that brought with it--whatever the season in the world above--the same
unwearying inheritance of exertion and fatigue; to chronicle the
history of night after night of broken slumber one hour, of wearying
thought the next, would be to produce a picture from the mournful
monotony of which the attention of the reader would recoil with
disgust.  It will be here sufficient to observe, that the influence of
the same infatuation which had nerved him to the defence of the
assaulted temple, and encouraged him to attempt his ill-planned
restoration of Paganism, had preserved him through sufferings under
which stronger and younger men would have sunk for ever; had prompted
his determination to escape from his slavery, and had now brought him
to Rome--old, forsaken, and feeble as he was--to risk new perils and
suffer new afflictions for the cause to which, body and soul, he had
ruthlessly devoted himself for ever.


Urged, therefore, by his miserable delusion, he had now entered a city
where even his name was unknown, faithful to his frantic project of
opposing himself, as a helpless, solitary man, against the people and
government of an Empire.  During his term of slavery, regardless of his
advanced years, he had arranged a series of projects, the gradual
execution of which would have demanded the advantages of a long and
vigorous life.  He no more desired, as in his former attempt at
Alexandria, to precipitate at all hazards the success of his designs.
He was now prepared to watch, wait, plot, and contrive for years on
years; he was resigned to be contented with the poorest and slowest
advancement--to be encouraged by the smallest prospect of ultimate
triumph.  Acting under this determination, he started his project by
devoting all that remained of his enfeebled energies to cautiously
informing himself, by every means in his power, of the private,
political, and religious sentiments of all men of influence in Rome.
Wherever there was a popular assemblage, he attended it to gather the
scandalous gossip of the day; wherever there was a chance of
overhearing a private conversation, he contrived to listen to it
unobserved. About the doors of taverns and the haunts of discharged
servants he lurked noiseless as a shadow, attentive alike to the
careless revelations of intoxication or the scurrility of malignant
slaves.  Day after day passed on, and still saw him devoted to his
occupation (which, servile as it was in itself, was to his eyes
ennobled by its lofty end), until at the expiration of some months he
found himself in possession of a vague and inaccurate fund of
information, which he stored up as a priceless treasure in his mind.
He next discovered the name and abode of every nobleman in Rome
suspected even of the most careless attachment to the ancient form of
worship.  He attended Christian churches, mastered the intricacies of
different sects, and estimated the importance of contending schisms;
gaining this collection of heterogeneous facts under the combined
disadvantages of poverty, solitude, and age; dependent for support on
the poorest public charities, and for shelter on the meanest public
asylums.  Every conclusion that he drew from all he learned partook of
the sanguine character of the fatal self-deception which had embittered
his whole life.  He believed that the dissensions which he saw raging
in the Church would speedily effect the destruction of Christianity
itself; that, when such a period should arrive, the public mind would
require but the guidance of some superior intellect to return to its
old religious predilections; and that to lay the foundation for
effecting in such a manner the desired revolution, it was necessary for
him--impossible though it might seem in his present degraded
condition--to gain access to the disaffected nobles of Rome, and
discover the secret of acquiring such an influence over them as would
enable him to infect them with his enthusiasm, and fire them with his
determination.  Greater difficulties even than these had been overcome
by other men.  Solitary individuals had, ere this, originated
revolutions.  The gods would favour him; his own cunning would protect
him.  Yet a little more patience, a little more determination, and he
might still, after all his misfortunes, be assured of success.

It was about this period that he first heard, while pursuing his
investigations, of an obscure man who had suddenly arisen to undertake
a reformation in the Christian Church, whose declared aim was to rescue
the new worship from that very degeneracy on the fatal progress of
which rested all his hopes of triumph.  It was reported that this man
had been for some time devoted to his reforming labours, but that the
difficulties attendant on the task that he had appointed for himself
had hitherto prevented him from attaining all the notoriety essential
to the satisfactory prosecution of his plans.  On hearing this rumour,
Ulpius immediately joined the few who attended the new orator's
discourses, and there heard enough to convince him that he listened to
the most determined zealot for Christianity in the city of Rome.  To
gain this man's confidence, to frustrate every effort that he might
make in his new vocation, to ruin his credit with his hearers, and to
threaten his personal safety by betraying his inmost secrets to his
powerful enemies in the Church, were determinations instantly adopted
by the Pagan as duties demanded by the exigencies of his creed.  From
that moment he seized every opportunity of favourably attracting the
new reformer's attention to himself, and, as the reader already knows,
he was at length rewarded for his cunning and perseverance by being
received into the household of the charitable and unsuspicious Numerian
as a pious convert to the Christianity of the early Church.


Once installed under Numerian's roof, the treacherous Pagan saw in the
Christian's daughter an instrument admirably adapted, in his
unscrupulous hands, for forwarding his wild project of obtaining the
ear of a Roman of power and station who was disaffected to the
established worship.  Among the patricians of whose anti-Christian
predilections report had informed him, was Numerian's neighbour,
Vetranio the senator. To such a man, renowned for his life of luxury, a
girl so beautiful as Antonina would be a bribe rich enough to enable
him to extort any promise required as a reward for betraying her while
under the protection of her father's house.  In addition to this
advantage to be drawn from her ruin, was the certainty that her loss
would so affect Numerian as to render him, for a time at least,
incapable of pursuing his labours in the cause of Christianity.  Fixed
then in his detestable purpose, the ruthless priest patiently awaited
the opportunity of commencing his machinations.  Nor did he watch in
vain.  The victim innocently fell into the very trap that he had
prepared for her when she first listened to the music of Vetranio's
lute, and permitted her treacherous guardian to become the friend who
concealed her disobedience from her father's ear.  After that first
fatal step every day brought the projects of Ulpius nearer to success.
The long-sought interview with the senator was at length obtained; the
engagement imperatively demanded on the one side was, as we have
already related, carelessly accepted on the other; the day that was to
bring success to the schemes of the betrayer, and degradation to the
honour of the betrayed, was appointed; and once more the cold heart of
the fanatic warmed to the touch of joy.  No doubts upon the validity of
his engagement with Vetranio ever entered his mind.  He never imagined
that powerful senator could with perfect impunity deny him the
impracticable assistance he had demanded as his reward, and thrust him
as an ignorant madman from his palace gates.  Firmly and sincerely he
believed that Vetranio was so satisfied with his readiness in pandering
to his profligate designs, and so dazzled by the prospect of the glory
which would attend success in the great enterprise, that he would
gladly hold to the performance of his promise whenever it should be
required of him.  In the meantime the work was begun.  Numerian was
already, through his agency, watched by the spies of a jealous and
unscrupulous Church.  Feuds, schisms, treacheries, and dissensions
marched bravely onward through the Christian ranks.  All things
combined to make it certain that the time was near at hand when,
through his exertions and the friendly senator's help, the restoration
of Paganism might be assured.

With the widest diversity of pursuit and difference of design, there
was still a strange and mysterious analogy between the temporary
positions of Ulpius and Numerian.  One was prepared to be a martyr for
the temple; the other to be a martyr for the Church.  Both were
enthusiasts in an unwelcome cause; both had suffered more than a life's
wonted share of affliction; and both were old, passing irretrievably
from their fading present on earth to the eternal future awaiting them
in the unknown spheres beyond.

But here--with their position--the comparison between them ends.  The
Christian's principle of action, drawn from the Divinity he served, was
love; the Pagan's, born of the superstition that was destroying him,
was hate.  The one laboured for mankind; the other for himself.  And
thus the aspirations of Numerian, founded on the general good,
nourished by offices of kindness, and nobly directed to a generous end,
might lead him into indiscretion, but could never degrade him into
crime--might trouble the serenity of his life, but could never deprive
him of the consolation of hope.  While, on the contrary, the ambition
of Ulpius, originating in revenge and directed to destruction, exacted
cruelty from his heart and duplicity from his mind; and, as the reward
for his service, mocked him alternately throughout his whole life with
delusion and despair.



CHAPTER 7.

THE BED-CHAMBER.

It is now time to resume our chronicle of the eventful night which
marked the destruction of Antonina's lute and the conspiracy against
Antonina's honour.


The gates of Vetranio's palace were closed, and the noises in it were
all hushed; the banquet was over, the triumph of the Nightingale Sauce
had been achieved, and the daybreak was already glimmering in the
eastern sky, when the senator's favoured servant, the freedman Carrio,
drew back the shutter of the porter's lodge, where he had been dozing
since the conclusion of the feast, and looked out lazily into the
street.  The dull, faint light of dawn was now strengthening slowly
over the lonely roadway and on the walls of the lofty houses.  Of the
groups of idlers of the lowest class who had assembled during the
evening in the street to snuff the fragrant odours which steamed afar
from Vetranio's kitchens, not one remained; men, women, and children
had long since departed to seek shelter wherever they could find it,
and to fatten their lean bodies on what had been charitable bestowed on
them of the coarser relics of the banquet.  The mysterious solitude and
tranquility of daybreak in a great city prevailed over all things.
Nothing impressed, however, by the peculiar and solemn attraction of
the scene at this moment, the freedman apostrophised the fresh morning
air, as it blew over him, in strong terms of disgust, and even ventured
in lowered tones to rail against his master's uncomfortable fancy for
being awakened after a feast at the approach of dawn.  Far too well
aware, nevertheless, of the necessity of yielding the most implicit
obedience to the commands he had received to resign himself any longer
to the pleasant temptations of repose, Carrio, after yawning, rubbing
his eyes, and indulging for a few moments more in the luxury of
complaint, set forth in earnest to follow the corridors leading to the
interior of the palace, and to awaken Vetranio without further delay.

He had not advanced more than a few steps when a proclamation, written
in letters of gold on a blue-coloured board, and hung against the wall
at his side, attracted his attention.  This public notice, which
delayed his progress at the very outset, and which was intended for the
special edification of all the inhabitants of Rome, was thus
expressed:--

'ON THIS DAY, AND FOR TEN DAYS FOLLOWING, THE AFFAIRS OF OUR PATRON
OBLIGE HIM TO BE ABSENT FROM ROME.'

Here the proclamation ended, without descending to particulars.  It had
been put forth, in accordance with the easy fashion of the age, to
answer at once all applications at Vetranio's palace during the
senator's absence.  Although the colouring of the board, the writing of
the letters, and the composition of the sentence were the work of his
own ingenuity, the worthy Carrio could not prevail upon himself to pass
the proclamation without contemplating its magnificence anew.  For some
time he stood regarding it with the same expression of lofty and
complacent approbation which we see in these modern days illuminating
the countenance of a connoisseur before one of his own old pictures
which he has bought as a great bargain, or dawning over the bland
features of a linen-draper as he surveys from the pavement his
morning's arrangement of the window of the shop.  All things, however,
have their limits, even a man's approval of an effort of his own skill.
Accordingly, after a prolonged review of the proclamation, some faint
ideas of the necessity of immediately obeying his master's commands
revived in the mind of the judicious Carrio, and counselled him to turn
his steps at once in the direction of the palace sleeping apartments.

Greatly wondering what new caprice had induced the senator to
contemplate leaving Rome at the dawn of day--for Vetranio had divulged
to no one the object of his departure--the freedman cautiously entered
his master's bed-chamber.  He drew aside the ample silken curtains
suspended around and over the sleeping couch, from the hands of Graces
and Cupids sculptured in marble; but the statues surrounded an empty
bed.  Vetranio was not there.  Carrio next entered the bathroom; the
perfumed water was steaming in its long marble basin, and the soft
wrapping-cloths lay ready for use; the attendant slave, with his
instruments of ablution, waited, half asleep, in his accustomed place;
but here also no signs of the master's presence appeared.  Somewhat
perplexed, the freedman examined several other apartments.  He found
guests, dancing girls, parasites, poets, painters--a motley
crew--occupying every kind of dormitory, and all peacefully engaged in
sleeping off the effects of the wine they had drunk at the banquet; but
the great object of his search still eluded him as before.  At last it
occurred to him that the senator, in an excess of convivial enthusiasm
and jovial hospitality, might yet be detaining some favoured guest at
the table of the feast.

Pausing, therefore, at some carved doors which stood ajar at one
extremity of a spacious hall, he pushed them open, and hurriedly
entered the banqueting-room beyond.


A soft, dim, luxurious light reigned over this apartment, which now
presented, as far as the eye could discern, an aspect of confusion that
was at once graceful and picturesque.  Of the various lamps, of every
variety of pattern, hanging from the ceiling, but few remained alight.
From those, however, which were still unextinguished there shone a mild
brightness, admirably adapted to display the objects immediately around
them.  The golden garlands and the alabaster pots of sweet ointment
which had been suspended before the guests during the banquet, still
hung from the painted ceiling.  On the massive table, composed partly
of ebony and partly of silver, yet lay, in the wildest confusion,
fragments of gastronomic delicacies, grotesque dinner services, vases
of flowers, musical instruments, and crystal dice; while towering over
all rose the glittering dish which had contained the nightingales
consumed by the feasters, with the four golden Cupids which had spouted
over them that illustrious invention--the Nightingale Sauce.  Around
the couches, of violet and rose colour, ranged along the table, the
perfumed and gaily-tinted powders that had been strewn in patterns over
the marble floor were perceptible for a few yards; but beyond this
point nothing more was plainly distinguishable.  The eye roved down the
sides of the glorious chamber, catching dim glimpses of gorgeous
draperies, crowded statues, and marble columns, but discerning nothing
accurately, until it reached the half-opened windows, and rested upon
the fresh dewy verdure now faintly visible in the shady gardens
without.  There--waving in the morning breezes, charged on every leaf
with their burden of pure and welcome moisture--rose the lofty
pine-trees, basking in the recurrence of the new day's beautiful and
undying youth, and rising in reproving contrast before the exhausted
allurements of luxury and the perverted creations of art which burdened
the tables of the hall within.

After a hasty survey of the apartment, the freedman appeared to be on
the point of quitting it in despair, when the noise of a falling dish,
followed by several partly suppressed and wholly confused exclamations
of affright, caught his ear.  He once more approached the
banqueting-table, retrimmed a lamp that hung near him, and taking it in
his hand, passed to the side of the room whence the disturbance
proceeded.  A hideous little negro, staring in ludicrous terror at a
silver oven, half filled with bread, which had just fallen beside him,
was the first object he discovered.  A few paces beyond the negro
reposed a beautiful boy, crowned with vine leaves and ivy, still
sleeping by the side of his lyre; and farther yet, stretched in an
uneasy slumber on a silken couch, lay the identical object of the
freedman's search--the illustrious author of the Nightingale Sauce.

Immediately above the sleeping senator hung his portrait, in which he
was modestly represented as rising by the assistance of Minerva to the
top of Parnassus, the nine Muses standing round him rejoicing.  At his
feet reposed a magnificent white cat, whose head rested in all the
luxurious laziness of satiety on the edge of a golden saucer half
filled with dormice stewed in milk.  The most indubitable evidences of
the night's debauch appeared in Vetranio's disordered dress and flushed
countenance as the freedman regarded him.  For some minutes the worthy
Carrio stood uncertain whether to awaken his master or not, deciding
finally, however, on obeying the commands he had received, and
disturbing the slumbers of the wearied voluptuary before him. To effect
this purpose, it was necessary to call in the aid of the singing-boy;
for, by a refinement of luxury, Vetranio had forbidden his attendants
to awaken him by any other method than the agency of musical sounds.

With some difficulty the boy was sufficiently aroused to comprehend the
service that was required of him.  For a short time the notes of the
lyre sounded in vain.  At last, when the melody took a louder and more
martial character, the sleeping patrician slowly opened his eyes and
stared vacantly around him.

'My respected patron,' said the polite Carrio in apologetic tones,
'commanded that I should awaken him with the dawn; the daybreak has
already appeared.'

When the freedman had ceased speaking, Vetranio sat up on the couch,
called for a basin of water, dipped his fingers in the refreshing
liquid, dried them abstractedly on the long silky curls of the
singing-boy who stood beside him, gazed about him once more, repeated
interrogatively the word 'daybreak', and sunk gently back upon his
couch.  We are grieved to confess it--but the author of the Nightingale
Sauce was moderately inebriated.


A short pause followed, during which the freedman and the singing-boy
stared upon each other in mutual perplexity.  At length the one resumed
his address of apology, and the other resumed his efforts on the lyre.
Once more, after an interval, the eyes of Vetranio lazily unclosed, and
this time he began to speak; but his thoughts--if thoughts they could
be called--were as yet wholly occupied by the 'table-talk' at the past
night's banquet.

'The ancient Egyptians--oh, sprightly and enchanting Camilla--were a
wise nation!' murmured the senator drowsily.  'I am myself descended
from the ancient Egyptians; and, therefore, I hold in high veneration
that cat in your lap, and all cats besides.  Herodotus--an historian
whose works I feel a certain gratification in publicly mentioning as
good--informs us, that when a cat died in the dwelling of an ancient
Egyptian, the owner shaved his eyebrows as a mark of grief, embalmed
the defunct animal in a consecrated house, and carried it to be
interred in a considerable city of Lower Egypt, called 'Bubastis'--an
Egyptian word which I have discovered to mean The Sepulchre of all the
Cats; whence it is scarcely erroneous to infer--'

At this point the speaker's power of recollection and articulation
suddenly failed him, and Carrio--who had listened with perfect gravity
to his master's oration upon cats--took immediate advantage of the
opportunity now afforded him to speak again.

'The equipage which my patron was pleased to command to carry him to
Aricia,' said he, with a strong emphasis on the last word, 'now stands
in readiness at the private gate of the palace gardens.'

As he heard the word 'Aricia', the senator's powers of recollection and
perception seemed suddenly to return to him.  Among that high order of
drinkers who can imbibe to the point of perfect enjoyment, and stop
short scientifically before the point of perfect oblivion, Vetranio
occupied an exalted rank.  The wine he had swallowed during the night
had disordered his memory and slightly troubled his self-possession,
but had not deprived him of his understanding. There was nothing
plebeian even in his debauchery; there was an art and a refinement in
his very excesses.

'Aricia--Aricia!' he repeated to himself, 'ah! the villa that Julia
lent to me at Ravenna!  The pleasures of the table must have obscured
for a moment the image of my beautiful pupil of other days, which now
revives before me again as Love resumes the dominion that Bacchus
usurped! My excellent Carrio,' he continued, speaking to the freedman,
'you have done perfectly right in awakening me; delay not a moment more
in ordering my bath to be prepared, or my man-monster Ulpius, the king
of conspirators and high priest of all that is mysterious, will wait
for me in vain!  And you, Glyco,' he pursued, when Carrio had departed,
addressing the singing-boy, 'array yourself for a journey, and wait
with my equipage at the garden-gate.  I shall require you to accompany
me in my expedition to Aricia.  But first, oh! gifted and valued
songster, let me reward you for the harmonious symphony that has just
awakened me.  Of what rank of my musicians are you at present, Glyco?'

'Of the fifth,' replied the boy.

'Were you bought, or born in my house?' asked Vetranio.

'Neither; but bequeathed to you by Geta's testament,' rejoined the
gratified Glyco.

'I advance you,' continued Vetranio, 'to the privileges and the pay of
the first rank of my musicians; and I give you, as a proof of my
continued favour, this ring.  In return for these obligations, I desire
to keep secret whatever concerns my approaching expedition; to employ
your softest music in soothing the ear of a young girl who will
accompany us--in calming her terrors if she is afraid, in drying her
tears if she weeps; and finally, to exercise your voice and your lute
incessantly in uniting the name 'Antonina' to the sweetest harmonies of
sound that your imagination can suggest.'

Pronouncing these words with an easy and benevolent smile, and looking
round complacently on the display of luxurious confusion about him,
Vetranio retired to the bath that was to prepare him for his
approaching triumph.


Meanwhile a scene of a very different nature was proceeding without, at
Numerian's garden-gate. Here were no singing-boys, no freedmen, no
profusion of rich treasures--here appeared only the solitary and
deformed figure of Ulpius, half hidden among surrounding trees, while
he waited at his appointed post.  As time wore on, and still Vetranio
did not appear, the Pagan's self-possession began to desert him.  He
moved restlessly backwards and forwards over the soft dewy grass,
sometimes in low tones calling upon his gods to hasten the tardy
footsteps of the libertine patrician, who was to be made the instrument
of restoring to the temples the worship of other days--sometimes
cursing the reckless delay of the senator, or exulting in the treachery
by which he madly believed his ambition was at last to be fulfilled;
but still, whatever his words or thoughts, wrought up to the same pitch
of fierce, fanatic enthusiasm which had strengthened him for the
defence of his idols at Alexandria, and had nerved him against the
torment and misery of years in his slavery in the copper mines of Spain.

The precious moments were speeding irrevocably onwards.  His impatience
was rapidly changing to rage and despair as he strained his eyes for
the last time in the direction of the palace gardens, and now at length
discerned a white robe among the distant trees.  Vetranio was rapidly
approaching him.

Restored by his bath, no effect of the night's festivity but its
exhilaration remained in the senator's brain.  But for a slight
uncertainty in his gait, and an unusual vacancy in his smile, the
elegant gastronome might now have appeared to the closest observer
guiltless of the influence of intoxicating drinks.  He advanced,
radiant with exultation, prepared for conquest, to the place where
Ulpius awaited him, and was about to address the Pagan with that
satirical familiarity so fashionable among the nobles of Rome in their
communications with the people, when the object of his intended
pleasantries sternly interrupted him, saying, in tones more of command
than of advice, 'Be silent!  If you would succeed in your purpose,
follow me without uttering a word!'

There was something so fierce and determined in the tones of the old
man's voice--low, tremulous, and husky though they were--as he uttered
those words, that the bold, confident senator instinctively held his
peace as he followed his stern guide into Numerian's house. Avoiding
the regular entrance, which at that early hour of the morning was
necessarily closed, Ulpius conducted the patrician through a small
wicket into the subterranean apartment, or rather outhouse, which was
his customary, though comfortless, retreat in his leisure hours, and
which was hardly ever entered by the other members of the Christian's
household.

From the low, arched brick ceiling of this place hung an earthenware
lamp, whose light, small and tremulous, left all the corners of the
apartment in perfect obscurity.  The thick buttresses that projected
inwards from the walls, made visible by their prominence, displayed on
their surfaces rude representations of idols and temples drawn in
chalk, and covered with strange, mysterious hieroglyphics.  On a block
of stone which served as a table lay some fragments of small statues,
which Vetranio recognised as having belonged to the old, accredited
representations of Pagan idols.  Over the sides of the table itself
were scrawled in Latin characters these two words, 'Serapis',
'Macrinus'; and about its base lay some pieces of torn, soiled linen,
which still retained enough of their former character, both in shape,
size, and colour, to convince Vetranio that they had once served as the
vestments of a Pagan priest.  Further than this the senator's
observation did not carry him, for the close, almost mephitic
atmosphere of the place already began to affect him unfavourably.  He
felt a suffocating sensation in his throat and a dizziness in his head.
The restorative influence of his recent bath declined rapidly.  The
fumes of the wine he had drunk in the night, far from having been, as
he imagined, permanently dispersed, again mounted to his head.  He was
obliged to lean against the stone table to preserved his equilibrium as
he faintly desired the Pagan to shorten their sojourn in his miserable
retreat.


Without even noticing the request, Ulpius hurriedly proceeded to erase
the drawings on the buttresses and the inscriptions on the table.  Then
collecting the fragments of statues and the pieces of linen, he
deposited them in a hiding-place in the corner of the apartment.  This
done, he returned to the stone against which Vetranio supported
himself, and for a few minutes silently regarded the senator with a
firm, earnest, and penetrating gaze.

A dark suspicion that he had betrayed himself into the hands of a
villain, who was then plotting some atrocious project connected with
his safety or honour, began to rise on the senator's bewildered brain
as he unwillingly submitted to the penetrating examination of the
Pagan's glance. At that moment, however, the withered lips of the old
man slowly parted, and he began to speak. Whether as he looked on
Vetranio's disturbed countenance, and marked his unsteady gait, the
heart of Ulpius, for the first time since his introduction to the
senator, misgave him when he thought of their monstrous engagement; or
whether the near approach of the moment that was henceforth, as he
wildly imagined, to fix Vetranio as his assistant and ally, so
powerfully affected his mind that it instinctively sought to vent its
agitation through the natural medium of words, it is useless to
inquire.  Whatever his motives for speech, the impressive earnestness
of his manner gave evidence of the depth and intensity of his emotions
as he addressed the senator thus:--

'I have submitted to servitude in a Christian's house, I have suffered
the contamination of a Christian's prayers, to gain the use of your
power and station when the time to employ them should arrive.  The hour
has now come when my part of the conditions of our engagement is to be
performed; the hour will yet come when your part shall be exacted from
you in turn!  Do you wonder at what I have done and what I will do?  Do
you marvel that a household drudge should speak thus to a nobleman of
Rome?  Are you astonished that I risk so much as to venture on
enlisting you--by the sacrifice of the girl who now slumbers above--in
the cause whose end is the restoration of our fathers' gods, and in
whose service I have suffered and grown old?  Listen, and you shall
hear from what I have fallen--you shall know what I once was!'

'I adjure you by all the gods and goddesses of our ancient worship, let
me hear you where I can breathe--in the garden, on the housetop,
anywhere but in this dungeon!' murmured the senator in entreating
accents.

'My birth, my parents, my education, my ancient abode--these I will not
disclose,' interrupted the Pagan, raising one arm authoritatively, as
if to obstruct Vetranio from approaching the door.  'I have sworn by my
gods, that until the day of restitution these secrets of my past life
shall remain unrevealed to strangers' ears.  Unknown I entered Rome,
and unknown I will labour in Rome until the projects I have lived for
are crowned with success!  It is enough that I confess to you that with
those sacred images whose fragments you have just beheld, I was once
lodged; that those sacred vestments whose remains you discerned at your
feet, I once wore.  To attain the glories of the priesthood there was
nothing that I did not resign, to preserve them there was nothing I did
not perform, to recover them there is nothing that I will not attempt!
I was once illustrious, prosperous, beloved; of my glory, my happiness,
my popularity, the Christians have robbed me, and I will yet live to
requite it heavily at their hands!  I had a guardian who loved me in my
youth; the Christians murdered him!  A temple was under the rule of my
manhood; the Christians destroyed it!  The people of a whole nation
once listened to my voice; the Christians have dispersed them!  The
wise, the great, the beautiful, the good, were once devoted to me; the
Christians have made me a stranger at their doors, and outcast of their
affections and thoughts! For all this shall I take no vengeance?  Shall
I not plot to rebuild my ruined temple, and win back, in my age, the
honours that adorned me in my youth?'

'Assuredly!--at once--without delay!' stammered Vetranio, returning the
stern and inquiring gaze of the Pagan with a bewildered, uneasy stare.


'To mount over the bodies of the Christian slain,' continued the old
man, his sinister eyes dilating in anticipated triumph as he whispered
close at the senator's ear, 'to rebuild the altars that the Christians
have overthrown, is the ambition that has made light to me the
sufferings of my whole life.  I have battled, and it has sustained me
in the midst of carnage; I have wandered, and it has been my home in
the desert; I have failed, and it has supported me; I have been
threatened with death, and it has preserved me from fear; I have been
cast into slavery, and it has made my fetters light.  You see me now,
old, degraded, lonely--believe that I long neither for wife, children,
tranquility, nor possessions; that I desire no companion but my
cherished and exalted purpose! Remember, then, in the hour of
performance the promise you have now made to aid me in the achievement
of that purpose!  Remember that you are a Pagan yourself!  Feast,
laugh, carouse with your compeers; be still the airy jester, the gay
companion; but never forget the end to which you are vowed--the destiny
of glory that the restoration of our deities has in store for us both!'

He ceased.  Though his voice, while he spoke, never rose beyond a
hoarse, monotonous, half-whispering tone, all the ferocity of his
abused and degraded nature was for the instant thoroughly aroused by
his recapitulation of his wrongs.  Had Vetranio at this moment shown
any symptoms of indecision, or spoken any words of discouragement, he
would have murdered him on the spot where they stood.  Every feature in
the Pagan's seared and livid countenance expressed the stormy emotions
that were rushing over his heart as he now confronted his bewildered
yet attentive listener.  His firm, menacing position; his poor and
scanty garments; his wild, shaggy hair; his crooked, distorted form;
his stern, solemn, unwavering gaze--opposed as they were (under the
fitful illumination of the expiring lamp and the advancing daylight) to
the unsteady gait, the vacant countenance, the rich robes, the youthful
grace of form and delicacy of feature of the object of his steady
contemplation, made so wild and strange a contrast between his
patrician ally and himself that they scarcely looked like beings of the
same race. Nothing could be more immense than the difference, more wild
than the incongruity between them.  It was sickness hand-in-hand with
health; pain marshalled face to face with enjoyment; darkness ranged in
monstrous discordance by the very side of light.

The next instant--just as the astonished senator was endeavouring to
frame a suitable answer to the solemn adjuration that had been
addressed to him--Ulpius seized his arm, and opening a door at the
inner extremity of the apartment, led him up some stairs that conducted
to the interior of the house.

They passed the hall, on the floor of which still lay the fragments of
the broken lute, dimly distinguishable in the soft light of daybreak;
and ascending another staircase, paused at a little door at the top,
which Ulpius cautiously opened, and in a moment afterwards Vetranio was
admitted into Antonina's bed-chamber.


The room was of no great extent; its scanty furniture was of the most
ordinary description; no ornaments glittered on its walls; no frescoes
adorned its ceiling; and yet there was a simple elegance in its
appearance, an unobtrusive propriety in its minutest details, which
made it at once interesting and attractive to the eye.  From the white
curtains at the window to the vase of flowers standing by the bedside,
the same natural refinement of taste appeared in the arrangement of all
that the apartment contained.  No sound broke the deep silence of the
place, save the low, soft breathing, occasionally interrupted by a
long, trembling sigh, of its sleeping occupant.  The sole light in the
room consisted of a little lamp, so placed in the middle of the flowers
round the sides of the vase that no extended or steady illumination was
cast upon any object.  There was something in the decent propriety of
all that was visible in the bed-chamber; in the soft obscurity of its
atmosphere; in the gentle and musical sound that alone interrupted its
magical stillness, impressive enough, it might have been imagined, to
have awakened some hesitation in the bosom of the boldest libertine ere
he deliberately proceeded to intrude on the unprotected slumbers of its
occupant.  No such feeling of indecision, however, troubled the
thoughts of Vetranio as he cast a rapid glance round the apartment
which he had ventured so treacherously to invade.  The fumes of the
wine he had imbibed at the banquet had been so thoroughly resuscitated
by the oppressive atmosphere of the subterranean retreat he had just
quitted, as to have left him nothing of his more refined nature.  All
that was honourable or intellectual in his character had now completely
ceded to all that was base and animal.  He looked round, and perceiving
that Ulpius had silently quitted him, softly closed the door.  Then
advancing to the bedside with the utmost caution compatible with the
involuntary unsteadiness of an intoxicated man, he took the lamp from
the vase in which it was half concealed, and earnestly surveyed by its
light the figure of the sleeping girl.

The head of Antonina was thrown back and rested rather over than on her
pillow.  Her light linen dress had become so disordered during the
night that it displayed her throat and part of her bosom, in all the
dawning beauties of their youthful formation, to the gaze of the
licentious Roman.  One hand half supported her head, and was almost
entirely hidden in the locks of her long black hair, which had escaped
from the white cincture intended to confine it, and now streamed over
the pillow in dazzling contrast to the light bed-furniture around it.
The other hand held tightly clasped to her bosom the precious fragment
of her broken lute.  The deep repose expressed in her position had not
thoroughly communicated itself to her face.  Now and then her slightly
parted lips moved and trembled, and ever and anon a change, so faint
and fugitive that it was hardly perceptible, appeared in her
complexion, breathing on the soft olive that was its natural hue, the
light rosy flush which the emotions of the past night had impressed on
it ere she slept.  Her position, in its voluptuous negligence, seemed
the very type of Oriental loveliness; while her face, calm and
sorrowful in its expression, displayed the more refined and sober
graces of the European model.  And thus these two characteristics of
two different orders of beauty, appearing conjointly under one form,
produced a whole so various and yet so harmonious, so impressive and
yet so attractive, that the senator, as he bent over the couch, though
the warm, soft breath of the young girl played on his cheeks and waved
the tips of his perfumed locks, could hardly imagine that the scene
before him was more than a bright, delusive dream.

While Vetranio was yet absorbed in admiration of her charms, Antonina's
form slightly moved, as if agitated by the influence of a passing
dream. The change thus accomplished in her position broke the spell
that its former stillness and beauty had unconsciously wrought to
restrain the unhallowed ardour of the profligate Roman.  He now passed
his arm round her warm, slender figure, and gently raising her till her
head rested on his shoulder as he sat by the bed, imprinted kiss after
kiss on the pure lips that sleep had innocently abandoned to him.

As he had foreseen, Antonina instantly awoke, but, to his unmeasured
astonishment, neither started nor shrieked.  The moment she had opened
her eyes she had recognised the person of Vetranio; and that
overwhelming terror which suspends in its victims the use of every
faculty, whether of the body or the mind, had immediately possessed
itself of her heart.  Too innocent to imagine the real motive that
prompted the senator's intrusion on her slumbers, where others of her
sex would have foreboded dishonour, she feared death.  All her father's
vague denunciations against the enormities of the nobles of Rome rushed
in an instant over her mind, and her childish imagination pictured
Vetranio as armed with some terrible and mysterious vengeance to be
wreaked on her for having avoided all communication with him as soon as
she had gained possession of her lute.  Prostrate beneath the
petrifying influence of her fears, motionless and powerless before him
as its prey before the serpent, she made no effort to move or speak;
but looked up steadfastly into the senator's face, her large eyes fixed
and dilated in a gaze of overpowering terror.

Intoxicated though he was, the affrighted expression of the poor girl's
pale, rigid countenance did not escape Vetranio's notice; and he taxed
his bewildered brain for such soothing and reassuring expressions as
would enable him to introduce his profligate proposals with some chance
that they would be listened to and understood.


'Dearest pupil!  Most beautiful of Roman maidens,' he began in the
husky, monotonous tones of inebriety, 'abandon your fears!  I come
hither, wafted by the breath of love, to restore the worship of the--I
would say to bear you on my bosom to a villa--the name of which has for
the moment escaped my remembrance.  You cannot have forgotten that it
was I who taught you to compose the Nightingale Sauce--or, no--let me
rather say to play upon the lute.  Love, music, pleasure, all await you
in the arms of your attached Vetranio.  Your eloquent silence speaks
encouragement to my heart.  Beloved Anto--'

Here the senator suddenly paused; for the eyes of the girl, which had
hitherto been fixed on him with the same expression of blank dismay
that had characterised them from the first, slowly moved in the
direction of the door.  The instant afterwards a slight noise caught
Vetranio's ear, and Antonina shuddered so violently as he pressed her
to his side that he felt it through his whole frame.  Slowly and
unwillingly he withdrew his gaze from the pale yet lovely countenance
on which it had been fixed, and looked up.

At the open door, pale, silent, motionless, stood the master of the
house.

Incapable, from the confusion of his ideas, of any other feeling than
the animal instinct of self-defence, Vetranio no sooner beheld
Numerian's figure than he rose, and drawing a small dagger from his
bosom, attempted to advance on the intruder.  He found himself,
however, restrained by Antonina, who had fallen on her knees before
him, and grasped his robe with a strength which seemed utterly
incompatible with the slenderness of her form and the feebleness of her
sex and age.

The first voice that broke the silence which ensued was Numerian's.  He
advanced, his face ghastly with anguish, his lip quivering with
suppressed emotions, to the senator's side, and addressed him thus:--

'Put up your weapon; I come but to ask a favour at your hands.'

Vetranio mechanically obeyed him.  There was something in the stern
calmness, frightful at such a moment, of the Christian's manner that
awed him in spite of himself.

'The favour I would petition for,' continued Numerian, in low, steady,
bitter tones, 'is that you would remove your harlot there, to your own
abode.  Here are no singing-boys, no banqueting-halls, no perfumed
couches.  The retreat of a solitary old man is no place for such an one
as she.  I beseech you, remove her to a more congenial home.  She is
well fitted for her trade; her mother was a harlot before her!'

He laughed scornfully, and pointed, as he spoke, to the figure of the
unhappy girl kneeling with outstretched arms at his feet.

'Father, father!' she cried, in accents bereft of their native softness
and melody, 'have you forgotten me?'

'I know you not!' he replied, thrusting her from him.  'Return to his
bosom; you shall never more be pressed to mine.  Go to his palace; my
house is yours no longer!  You are his harlot, not my daughter!  I
command you--go!'

As he advanced towards her with fierce glance and threatening
demeanour, she suddenly rose up. Her reason seemed crushed within her
as she looked with frantic earnestness from Vetranio to her father, and
then back again from her father to Vetranio.  On one side she saw an
enemy who had ruined her she knew not how, and who threatened her with
she knew not what; on the other, a parent who had cast her off.  For
one instant she directed a final look on the room, that, sad and lonely
though it was, had still been a home to her; and then, without a word
or a sigh, she turned, and crouching like a beaten dog, fled from the
house.


During the whole of the scene Vetranio had stood so fixed in the
helpless astonishment of intoxication as to be incapable of moving or
uttering a word.  All that took place during the short and terrible
interview between father and child utterly perplexed him.  He heard no
loud, violent anger on one side, no clamorous petitioning for
forgiveness on the other.  The stern old man whom Antonina had called
father, and who had been pointed out to him as the most austere
Christian in Rome, far from avenging his intrusion on Antonina's
slumber, had voluntarily abandoned his daughter to his licentious will.
That the anger or irony of so severe a man should inspire such an
action as this, or that Numerian, like his servant, was plotting to
obtain some strange mysterious favour from him by using Antonina as a
bribe, seemed perfectly impossible. All that passed before the senator
was, to his bewildered imagination, thoroughly incomprehensible.
Frivolous, thoughtless, profligate as he might be, his nature was not
radically base, and when the scene of which he had been the astounded
witness was abruptly terminated by the flight of Antonina, the look of
frantic misery fixed on him by the unfortunate girl at the moment of
her departure, almost sobered him for the instant, as he stood before
the now solitary father gazing vacantly around him with emotions of
uncontrollable confusion and dismay.

Meanwhile a third person was now approaching to join the two occupants
of the bedchamber abandoned by its ill-fated mistress.  Although in the
subterranean retreat to which he had retired on leaving Vetranio,
Ulpius had not noticed the silent entrance of the master of the house,
he had heard through the open doors the sound, low though it was, of
the Christian's voice.  As he rose, suspecting all things and prepared
for every emergency, to ascend to the bedchamber, he saw, while he
mounted the lowest range of stairs, a figure in white pass rapidly
through the hall and disappear by the principal entrance of the house.
He hesitated for an instant and looked after it, but the fugitive
figure had passed so swiftly in the uncertain light of early morning
that he was unable to identify it, and he determined to ascertain the
progress of events, now that Numerian must have discovered a portion at
least of the plot against his daughter and himself, by ascending
immediately to Antonina's apartment, whatever might be the consequences
of his intrusion at such an hour on her father's wrath.

As soon as the Pagan appeared before him, a sensible change took place
in Vetranio.  The presence of Ulpius in the chamber was a positive
relief to the senator's perturbed faculties, after the mysterious,
overpowering influence that the moral command expressed in the mere
presence of the father and the master of the house, at such an hour,
had exercised over them. Over Ulpius he had an absolute right, Ulpius
was his dependant; and he determined, therefore, to extort from the
servant whom he despised an explanation of the mysteries in the conduct
of the master whom he feared, and the daughter whom he began to doubt.

'Where is Antonina?' he cried, starting as if from a trance, and
advancing fiercely towards the treacherous Pagan.  'She has left the
room--she must have taken refuge with you.'

With a slow and penetrating gaze Ulpius looked round the apartment.  A
faint agitation was perceptible in his livid countenance, but he
uttered not a word.

The senator's face became pale and red with alternate emotions of
apprehension and rage.  He seized the Pagan by the throat, his eyes
sparkled, his blood boiled, he began to suspect even then that Antonina
was lost to him for ever.

'I ask you again where is she?' he shouted in a voice of fury.  'If
through this night's work she is lost or harmed, I will revenge it on
you.  Is this the performance of your promise?  Do you think that I
will direct your desired restoration of the gods of old for this?  If
evil comes to Antonina through your treachery, sooner than assist in
your secret projects, I would see you and your accursed deities all
burning together in the Christians' hell!  Where is the girl, you
slave? Villain, where was your vigilance, when you let that man
surprise us at our first interview?'

He turned towards Numerian as he spoke.  Trouble and emergency gift the
faculties with a more than mortal penetration.  Every word that he had
uttered had eaten its burning way into the father's heart.  Hours of
narrative could not have convinced him how fatally he had been
deceived, more thoroughly than the few hasty expressions he had just
heard.  No word passed his lips--no action betrayed his misery.  He
stood before the spoilers of his home, changed in an instant from the
courageous enthusiast to the feeble, helpless, heart-broken man.

Though all the ferocity of his old Roman blood had been roused in
Vetranio, as he threatened Ulpius, the father's look of cold, silent,
frightful despair froze it in his young veins in an instant. His heart
was still the impressible heart of youth; and, struck for the first
time in his life with emotions of horror and remorse, he advanced a
step to offer such explanation and atonement as he best might, when the
voice of Ulpius suspended his intentions, and made him pause to listen.

'She passed me in the hall,' muttered the Pagan, doggedly.  'I did my
part in betraying her into your power--it was for you to hinder her in
her flight.  Why did you not strike him to the earth,' he continued,
pointing with a mocking smile to Numerian, 'when he surprised you?  You
are wealthy and a noble of Rome; murder would have been no crime in
you!'

'Stand back!' cried the senator, thrusting him from the position he had
hitherto occupied in the door-way.  'She may be recovered even yet!
All Rome shall be searched for her!'

The next instant he disappeared from the room, and the master and
servant were left together alone.

The silence that now reigned in the apartment was broken by distant
sounds of uproar and confusion in the streets of the city beneath.
These ominous noises had arisen with the dawn of day, but the different
emotions of the occupants of Numerian's abode had so engrossed them,
that the turmoil in the outer world had passed unheeded by all.  No
sooner, however, had Vetranio departed than it caught the attention of
Ulpius, and he advanced to the window.  What he there saw and heard was
of no ordinary importance, for it at once fixed him to the spot where
he stood in mute and ungovernable surprise.

While Ulpius was occupied at the window, Numerian had staggered to the
side of the bed which his ill-timed severity had made vacant, perhaps
for ever.  The power of action, the capacity to go forth and seek his
child himself, was entirely suspended in the agony of her loss, as the
miserable man fell on his knees, and in the anguish of his heart
endeavoured to find solace in prayer.  In the positions they severally
occupied the servant and the master long remained--the betrayer
watching at the window, the betrayed mourning at his lost daughter's
bed--both alike silent, both alike unconscious of the lapse of time.

At length, apparently unaware at first that he was not alone in the
room, Numerian spoke.  In his low, broken, tremulous accents, none of
his adherents would have recognised the voice of the eloquent
preacher--the bold chastiser of the vices of the Church.  The whole
nature of the man--moral, intellectual, physical--seemed fatally and
completely changed.

'She was innocent, she was innocent!' he whispered to himself.  'And
even had she been guilty, was it for me to drive her from my doors!  My
part, like my Redeemer's, was to teach repentance, and to show mercy!
Accursed be the pride and anger that drove justice and patience from my
heart, when I beheld her, as I thought, submitting herself without a
struggle or a cry, to my dishonour, and hers!  Could I not have
imagined her terror, could I not have remembered her purity?  Alas, my
beloved, if I myself have been the dupe of the wicked, what marvel is
it that you should have been betrayed as well!  And I have driven you
from me, you, from whose mouth no word of anger ever dropped!  I have
thrust you from my bosom, you, who were the adornment of my age!  My
death approaches, and you will not be by to pardon my heavy offence, to
close my weary eyes, to mourn by my solitary tomb!  God--oh God!  If I
am left thus lonely on the earth, thou hast punished me beyond what I
can bear!'

He paused--his emotions for the instant bereft him of speech.  After an
interval, he muttered to himself in a low, moaning voice--'I called her
harlot!  My pure, innocent child!  I called her harlot--I called her
harlot!'


In a paroxysm of despair, he started up and looked distractedly around
him.  Ulpius still stood motionless at the window.  At the sight of the
ruthless Pagan he trembled in every limb.  All those infirmities of age
that had been hitherto spared him, seemed to overwhelm him in an
instant.  He feebly advanced to his betrayer's side, and addressed him
thus:--

'I have lodged you, taught you, cared for you; I have never intruded on
your secrets, never doubted your word, and for all this, you have
repaid me by plotting against my daughter and deceiving me!  If your
end was to harm me by assailing my child's happiness and honour you
have succeeded! If you would banish me from Rome, if you would plunge
me into obscurity, to serve some mysterious ambition of your own, you
may dispose of me as you will!  I bow before the terrible power of your
treachery!  I will renounce whatever you command, if you will restore
me to my child!  I am helpless and miserable; I have neither heart nor
strength to seek her myself!  You, who know all things and can dare all
dangers, may restore her to pardon and bless me, if you will!
Remember, whoever you really are, that you were once helpless and
alone, and that you are still old, like me!  Remember that I have
promised to abandon to you whatever you desire!  Remember that no
woman's voice can cheer me, no woman's heart feel for me, now that I am
old and lonely, but my daughter's!  I have guessed from the words of
the nobleman whom you serve, what are the designs you cherish and the
faith you profess; I will neither betray the one nor assault the other!
I thought that my labours for the Church were more to me than anything
on earth, but now, that through my fault, my daughter is driven from
her father's roof, I know that she is dearer to me than the greatest of
my designs; I must gain her pardon; I must win back her affection
before I die!  You are powerful and can recover her!  Ulpius!  Ulpius!'

As he spoke, the Christian knelt at the Pagan's feet.  It was terrible
to see the man of affection and integrity thus humbled before the man
of heartlessness and crime.

Ulpius turned to behold him, then without a word he raised him from the
ground, and thrusting him to the window, pointed with flashing eyes to
the wide view without.

The sun had arisen high in the heaven and beamed in dazzling brilliancy
over Rome and the suburbs.  A vague, fearful, mysterious desolation
seemed to have suddenly overwhelmed the whole range of dwellings beyond
the walls.  No sounds rose from the gardens, no population idled in the
streets.  The ramparts on the other hand were crowded at every visible
point with people of all ranks, and the distant squares and
amphitheatres of the city itself, swarmed like ant-hills to the eye
with the crowds that struggled within them.  Confused cries and strange
wild noises rose at all points from these masses of human beings.  The
whole of Rome seemed the prey of a vast and universal revolt.

Extraordinary and affrighting as was the scene at the moment when he
beheld it, it passed unheeded before the eyes of the scarce conscious
father.  He was blind to all sights but his daughter's form, deaf to
all sounds but her voice; and he murmured as he looked vacantly forth
upon the wild view before him, 'Where is my child!--where is my child!'

'What is your child to me?  What are the fortunes of affections of man
or woman, at such an hour as this?' cried the Pagan, as he stood by
Numerian, with features horribly animated by the emotions of fierce
delight and triumph that were raging within him at the prospect he
beheld.  'Dotard, look from this window!  Listen to those voices!  The
gods whom I serve, the god whom you and your worship would fain have
destroyed, have risen to avenge themselves at last! Behold those
suburbs, they are left desolate!  Hear those cries--they are from Roman
lips!  While your household's puny troubles have run their course, this
city of apostates has been doomed!  In the world's annals this morning
will never be forgotten!  THE GOTHS ARE AT THE GATES OF ROME!'



CHAPTER 8.

THE GOTHS.

It was no false rumour that had driven the populace of the suburbs to
fly to the security of the city walls.  It was no ill-founded cry of
terror that struck the ear of Ulpius, as he stood at Numerian's window.
The name of Rome had really lost its pristine terrors; the walls of
Rome, those walls which had morally guarded the Empire by their renown,
as they had actually guarded its capital by their strength, were
deprived at length of their ancient inviolability.  An army of
barbarians had indeed penetrated for conquest and for vengeance to the
City of the World!  The achievement which the invasions of six hundred
years had hitherto attempted in vain, was now accomplished, and
accomplished by the men whose forefathers had once fled like hunted
beasts to their native fastnesses, before the legions of the
Caesars--'The Goths were at the gates of Rome!'

And now, as his warriors encamped around him, as he saw the arrayed
hosts whom his summons had gathered together, and his energy led on,
threatening at their doors the corrupt senate who had deceived, and the
boastful populace who had despised him, what emotions stirred within
the heart of Alaric!  As the words of martial command fell from his
lips, and his eyes watched the movements of the multitudes around him,
what exalted aspirations, what daring resolves, grew and strengthened
in the mind of the man who was the pioneer of that mighty revolution,
which swept from one quarter of the world the sway, the civilisation,
the very life and spirit of centuries of ancient rule!  High thoughts
gathered fast in his mind; a daring ambition expanded within him--the
ambition, not of the barbarian plunderer, but of the avenger who had
come to punish; not of the warrior who combated for combat's sake, but
of the hero who was vowed to conquer and to sway.  From the far-distant
days when Odin was driven from his territories by the romans, to the
night polluted by the massacre of the hostages in Aquileia, the hour of
just and terrible retribution for Gothic wrongs had been delayed
through the weary lapse of years, and the warning convulsion of bitter
strifes, to approach at last under him.  He looked on the towering
walls before him, the only invader since Hannibal by whom they had been
beheld; and he felt as he looked, that his new aspirations did not
deceive him, that his dreams of dominion were brightening into proud
reality, that his destiny was gloriously linked with the overthrow of
Imperial Rome!

But even in the moment of approaching triumph, the leader of the Goths
was still wily in purpose and moderate in action.  His impatient
warriors waited but the word to commence the assault, to pillage the
city, and to slaughter the inhabitants; but he withheld it.  Scarcely
had the army halted before the gates of Rome, when the news was
promulgated among their ranks, that Alaric, for purposes of his own,
had determined to reduce the city by a blockade.

The numbers of his forces, increased during his march by the accession
of thirty thousand auxiliaries, were now divided into battalions,
varying in strength according to the service that was required of them.
These divisions stretched round the city walls, and though occupying
separate posts, and devoted to separate duties, were so arranged as to
be capable of uniting at a signal in any numbers, on any given point.
Each body of men was commanded by a tried and veteran warrior, in whose
fidelity Alaric could place the most implicit trust, and to whom he
committed the duty of enforcing the strictest military discipline that
had ever prevailed among the Gothic ranks.  Before each of the twelve
principal gates a separate encampment was raised. Multitudes watched
the navigation of the Tiber in every possible direction, with untiring
vigilance; and not one of the ordinary inlets to Rome, however
apparently unimportant, was overlooked. By these means, every mode of
communication between the beleaguered city and the wide and fertile
tracts of land around it, was effectually prevented.  When it is
remembered that this elaborate plan of blockade was enforced against a
place containing, at the lowest possible computation, twelve hundred
thousand inhabitants, destitute of magazines for food within its walls,
dependent for supplies on its regular contributions from the country
without, governed by an irresolute senate, and defended by an enervated
army, the horrors that now impended over the besieged Romans are as
easily imagined as described.


Among the ranks of the army that now surrounded the doomed city, the
division appointed to guard the Pincian Gate will be found, at this
juncture, most worthy of the reader's attention:  for one of the
warriors appointed to its subordinate command was the young chieftain
Hermanric, who had been accompanied by Goisvintha through all the toils
and dangers of the march, since the time when we left him at the
Italian Alps.

The watch had been set, the tents had been pitched, the defences had
been raised on the portion of ground selected to occupy every possible
approach to the Pincian Gate, as Hermanric retired to await by
Goisvintha's side, whatever further commands he might yet be entrusted
with, by his superiors in the Gothic camp.  The spot occupied by the
young warrior's simple tent was on a slight eminence, apart from the
positions chosen by his comrades, eastward of the city gate, and
overlooking at some distance the deserted gardens of the suburbs, and
the stately palaces of the Pincian Hill.  Behind his temporary dwelling
was the open country, reduced to a fertile solitude by the flight of
its terrified inhabitants; and at each side lay one unvarying prospect
of military strength and preparation, stretching out its animated
confusion of soldiers, tents, and engines of warfare, as far as the
sight could reach.  It was now evening.  The walls of Rome, enshrouded
in a rising mist, showed dim and majestic to the eyes of the Goths.
The noises in the beleaguered city softened and deepened, seeming to be
muffled in the growing darkness of the autumn night, and becoming less
and less audible as the vigilant besiegers listened to them from their
respective posts. One by one, lights broke wildly forth at irregular
distances, in the Gothic camp.  Harshly and fitfully the shrill call of
the signal trumpets rang from rank to rank; and through the dim thick
air rose, in the intervals of the more important noises, the clash of
heavy hammers and the shout of martial command. Wherever the
preparations for the blockade were still incomplete, neither the
approach of night nor the pretext of weariness were suffered for an
instant to hinder their continued progress. Alaric's indomitable will
conquered every obstacle of nature, and every deficiency of man.
Darkness had no obscurity that forced him to repose, and lassitude no
eloquence that lured him to delay.

In no part of the army had the commands of the Gothic king been so
quickly and intelligently executed, as in that appointed to watch the
Pincian Gate.  The interview of Hermanric and Goisvintha in the young
chieftain's tent, was, consequently, uninterrupted for a considerable
space of time by any fresh mandate from the head-quarters of the camp.

In outward appearance, both the brother and sister had undergone a
change remarkable enough to be visible, even by the uncertain light of
the torch which now shone on them as they stood together at the door of
the tent.  The features of Goisvintha--which at the period when we
first beheld her on the shores of the mountain lake, retained, in spite
of her poignant sufferings, much of the lofty and imposing beauty that
had been their natural characteristic in her happier days--now
preserved not the slightest traces of their former attractions.  Its
freshness had withered from her complexion, its fulness had departed
from her form. Her eyes had contracted an unvarying sinister expression
of malignant despair, and her manner had become sullen, repulsive, and
distrustful. This alteration in her outward aspect, was but the result
of a more perilous change in the disposition of her heart.  The death
of her last child at the very moment when her flight had successfully
directed her to the protection of her people, had affected her more
fatally than all the losses she had previously sustained.  The
difficulties and dangers that she had encountered in saving her
offspring from the massacre; the dismal certainty that the child was
the only one, out of all the former objects of her affection, left to
her to love; the wild sense of triumph that she experienced in
remembering, that in this single instance her solitary efforts had
thwarted the savage treachery of the Court of Rome, had inspired her
with feelings of devotion towards the last of her household which
almost bordered on insanity.  And, now that her beloved charge, her
innocent victim, her future warrior, had, after all her struggles for
his preservation, pined and died; now that she was childless indeed;
now that Roman cruelty had won its end in spite of all her patience,
all her courage, all her endurance; every noble feeling within her
sunk, annihilated at the shock.  Her sorrow took the fatal form which
irretrievable destroys, in women, all the softer and better
emotions;--it changed to the despair that asks no sympathy, to the
grief that holds no communion with tears.

Less elevated in intellect and less susceptible in disposition, the
change to sullenness of expression and abruptness of manner now visible
in Hermanric, resulted rather from his constant contemplation of
Goisvintha's gloomy despair, than from any actual revolution in his own
character.  In truth, however many might be the points of outward
resemblance now discernible between the brother and sister, the
difference in degree of their moral positions, implied of itself the
difference in degree of the inward sorrow of each.  Whatever the trials
and afflictions that might assail him, Hermanric possessed the
healthful elasticity of youth and the martial occupations of manhood to
support them.  Goisvintha could repose on neither.  With no employment
but bitter remembrance to engage her thoughts, with no kindly
aspiration, no soothing hope to fill her heart, she was abandoned
irrevocably to the influence of unpartaken sorrow and vindictive
despair.

Both the woman and the warrior stood together in silence for some time.
At length, without taking his eyes from the dusky, irregular mass
before him, which was all that night now left visible of the ill-fated
city, Hermanric addressed Goisvintha thus:--

'Have you no words of triumph, as you look on the ramparts that your
people have fought for generations to behold at their mercy, as we now
behold them?  Can a woman of the Goths be silent when she stands before
the city of Rome?'

'I came hither to behold Rome pillaged, and Romans slaughtered; what is
Rome blockaded to me?' replied Goisvintha fiercely.  'The treasures
within that city will buy its safety from our King, as soon as the
tremblers on the ramparts gain heart enough to penetrate a Gothic camp.
Where is the vengeance that you promised me among those distant
palaces? Do I behold you carrying that destruction through the
dwellings of Rome, which the soldiers of yonder city carried through
the dwellings of the Goths?  Is it for plunder or for glory that the
army is here?  I thought, in my woman's delusion, that it was for
revenge!'

'Dishonour will avenge you--Famine will avenge you--Pestilence will
avenge you!'

'They will avenge my nation; they will not avenge me.  I have seen the
blood of Gothic women spilt around me--I have looked on my children's
corpses bleeding at my feet!  Will a famine that I cannot see, and a
pestilence that I cannot watch, give me vengeance for this?  Look!
Here is the helmet-crest of my husband and your brother--the
helmet-crest that was flung to me as a witness that the Romans had
slain him!  Since the massacre of Aquileia it has never quitted my
bosom.  I have sworn that the blood which stains and darkens it, shall
be washed off in the blood of the people of Rome.  Though I should
perish under those accursed walls; though you in your soulless patience
should refuse me protection and aid; I, widowed, weakened, forsaken as
I am, will hold to the fulfilment of my oath!'

As she ceased she folded the crest in her mantle, and turned abruptly
from Hermanric in bitter and undissembled scorn.  All the attributes of
her sex, in thought, expression, and manner, seemed to have deserted
her.  The very tones she spoke in were harsh and unwomanly.


Every word she had uttered, every action she had displayed, had sunk
into the inmost heart, had stirred the fiercest passions of the young
warrior whom she addressed.  The first national sentiment discoverable
in the day-spring of the ages of Gothic history, is the love of war;
but the second is the reverence of woman.  This latter
feeling--especially remarkable among so fierce and unsusceptible a
people as the ancient Scandinavians--was entirely unconnected with
those strong attaching ties, which are the natural consequence of the
warm temperaments of more southern nations; for love was numbered with
the base inferior passions, in the frigid and hardy composition of the
warrior of the north.  It was the offspring of reasoning and
observation, not of instinctive sentiment and momentary impulse.  In
the wild, poetical code of the old Gothic superstition was one axiom,
closely and strangely approximating to an important theory in the
Christian scheme--the watchfulness of an omnipotent Creator over a
finite creature.  Every action of the body, every impulse of the mind,
was the immediate result, in the system of worship among the Goths of
the direct, though invisible interference of the divinities they
adored.  When, therefore, they observed that women were more submitted
in body to the mysterious laws of nature and temperament, and more
swayed in mind by the native and universal instincts of humanity than
themselves, they inferred as an inevitable conclusion, that the female
sex was more incessantly regarded, and more constantly and remarkably
influenced by the gods of their worship, than the male.  Acting under
this persuasion, they committed the study of medicine, the
interpretation of dreams, and in many instances, the mysteries of
communication with the invisible world, to the care of their women.
The gentler sex became their counsellors in difficulty, and their
physicians in sickness--their companions rather than their
mistresses,--the objects of their veneration rather than the purveyors
of their pleasures.  Although in after years, the national migrations
of the Goths changed the national temperament, although their ancient
mythology was exchanged for the worship of Christ, this prevailing
sentiment of their earliest existence as a people never entirely
deserted them; but, with different modifications and in different
forms, maintained much of its old supremacy through all changes of
manners and varieties of customs, descending finally to their posterity
among the present nations of Europe, in the shape of that established
code of universal courtesy to women, which is admitted to be one great
distinguishing mark between the social systems of the inhabitants of
civilised and uncivilised lands.

This powerful and remarkable ascendancy of the woman over the man,
among the Goths, could hardly be more strikingly displayed than in the
instance of Hermanric.  It appeared, not only in the deteriorating
effect of the constant companionship of Goisvintha on his naturally
manly character, but also in the strong influence over his mind of the
last words of fury and disdain that she had spoken.  His eyes gleamed
with anger, his cheeks flushed with shame, as he listened to those
passages in her wrathful remonstrance which reflected most bitterly on
himself.  She had scarcely ceased, and turned to retire into the tent,
when he arrested her progress, and replied, in heightened and accusing
tones:--

'You wrong me by your words!  When I saw you among the Alps, did I
refuse you protection? When the child was wounded, did I leave him to
suffer unaided?  When he died, did I forsake him to rot upon the earth,
or abandon to his mother the digging of his grave?  When we approached
Aquileia, and marched past Ravenna, did I forget that the sword hung at
my shoulder?  Was it at my will that it remained sheathed, or that I
entered not the gates of the Roman towns, but passed by them in haste?
Was it not the command of the king that withheld me? and could I, his
warrior, disobey?  I swear it to you, the vengeance that I promised, I
yearn to perform,--but is it for me to alter the counsels of Alaric?
Can I alone assault the city which it is his command that we should
blockade?  What would you have of me?'

'I would have you remember,' retorted Goisvintha, indignantly, 'that
Romans slew your brother, and made me childless!  I would have you
remember that a public warfare of years on years, is powerless to stay
one hour's craving of private vengeance!  I would have you less
submitted to your general's wisdom, and more devoted to your own
wrongs! I would have you--like me--thirst for the blood of the first
inhabitant of yonder den of traitors, who--whether for peace or for
war--passes the precincts of its sheltering walls!'

She paused abruptly for an answer, but Hermanric uttered not a word.
The courageous heart of the young chieftain recoiled at the deliberate
act of assassination, pressed upon him in Goisvintha's veiled yet
expressive speech. To act with his comrades in taking the city by
assault, to outdo in the heat of battle the worst horrors of the
massacre of Aquileia, would have been achievements in harmony with his
wild disposition and warlike education; but, to submit himself to
Goisvintha's projects, was a sacrifice, that the very peculiarities of
his martial character made repugnant to his thoughts. Emotions such as
these he would have communicated to his companion, as they passed
through his mind; but there was something in the fearful and ominous
change that had occurred in her disposition since he had met her among
the Alps,--in her frantic, unnatural craving for bloodshed and revenge,
that gave her a mysterious and powerful influence over his thoughts,
his words, and even his actions. He hesitated and was silent.

'Have I not been patient?' continued Goisvintha, lowering her voice to
tones of earnest, agitated entreaty, which jarred upon Hermanric's ear,
as he thought who was the petitioner, and what would be the object of
the petition,--' Have I not been patient throughout the weary journey
from the Alps?  Have I not waited for the hour of retribution, even
before the defenceless cities that we passed on the march?  Have I not
at your instigation governed my yearning for vengeance, until the day
that should see you mounting those walls with the warriors of the
Goths, to scourge with fire and sword the haughty traitors of Rome?
Has that day come?  Is it by this blockade that the requital you
promised me over the corpse of my murdered child, is to be performed?
Remember the perils I dared, to preserve the life of that last one of
my household,--and will you risk nothing to avenge his death?  His
sepulchre is untended and solitary.  Far from the dwellings of his
people, lost in the dawn of his beauty, slaughtered in the beginning of
his strength, lies the offspring of your brother's blood.  And the
rest--the two children, who were yet infants; the father, who was brave
in battle and wise in council--where are they?  Their bones whiten on
the shelterless plain, or rot unburied by the ocean shore!  Think--had
they lived--how happily your days would have passed with them in the
time of peace! how gladly your brother would have gone forth with you
to the chase! how joyfully his boys would have nestled at your knees,
to gather from your lips the first lessons that should form them for
the warrior's life!  Think of such enjoyments as these, and then think
that Roman swords have deprived you of them all!'

Her voice trembled, she ceased for a moment, and looked mournfully up
into Hermanric's averted face.  Every feature in the young chieftain's
countenance expressed the tumult that her words had aroused within him.
He attempted to reply, but his voice was powerless in that trying
moment.  His head drooped upon his heaving breast, and he sighed
heavily as, without speaking, he grasped Goisvintha by the hand.  The
object she had pleaded for was nearly attained;--he was fast sinking
beneath the tempter's well-spread toils!

'Are you silent still?' she gloomily resumed.  'Do you wonder at this
longing for vengeance, at this craving for Roman blood?  I tell you
that my desire has arisen within me, at promptings from the voices of
an unknown world.  They urge me to seek requital on the nation who have
widowed and bereaved me--yonder, in their vaunted city, from their
pampered citizens, among their cherished homes--in the spot where their
shameful counsels take root, and whence their ruthless treacheries
derive their bloody source!  In the book that our teachers worship, I
have heard it read, that "the voice of blood crieth from the ground!"
This is the voice--Hermanric, this is the voice that I have heard!  I
have dreamed that I walked on a shore of corpses, by a sea of blood--I
have seen, arising from that sea, my husband's and my children's
bodies, gashed throughout with Roman wounds!  They have called to me
through the vapour of carnage that was around them;--'Are we yet
unavenged?  Is the sword of Hermanric yet sheathed?'  Night after night
have I seen this vision and heard those voice, and hoped for no respite
until the day that saw the army encamped beneath the walls of Rome, and
raising the scaling ladders for the assault!  And now, after all my
endurance, how has that day arrived?  Accursed be the lust of treasure!
It is more to the warriors, and to you, than the justice of revenge!'

'Listen! listen!' cried Hermanric entreatingly.

'I listen no longer!' interrupted Goisvintha.  'The tongue of my people
is as a strange language in my ears; for it talks but of plunder and of
peace, of obedience, of patience, and of hope!  I listen no longer; for
the kindred are gone that I loved to listen to--they are all slain by
the Romans but you--and you I renounce!'


Deprived of all power of consideration by the violence of the emotions
awakened in his heart by Goisvintha's wild revelations of the evil
passion that consumed her, the young Goth, shuddering throughout his
whole frame, and still averting his face, murmured in hoarse, unsteady
accents: 'Ask of me what you will.  I have no words to deny, no power
to rebuke you--ask of me what you will!'

'Promise me,' cried Goisvintha, seizing the hand of Hermanric, and
gazing with a look of fierce triumph on his disordered countenance,
'that this blockade of the city shall not hinder my vengeance!  Promise
me that the first victim of our righteous revenge, shall be the first
one that appears before you--whether in war or peace--of the
inhabitants of Rome!'

'I promise,' cried the Goth.  And those two words sealed the destiny of
his future life.

During the silence that now ensued between Goisvintha and Hermanric,
and while each stood absorbed in deep meditation, the dark prospect
spread around them began to brighten slowly under a soft, clear light.
The moon, whose dull broad disk had risen among the evening mists
arrayed in gloomy red, had now topped the highest of the exhalations of
earth, and beamed in the wide heaven, adorned once more in her pale,
accustomed hue.  Gradually, yet perceptibly, the vapour rolled,--layer
by layer,--from the lofty summits of the palaces of Rome, and the high
places of the mighty city began to dawn, as it were, in the soft,
peaceful, mysterious light; while the lower divisions of the walls, the
desolate suburbs, and parts of the Gothic camp, lay still plunged in
the dusky obscurity of the mist, in grand and gloomy contrast to the
prospect of glowing brightness, that almost appeared to hover about
them from above and around.  Patches of ground behind the tent of
Hermanric, began to grow partially visible in raised and open
positions; and the song of the nightingale was now faintly audible at
intervals, among the solitary and distant trees.  In whatever direction
it was observed, the aspect of nature gave promise of the cloudless,
tranquil night, of the autumnal climate of ancient Italy.

Hermanric was the first to return to the contemplation of the outward
world.  Perceiving that the torch which still burnt by the side of his
tent, had become useless, now that the moon had arisen and dispelled
the mists, he advanced and extinguished it; pausing afterwards to look
forth over the plains, as they brightened slowly before him.  He had
been thus occupied but a short time, when he thought he discerned a
human figure moving slowly over a spot of partially lightened and hilly
ground, at a short distance from him.  It was impossible that this
wandering form could be one of his own people;--they were all collected
at their respective posts, and his tent he knew was on the outermost
boundary of the encampment before the Pincian Gate.

He looked again.  The figure still advanced, but at too great a
distance to allow him a chance of discovering, in the uncertain light
around him, either its nation, its sex, or its age.  His heart misgave
him as he remembered his promise to Goisvintha, and contemplated the
possibility that it was some miserable slave, abandoned by the
fugitives who had quitted the suburbs in the morning, who now
approached as a last resource, to ask mercy and protection from his
enemies in the camp.  He turned towards Goisvintha as the idea crossed
his mind, and observed that she was still occupied in meditation.
Assured by the sight, that she had not yet observed the fugitive
figure, he again directed his attention--with an excess of anxiety
which he could hardly account for--in the direction where he had first
beheld it, but it was no more to be seen.  It had either retired to
concealment, or was now still advancing towards his tent through a
clump of trees that clothed the descent of the hill.

Silently and patiently he continued to look forth over the landscape;
and still no living thing was to be seen.  At length, just as he began
to doubt whether his senses had not deceived him, the fugitive figure
suddenly appeared from the trees, hurried with wavering gait over the
patch of low, damp ground that still separated it from the young Goth,
gained his tent, and then with a feeble cry fell helplessly upon the
earth at his feet.


That cry, faint as it was, attracted Goisvintha's attention.  She
turned in an instant, thrust Hermanric aside, and raised the stranger
in her arms.  The light, slender form, the fair hand and arm hanging
motionless towards the ground, the long locks of deep black hair, heavy
with the moisture of the night atmosphere, betrayed the wanderer's sex
and age in an instant.  The solitary fugitive was a young girl.

Signing to Hermanric to kindle the extinguished torch at a neighbouring
watch-fire, Goisvintha carried the still insensible girl into the tent.
As the Goth silently proceeded to obey her, a vague, horrid suspicion,
that he shrunk from embodying, passed across his mind.  His hand shook
so that he could hardly light the torch, and bold and vigorous as he
was, his limbs trembled beneath him as he slowly returned to the tent.

When he had gained the interior of his temporary abode, the light of
his torch illuminated a strange and impressive scene.

Goisvintha was seated on a rude oaken chest, supporting on her knees
the form of the young girl, and gazing with an expression of the most
intense and enthralling interest upon her pale, wasted countenance.
The tattered robe that had hitherto enveloped the fugitive had fallen
back, and disclosed the white dress, which was the only other garment
she wore.  Her face, throat, and arms, had been turned, by exposure to
the cold, to the pure whiteness of marble.  Her eyes were closed, and
her small, delicate features were locked in a rigid repose.  But for
her deep black hair, which heightened the ghastly aspect of her face,
she might have been mistaken, as she lay in the woman's arms, for an
exquisitely chiseled statue of youth in death!

When the figure of the young warrior, arrayed in his martial
habiliments, and standing near the insensible girl with evident
emotions of wonder and anxiety, was added to the group thus
produced,--when Goisvintha's tall, powerful frame, clothed in dark
garments, and bent over the fragile form and white dress of the
fugitive, was illuminated by the wild, fitful glare of the torch,--when
the heightened colour, worn features, and eager expression of the woman
were beheld, here shadowed, there brightened, in close opposition to
the pale, youthful, reposing countenance of the girl, such an
assemblage of violent lights and deep shades was produced, as gave the
whole scene a character at once mysterious and sublime.  It presented
an harmonious variety of solemn colours, united by the exquisite
artifice of Nature to a grand, yet simple disposition of form.  It was
a picture executed by the hand of Rembrandt, and imagined by the mind
of Raphael.

Starting abruptly from her long, earnest examination of the fugitive,
Goisvintha proceeded to employ herself in restoring animation to her
insensible charge.  While thus occupied, she preserved unbroken
silence. A breathless expectation, that absorbed all her senses in one
direction, seemed to have possessed itself of her heart.  She laboured
at her task with the mechanical, unwavering energy of those, whose
attention is occupied by their thoughts rather than their actions.
Slowly and unwillingly the first faint flush of returning animation
dawned, in the tenderest delicacy of hue, upon the girl's colourless
cheek.  Gradually and softly, her quickening respiration fluttered a
thin lock of hair that had fallen over her face.  A little interval
more, and then the closed, peaceful eyes suddenly opened, and glance
quickly round the tent with a wild expression of bewilderment and
terror.  Then, as Goisvintha rose, and attempted to place her on a
seat, she tore herself from her grasp, looked on her for a moment with
fearful intentness, and then falling on her knees, murmured, in a
plaintive voice,--

'Have mercy upon me.  I am forsaken by my father,--I know not why.  The
gates of the city are shut against me.  My habitation in Rome is closed
to me for ever!'


She had scarcely spoken these few words, before an ominous change
appeared in Goisvintha's countenance.  Its former expression of ardent
curiosity changed to a look of malignant triumph. Her eyes fixed
themselves on the girl's upturned face, in glaring, steady, spell-bound
contemplation.  She gloated over the helpless creature before her, as
the wild beast gloats over the prey that it has secured.  Her form
dilated, a scornful smile appeared on her lips, a hot flush rose on her
cheeks, and ever and anon she whispered softly to herself, 'I knew she
was Roman! Aha!  I knew she was Roman!'

During this space of time Hermanric was silent.  His breath came short
and thick, his face grew pale, and his glance, after resting for an
instant on the woman and the girl, travelled slowly and anxiously round
the tent.  In one corner of it lay a heavy battle-axe.  He looked for a
moment from the weapon to Goisvintha, with a vivid expression of
horror, and then moving slowly across the tent, with a firm, yet
trembling grasp, he possessed himself of the arm.

As he looked up, Goisvintha approached him.  In one hand she held the
bloody helmet-crest, while she pointed with the other to the crouching
form of the girl.  Her lips were still parted with their unnatural
smile, and she whispered softly to the Goth--'Remember your
promise!--remember your kindred!--remember the massacre of Aquileia!'

The young warrior made no answer.  He moved rapidly forward a few
steps, and signed hurriedly to the young girl to fly by the door; but
her terror had by this time divested her of all her ordinary powers of
perception and comprehension.  She looked up vacantly at Hermanric, and
then shuddering violently, crept into a corner of the tent.  During the
short silence that now ensued, the Goth could hear her shiver and sigh,
as he stood watching, with all the anxiety of apprehension,
Goisvintha's darkening brow.

'She is Roman--she is the first dweller in the city who has appeared
before you!--remember your promise!--remember your kindred!--remember
the massacre of Aquileia!' said the woman in fierce, quick,
concentrated tones.

'I remember that I am a warrior and a Goth,' replied Hermanric,
disdainfully.  'I have promised to avenge you, but it must be on a man
that my promise must be fulfilled--an armed man, who can come forth
with weapons in his hand--a strong man of courage whom I will slay in
single combat before your eyes!  The girl is too young to die, too weak
to be assailed!'

Not a syllable that he had spoken had passed unheeded by the fugitive,
every word seemed to revive her torpid faculties.  As he ceased she
arose, and with the quick instinct of terror, ran up to the side of the
young Goth.  Then seizing his hand--the hand that still grasped the
battle-axe--she knelt down and kissed it, uttering hurried broken
ejaculations, as she clasped it to her bosom, which the tremulousness
of her voice rendered completely unintelligible.

'Did the Romans think my children too young to die, or too weak to be
assailed?' cried Goisvintha.  'By the Lord God of Heaven, they murdered
them the more willingly because they were young, and wounded them the
more fiercely because they were weak!  My heart leaps within me as I
look on the girl!  I am doubly avenged, if I am avenged on the innocent
and the youthful!  Her bones shall rot on the plains of Rome, as the
bones of my offspring rot on the plains of Aquileia!  Shed me her
blood!--Remember your promise!--Shed me her blood!'

She advanced with extended arms and gleaming eyes towards the fugitive.
She gasped for breath, her face turned suddenly to a livid paleness,
the torchlight fell upon her distorted features, she looked unearthly
at that fearful moment; but the divinity of mercy had now braced the
determination of the young Goth to meet all emergencies.  His bright
steady eye quailed not for an instant, as he encountered the frantic
glance of the fury before him.  With one hand he barred Goisvintha from
advancing another step; the other, he could not disengage from the
girl, who now clasped and kissed it more eagerly than before.


'You do this but to tempt me to anger,' said Goisvintha, altering her
manner with sudden and palpable cunning, more ominous of peril to the
fugitive than the fury she had hitherto displayed. 'You jest at me,
because I have failed in patience, like a child!  But you will shed her
blood--you are honourable and will hold to your promise--you will shed
her blood!  And I,' she continued, exultingly, seating herself on the
oaken chest that she had previously occupied, and resting her clenched
hands on her knees; 'I will wait to see it!'

At this moment voices and steps were heard outside the tent.  Hermanric
instantly raised the trembling girl from the ground, and supporting her
by his arm, advanced to ascertain the cause of the disturbance.  He was
confronted the next instant by an old warrior of superior rank,
attached to the person of Alaric, who was followed by a small party of
the ordinary soldiery of the camp.

'Among the women appointed by the king to the office of tending, for
this night, those sick and wounded on the march, is Goisvintha, sister
of Hermanric.  If she is here, let her approach and follow me;' said
the chief of the party in authoritative tones, pausing at the door of
the tent.

Goisvintha rose.  For an instant she stood irresolute.  To quit
Hermanric at such a time as this, was a sacrifice that wrung her savage
heart;--but she remembered the severity of Alaric's discipline, she saw
the armed men awaiting her, and yielded after a struggle to the
imperious necessity of obedience to the king's commands.  Trembling
with suppressed anger and bitter disappointment, she whispered to
Hermanric as she passed him:--

'You cannot save her if you would!  You dare not commit her to the
charge of your companions, she is too young and too fair to be
abandoned to their doubtful protection.  You cannot escape with her,
for you must remain here on the watch at your post.  You will not let
her depart by herself, for you know that she would perish with cold and
privation before the morning rises. When I return on the morrow I shall
see her in the tent.  You cannot escape from your promise;--you cannot
forget it,--you must shed her blood!'

'The commands of the king,' said the old warrior, signing to his party
to depart with Goisvintha, who now stood with forced calmness awaiting
their guidance:  'will be communicated to the chieftain Hermanric on
the morrow.  Remember,' he continued in a lower tone, pointing
contemptuously to the trembling girl; 'that the vigilance you have
shown in setting the watch before yonder gate, will not excuse any
negligence your prize there may now cause you to commit!  Consult your
youthful pleasures as you please, but remember your duties!  Farewell!'

Uttering these words in a stern, serious tone, the veteran departed.
Soon the last sound of the footsteps of his escort died away, and
Hermanric and the fugitive were left alone in the tent.

During the address of the old warrior to the chieftain, the girl had
silently detached herself from her protector's support, and retired
hastily to the interior of the tent.  When she saw that they were left
together again, she advanced hesitatingly towards the young Goth, and
looked up with an expression of mute inquiry into his face.

'I am very miserable,' said she, after an interval of silence, in soft,
clear, melancholy accents.  'If you forsake me now, I must die--and I
have lived so short a time on the earth, I have known so little
happiness and so little love, that I am not fit to die!  But you will
protect me!  You are good and brave, strong with weapons in your hands,
and full of pity.  You have defended me, and spoken kindly of me--I
love you for the compassion you have shown me.'


Her language and actions, simple as they were, were yet so new to
Hermanric, whose experience of her sex had been almost entirely limited
to the women of his own stern impassive nation, that he could only
reply by a brief assurance of protection, when the suppliant awaited
his answer.  A new page in the history of humanity was opening before
his eyes, and he scanned it in wondering silence.


'If that woman should return,' pursued the girl, fixing her dark,
eloquent eyes intently upon the Goth's countenance, 'take me quickly
where she cannot come.  My heart grows cold as I look on her!  She will
kill me if she can approach me again!  My father's anger is very
fearful, but hers is horrible--horrible--horrible!  Hush! already I
hear her coming back--let us go--I will follow you wherever you
please--but let us not delay while there is time to depart!  She will
destroy me if she sees me now, and I cannot die yet!  Oh my preserver,
my compassionate defender, I cannot die yet!'

'No one shall harm you--no on shall approach you to-night--you are
secure from all dangers in this tent,' said the Goth, gazing on her
with undissembled astonishment and admiration.

'I will tell you why death is so dreadful to me,' she continued, and
her voice deepened as she spoke, to tones of mournful solemnity,
strangely impressive in a creature so young.  'I have lived much alone,
and have had no companions but my thoughts, and the sky that I could
look up to, and the things on the earth that I could watch.  As I have
seen the clear heaven and the soft fields, and smelt the perfume of
flowers, and heard the voices of singing-birds afar off, I have
wondered why the same God who made all this, and made me, should have
made grief and pain and hell--the dread eternal hell that my father
speaks of in his church.  I never looked at the sun-light, or woke from
my sleep to look on and to think of the distant stars, but I longed to
love something that might listen to my joy.  But my father forbade me
to be happy!  He frowned even when he gave me my flower-garden--though
God made flowers.  He destroyed my lute--though God made music.  My
life has been a longing in loneliness for the voices of friends!  My
heart has swelled and trembled within me, because when I walked in the
garden and looked on the plains and woods and high, bright mountains
that were round me, I knew that I loved them alone!  Do you know now
why I dare not die?  It is because I must find first the happiness
which I feel God has made for me.  It is because I must live to praise
this wonderful, beautiful world with others who enjoy it as I could!
It is because my home has been among those who sigh, and never among
those who smile!  It is for this that I fear to die!  I must find
companions whose prayers are in singing and in happiness, before I go
to the terrible hereafter that all dread.  I dare not die!  I dare not
die!'

As she uttered these last words she began to weep bitterly.  Between
amazement and compassion the young Goth was speechless.  He looked down
upon the small, soft hand that she had placed on his arm while she
spoke, and saw that it trembled; he pressed it, and felt that it was
cold; and in the first impulse of pity produced by the action, he found
the readiness of speech which he had hitherto striven for in vain.

'You shiver and look pale,' said he; 'a fire shall be kindled at the
door of the tent.  I will bring you garments that will warm you, and
food that will give you strength; you shall sleep, and I will watch
that no one harms you.'

The girl hastily looked up.  An expression of ineffable gratitude
overspread her sorrowful countenance.  She murmured in a broken voice,
'Oh, how merciful, how merciful you are!'  And then, after an evident
struggle with herself, she covered her face with her hands, and again
burst into tears.

More and more embarrassed, Hermanric mechanically busied himself in
procuring from such of his attendants as the necessities of the
blockade left free, the supplies of fire, food and raiment, which he
had promised.  She received the coverings, approached the blazing fuel,
and partook of the simple refreshment, which the young warrior offered
her, with eagerness.  After that she sat for some time silent, absorbed
in deep meditation, and cowering over the fire, apparently unconscious
of the curiosity with which she was still regarded by the Goth.  At
length she suddenly looked up, and observing his eyes fixed on her,
arose and beckoned him to the seat that she occupied.

'Did you know how utterly forsaken I am,' said she, 'you would not
wonder as you do, that I, a stranger and a Roman, have sought you thus.
I have told you how lonely was my home; but yet that home was a refuge
and a protection to me until the morning of this long day that is past,
when I was expelled from it for ever!  I was suddenly awakened in my
bed by--my father entered in anger--he called me--'

She hesitated, blushed, and then paused at the very outset of her
narrative.  Innocent as she was, the natural instincts of her sex
spoke, though in a mysterious yet in a warning tone, within her heart,
abruptly imposing on her motives for silence that she could neither
penetrate nor explain. She clasped her trembling hands over her bosom
as if to repress its heaving, and casting down her eyes, continued in a
lower tone:--

'I cannot tell you why my father drove me from his doors.  He has
always been silent and sorrowful to me; setting me long tasks in
mournful books; commanding that I should not quit the precincts of his
abode, and forbidding me to speak to him when I have sometimes asked
him to tell me of my mother whom I have lost.  Yet he never threatened
me or drove me from his side, until the morning of which I have told
you.  Then his wrath was terrible; his eyes were fierce; his voice was
threatening!  He bade me begone, and I obeyed him in affright, for I
thought he would have slain me if I stayed!  I fled from the house,
knowing not where I went, and ran through yonder gate, which is hard by
our abode.  As I entered the suburbs, I met great crowds, all hurrying
into Rome.  I was bewildered by my fears and the confusion all around,
yet I remember that they called loudly to me to fly to the city, ere
the gates were closed against the assault of the Goths.  And others
jostled and scoffed at me, as they passed by and saw me in the thin
night garments in which I was banished from my home!'

Here she paused and listened intently for a few moments.  Every
accidental noise that she heard still awakened in her the apprehension
of Goisvintha's return.  Reassured by Hermanric and by her own
observation of all that was passing outside the tent, she resumed her
narrative after an interval, speaking now in a steadier voice.

'I thought my heart would burst within me,' she continued, 'as I tried
to escape them.  All things whirled before my eyes.  I could not
speak--I could not stop--I could not weep.  I fled and fled I knew not
whither, until I sank down exhausted at the door of a small house on
the outskirts of the suburbs.  Then I called for aid, but no one was by
to hear me.  I crept--for I could stand no longer--into the house.  It
was empty.  I looked from the windows:  no human figure passed through
the silent streets.  The roar of a mighty confusion still rose from the
walls of the city, but I was left to listen to it alone.  In the house
I saw scattered on the floor some fragments of bread and an old
garment. I took them both, and then rose and departed; for the silence
of the place was horrible to me, and I remembered the fields and the
plains that I had once loved to look on, and I thought that I might
find there the refuge that had been denied to me at Rome! So I set
forth once more; and when I gained the soft grass, and sat down beside
the shady trees, and saw the sunlight brightening over the earth, my
heart grew sad, and I wept as I thought on my loneliness and remembered
my father's anger.

'I had not long remained in my resting-place, when I heard a sound of
trumpets in the distance, and looking forth, I saw far off, advancing
over the plains, a mighty multitude with arms that glittered in the
sun. I strove, as I beheld them, to arise and return even to those
suburbs whose solitude had affrighted me.  But my limbs failed me.  I
saw a little hollow hidden among the trees around.  I entered it, and
there throughout the lonely day I lay concealed.  I heard the long
tramp of footsteps, as your army passed me on the roads beneath; and
then, after those hours of fear came the weary hours of solitude!


'Oh, those--lonely--lonely--lonely hours!  I have lived without
companions, but those hours were more terrible to me than all the years
of my former life!  I dared not venture to leave my hiding-place--I
dared not call!  Alone in the world, I crouched in my refuge till the
sun went down!  Then came the mist, and the darkness, and the cold.
The bitter winds of night thrilled through and through me!  The lonely
obscurity around me seemed filled with phantoms whom I could not
behold, who touched me and rustled over the surface of my skin!  They
half maddened me!  I rose to depart; to meet my wrathful father, or the
army that had passed me, or solitude in the cold, bright meadows--I
cared not which!--when I discerned the light of your torch, the moment
ere it was extinguished.  Dark though it then was, I found your tent.
And now I know that I have found yet more--a companion and a friend!'

She looked up at the young Goth as she pronounced these words with the
same grateful expression that had appeared on her countenance before;
but this time her eyes were not dimmed by tears. Already her
disposition--poor as was the prospect of happiness which now lay before
it--had begun to return, with an almost infantine facility of change,
to the restoring influences of the brighter emotions. Already the short
tranquilities of the present began to exert for her their effacing
charm over the long agitations of the past. Despair was unnumbered
among the emotions that grew round that child-like heart; shame, fear,
and grief, however they might overshadow it for a time, left no taint
of their presence on its bright, fine surface. Tender, perilously alive
to sensation, strangely retentive of kindness as she was by nature, the
very solitude to which she had been condemned had gifted her, young as
she was, with a martyr's endurance of ill, and with a stoic's patience
under pain.

'Do not mourn for me now,' she pursued, gently interrupting some broken
expressions of compassion which fell from the lips of the young Goth.
'If you are merciful to me, I shall forget all that I have suffered!
Though your nation is at enmity with mine, while you remain my friend,
I fear nothing!  I can look on your great stature, and heavy sword, and
bright armour now without trembling!  You are not like the soldiers of
Rome;--you are taller, stronger, more gloriously arrayed!  You are like
a statue I once saw by chance of a warrior of the Greeks!  You have a
look of conquest and a presence of command!'

She gazed on the manly and powerful frame of the young warrior, clothed
as it was in the accoutrements of his warlike nation, with an
expression of childish interest and astonishment, asking him the
appellation and use of each part of his equipment, as it attracted her
attention, and ending her inquiries by eagerly demanding his name.

'Hermanric,' she repeated, as he answered her, pronouncing with some
difficulty the harsh Gothic syllables--'Hermanric!--that is a stern,
solemn name--a name fit for a warrior and a man!  Mine sounds
worthless, after such a name as that!  It is only Antonina!'

Deeply as he was interested in every word uttered by the girl,
Hermanric could no longer fail to perceive the evident traces of
exhaustion that now appeared in the slightest of her actions.
Producing some furs from a corner of the tent, he made a sort of rude
couch by the side of the fire, heaped fresh fuel on the flames, and
then gently counselled her to recruit her wasted energies by repose.
There was something so candid in his manner, so sincere in the tones of
his voice, as he made his simple offer of hospitality to the stranger
who had taken refuge with him, that the most distrustful woman would
have accepted with as little hesitation as Antonina; who, gratefully
and unhesitatingly, laid down on the bed that he had been spreading for
her at her feet.

As soon as he had carefully covered her with a cloak, and rearranged
her couch in the position best calculated to insure her all the warmth
of the burning fuel, Hermanric retired to the other side of the fire;
and, leaning on his sword, abandoned himself to the new and absorbing
reflections which the presence of the girl naturally aroused.

He thought not on the duties demanded of him by the blockade; he
remembered neither the scene of rage and ferocity that had followed his
evasion of his reckless promise; nor the fierce determination that
Goisvintha had expressed as she quitted him for the night.  The cares
and toils to come with the new morning, which would oblige him to
expose the fugitive to the malignity of her revengeful enemy; the
thousand contingencies that the difference of their sexes, their
nations, and their lives, might create to oppose the continuance of the
permanent protection that he had promised to her, caused him no
forebodings. Antonina, and Antonina alone, occupied every faculty of
his mind, and every feeling of his heart.  There was a softness and a
melody to his ear in her very name!


His early life had made him well acquainted with the Latin tongue, but
he had never discovered all its native smoothness of sound, and
elegance of structure, until he had heard it spoken by Antonina.  Word
by word, he passed over in his mind her varied, natural, and happy
turns of expression; recalling, as he was thus employed, the eloquent
looks, the rapid gesticulations, the changing tones which had
accompanied those words, and thinking how wide was the difference
between this young daughter of Rome, and the cold and taciturn women of
his own nation. The very mystery enveloping her story, which would have
excited the suspicion or contempt of more civilised men, aroused in him
no other emotions than those of wonder and compassion.  No feelings of
a lower nature than these entered his heart towards the girl.  She was
safe under the protection of the enemy and the barbarian, after having
been lost through the interference of the Roman and the senator.

To the simple perceptions of the Goth, the discovery of so much
intelligence united to such extreme youth, of so much beauty doomed to
such utter loneliness, was the discovery of an apparition that dazzled,
and not of a woman who charmed him.  He could not even have touched the
hand of the helpless creature, who now reposed under his tent, unless
she had extended it to him of her own accord.  He could only
think--with a delight whose excess he was far from estimating
himself--on this solitary mysterious being who had come to him for
shelter and for aid; who had awakened in him already new sources of
sensation; and who seemed to his startled imagination to have suddenly
twined herself for ever about the destinies of his future life.

He was still deep in meditation, when he was startled by a hand
suddenly laid on his arm.  He looked up and saw that Antonina, whom he
had imagined to be slumbering on her couch, was standing by his side.

'I cannot sleep,' said the girl in a low, awe-struck voice, 'until I
have asked you to spare my father when you enter Rome.  I know that you
are here to ravage the city; and, for aught I can tell, you may assault
and destroy it to-night.  Will you promise to warn me before the walls
are assailed? I will then tell you my father's name and abode, and you
will spare him as you have mercifully spared me?  He has denied me his
protection, but he is my father still; and I remember that I disobeyed
him once, when I possessed myself of a lute!  Will you promise me to
spare him?  My mother, whom I have never seen and who must therefore be
dead, may love me in another world for pleading for my father's life!'

In a few words, Hermanric quieted her agitation by explaining to her
the nature and intention of the Gothic blockade, and she silently
returned to the couch.  After a short interval, her slow, regular
breathing announced to the young warrior, as he watched by the side of
the fire, that she had at length forgotten the day's heritage of
misfortune in the welcome oblivion of sleep.



CHAPTER 9.

THE TWO INTERVIEWS.

The time, is the evening of the first day of the Gothic blockade; the
place, is Vetranio's palace at Rome.  In one of the private apartments
of his mansion is seated its all-accomplished owner, released at length
from the long sitting convened by the Senate on the occasion of the
unexpected siege of the city.  Although the same complete discipline,
the same elegant regularity, and the same luxurious pomp, which
distinguished the senator's abode in times of security, still prevail
over it in the time of imminent danger which now threatens rich and
poor alike in Rome, Vetranio himself appears far from partaking the
tranquility of his patrician household.  His manner displays an unusual
sternness, and his face an unwonted displeasure, as he sits, occupied
by his silent reflections and thoroughly unregardful of whatever occurs
around him.  Two ladies who are his companions in the apartment, exert
all their blandishments to win him back to hilarity, but in vain.  The
services of his expectant musicians are not put into requisition, the
delicacies on his table remain untouched, and even 'the inestimable
kitten of the breed most worshipped by the ancient Egyptians' gambols
unnoticed and unapplauded at his feet.  All its wonted philosophical
equanimity has evidently departed, for the time at least, from the
senator's mind.

Silence--hitherto a stranger to the palace apartments--had reigned
uninterruptedly over them for some time, when the freedman Carrio
dissipated Vetranio's meditations, and put the ladies who were with him
to flight, by announcing in an important voice, that the Prefect
Pompeianus desired a private interview with the Senator Vetranio.

The next instant the chief magistrate of Rome entered the apartment.
He was a short, fat, undignified man.  Indolence and vacillation were
legibly impressed on his appearance and expression.  You saw, in a
moment, that his mind, like a shuttlecock, might be urged in any
direction by the efforts of others, but was utterly incapable of
volition by itself.  But once in his life had the Prefect Pompeianus
been known to arrive unaided at a positive determination, and that was
in deciding a fierce argument between a bishop and a general, regarding
the relative merits of two rival rope-dancers of equal renown.

'I have come, my beloved friend,' said the Prefect in agitated tones,
'to ask your opinion, at this period of awful responsibility for us
all, on the plan of operations proposed by the Senate at the sitting of
to-day!  But first,' he hastily continued, perceiving with the unerring
instinct of an old gastronome, that the inviting refreshments on
Vetranio's table had remained untouched, 'permit me to fortify my
exhausted energies by a visit to your ever-luxurious board.  Alas, my
friend, when I consider the present fearful scarcity of our provision
stores in the city, and the length of time that this accursed blockade
may be expected to last, I am inclined to think that the gods alone
know (I mean St. Peter) how much longer we may be enabled to give
occupation to our digestions and employment to our cooks.

'I have observed,' pursued the Prefect, after an interval, speaking
with his mouth full of stewed peacock; 'I have observed, oh esteemed
colleague! the melancholy of your manner and your absolute silence
during your attendance to-day at our deliberations.  Have we, in your
opinion, decided erroneously?  It is not impossible!  Our confusion at
this unexpected appearance of the barbarians may have blinded our usual
penetration!  If by any chance you dissent from our plans, I beseech
you communicate your objections to me without reserve!'

'I dissent from nothing, because I have heard nothing,' replied
Vetranio sullenly.  'I was so occupied by a private matter of
importance during my attendance at the sitting of the Senate, that I
was deaf to their deliberations.  I know that we are besieged by the
Goths--why are they not driven from before the walls?'

'Deaf to our deliberations!  Drive the Goths from the walls!' repeated
the Prefect faintly.  'Can you think of any private matter at such a
moment as this?  Do you know our danger?  Do you know that our friends
are so astonished at this frightful calamity, that they move about like
men half awakened from a dream?  Have you not seen the streets filled
with terrified and indignant crowds? Have you not mounted the ramparts
and beheld the innumerable multitudes of pitiless Goths surrounding us
on all sides, intercepting our supplies of provisions from the country,
and menacing us with a speedy famine, unless our hoped-for auxiliaries
arrive from Ravenna?'

'I have neither mounted the ramparts, nor viewed with any attention the
crowds in the streets,' replied Vetranio, carelessly.

'But if you have seen nothing yourself, you must have heard what others
saw,' persisted the Prefect; 'you must know at least that the legions
we have in the city are not sufficient to guard more than half the
circuit of the walls.  Has no one informed you that if it should please
the leader of the barbarians to change his blockade into an assault, it
is more than probable that we should be unable to repulse him
successfully? Are you still deaf to our deliberations, when your palace
may to-morrow be burnt over your head, when we may be staved to death,
when we may be doomed to eternal dishonour by being driven to conclude
a peace?  Deaf to our deliberations, when such an unimaginable calamity
as this invasion has fallen like a thunderbolt under our very walls!
You amaze me!  You overwhelm me!  You horrify me!'


And in the excess of his astonishment the bewildered Prefect actually
abandoned his stewed peacock, and advanced, wine-cup in hand, to obtain
a nearer view of the features of his imperturbable host.

'If we are not strong enough to drive the Goths out of Italy,' rejoined
Vetranio coolly, 'you and the Senate know that we are rich enough to
bribe them to depart to the remotest confines of the empire.  If we
have not swords enough to fight, we have gold and silver enough to pay.'

'You are jesting!  Remember our honour and the auxiliaries we still
hope for from Ravenna,' said the Prefect reprovingly.

'Honour has lost the signification now, that it had in the time of the
Caesars,' retorted the Senator. 'Our fighting days are over.  We have
had heroes enough for our reputation.  As for the auxiliaries you still
hope for, you will have none!  While the Emperor is safe in Ravenna, he
will care nothing for the worst extremities that can be suffered by the
people of Rome.'

'But you forget your duties,' urged the astonished Pompeianus, turning
from rebuke to expostulation.  'You forget that it is a time when all
private interests must be abandoned!  You forget that I have come here
to ask your advice, that I am bewildered by a thousand projects, forced
on me from all sides, for ruling the city successfully during the
blockade; that I look to you, as a friend and a man of reputation, to
aid me in deciding on a choice out of the varied counsels submitted to
me in the Senate to-day.'

'Write down the advice of each senator on a separate strip of vellum;
shake all the strips together in an urn; and then, let the first you
take out by chance, be your guide to govern by in the present condition
of the city!' said Vetranio with a sneer.

'Oh friend, friend! it is cruel to jest with me thus!' cried the
Prefect, in tones of lament; 'Would you really persuade me that you are
ignorant that what sentinels we have, are doubled already on the walls?
Would you attempt to declare seriously to me, that you never heard the
project of Saturninus for reducing imperceptibly the diurnal allowance
of provisions?  Or the recommendation of Emilianus, that the people
should be kept from thinking on the dangers and extremities which now
threaten them, by being provided incessantly with public amusements at
the theatres and hippodromes?  Do you really mean that you are
indifferent to the horrors of our present situation?  By the souls of
the Apostles, Vetranio, I begin to think that you do not believe in the
Goths!'

'I have already told you that private affairs occupy me at present, to
the exclusion of public,' said Vetranio impatiently.  'Debate as you
choose--approve what projects you will--I withdraw myself from
interference in your deliberations!'


'This,' murmured the repulsed Prefect in soliloquy, as he mechanically
resumed his place at the refreshment table, 'this is the very end and
climax of all calamities!  Now, when advice and assistance are more
precious than jewels in my estimation, I receive neither!  I gain from
none, the wise and saving counsels which, as chief magistrate of this
Imperial City, it is my right to demand from all; and the man on whom I
most depended is the man who fails me most!  Yet hear me, oh Vetranio,
once again,' he continued, addressing the Senator, 'if our perils
beyond the walls affect you not, there is a weighty matter that has
been settled within them, which must move you.  After you had quitted
the Senate, Serena, the widow of Stilicho, was accused, as her husband
was accused before her, of secret and treasonable correspondence with
the Goths; and has been condemned, as her husband was condemned, to
suffer the penalty of death.  I myself discerned no evidence to convict
her; but the populace cried out, in universal frenzy, that she was
guilty, that she should die; and that the barbarians, when they heard
of the punishment inflicted on their secret adherent, would retire in
dismay from Rome.  This also was a moot point of argument, on which I
vainly endeavoured to decide; but the Senate and the people were wiser
than I; and Serena was condemned to be strangled to-morrow by the
public executioner.  She was a woman of good report before this time,
and is the adopted mother of the Emperor.  It is now doubted by many
whether Stilicho, her husband, was ever guilty of the correspondence
with the Goths, of which he was accused; and I, on my part, doubt much
that Serena has deserved the punishment of death at our hands.  I
beseech you, Vetranio, let me be enlightened by your opinion on this
one point at least!'

The Prefect waited anxiously for an answer, but Vetranio neither looked
at him nor replied.  It was evident that the Senator had not listened
to a word that he had said!

This reception of his final appeal for assistance, produced the effect
on the petitioner, which it was perhaps designed to convey--the Prefect
Pompeianus quitted the room in despair.

He had not long departed, when Carrio again entered the apartment, and
addressed his master thus:

'It is grievous for me, revered patron, to disclose it to you, but your
slaves have returned unsuccessful from the search!'

'Give the description of the girl to a fresh division of them, and let
them continue their efforts throughout the night, not only in the
streets, but in all the houses of public entertainment in the city.
She must be in Rome, and she must be found!' said the senator gloomily.

Carrio bowed profoundly, and was about to depart, when he was arrested
at the door by his master's voice.

'If an old man, calling himself Numerian, should desire to see me,'
said Vetranio, 'admit him instantly.'

'She had quitted the room but a short time when I attempted to reclaim
her,' pursued the senator, speaking to himself; 'and yet when I gained
the open air, she was nowhere to be seen!  She must have mingled
unintentionally with the crowds whom the Goths drove into the city, and
thus have eluded my observation!  So young and so innocent!  She must
be found!  She must be found!'

He paused, once more engrossed in deep and melancholy thought.  After a
long interval, he was roused from his abstraction by the sound of
footsteps on the marble floor.  He looked up.  The door had been opened
without his perceiving it, and an old man was advancing with slow and
trembling steps towards his silken couch.  It was the bereaved and
broken-hearted Numerian.

'Where is she?  Is she found?' asked the father, gazing anxiously round
the room, as if he had expected to see his daughter there.

'My slaves still search for her,' said Vetranio, mournfully.

'Ah, woe--woe--woe!  How I wronged her!  How I wronged her!' cried the
old man, turning to depart.


'Listen to me ere you go,' said Vetranio, gently detaining him.  'I
have done you a great wrong, but I will yet atone for it by finding for
you your child!  While there were women who would have triumphed in my
admiration, I should not have attempted to deprive you of your
daughter! Remember when you recover her--and you shall recover
her--that from the time when I first decoyed her into listening to my
lute, to the night when your traitorous servant led me to her
bed-chamber, she has been innocent in this ill-considered matter.  I
alone have been guilty!  She was scarcely awakened when you discovered
her in my arms, and my entry into her chamber, was as little expected
by her, as it was by you.  I was bewildered by the fumes of wine and
the astonishment of your sudden appearance, or I should have rescued
her from your anger, ere it was too late!  The events which have passed
this morning, confused though they were, have yet convinced me that I
had mistaken you both.  I now know that your child was too pure to be
an object fitted for my pursuit; and I believe that in secluding her as
you did, however ill-advised you might appear, you were honest in your
design!  Never in my pursuit of pleasure did I commit so fatal an
error, as when I entered the doors of your house!'

In pronouncing these words, Vetranio but gave expression to the
sentiments by which they were really inspired.  As we have before
observed, profligate as he was by thoughtlessness of character and
license of social position, he was neither heartless nor criminal by
nature.  Fathers had stormed, but his generosity had hitherto
invariably pacified them.  Daughters had wept, but had found
consolation on all previous occasions in the splendour of his palace
and the amiability of his disposition.  In attempting, therefore, the
abduction of Antonina, though he had prepared for unusual obstacles, he
had expected no worse results of his new conquest, than those that had
followed, as yet, his gallantries that were past.  But, when--in the
solitude of his own home, and in the complete possession of his
faculties--he recalled all the circumstances of his attempt, from the
time when he had stolen on the girl's slumbers, to the moment when she
had fled from the house; when he remembered the stern concentrated
anger of Numerian, and the agony and despair of Antonina; when he
thought on the spirit-broken repentance of the deceived father, and the
fatal departure of the injured daughter, he felt as a man who had not
merely committed an indiscretion, but had been guilty of a crime; he
became convinced that he had incurred the fearful responsibility of
destroying the happiness of a parent who was really virtuous, and a
child who was truly innocent.  To a man, the business of whose whole
life was to procure for himself a heritage of unalloyed pleasure, whose
sole occupation was to pamper that refined sensuality which the habits
of a life had made the very material of his heart, by diffusing luxury
and awakening smiles wherever he turned his steps, the mere mental
disquietude attending the ill-success of his intrusion into Numerian's
dwelling, was as painful in its influence, as the bitterest remorse
that could have afflicted a more highly-principled mind.  He now,
therefore, instituted the search after Antonina, and expressed his
contrition to her father, from a genuine persuasion that nothing but
the completest atonement for the error he had committed, could restore
to him that luxurious tranquility, the loss of which had, as he had
himself expressed it, rendered him deaf to the deliberations of the
Senate, and regardless of the invasion of the Goths.

'Tell me,' he continued, after a pause, 'whither has Ulpius betaken
himself?  It is necessary that he should be discovered.  He may
enlighten us upon the place of Antonina's retreat.  He shall be secured
and questioned.'

'He left me suddenly; I saw him as I stood at the window, mix with the
multitude in the street, but I know not whither he is gone,' replied
Numerian; and a tremor passed over his whole frame as he spoke of the
remorseless Pagan.

Again there was a short silence.  The grief of the broken-spirited
father, possessed in its humility and despair, a voice of rebuke,
before which the senator, careless and profligate as he was,
instinctively quailed.  For some time he endeavoured in vain to combat
the silencing and reproving influence, exerted over him by the very
presence of the sorrowing man whom he had so fatally wronged.  At
length, after an interval, he recovered self-possession enough to
address to Numerian some further expressions of consolation and hope;
but he spoke to ears that listened not.  The father had relapsed into
his mournful abstraction; and when the senator paused, he merely
muttered to himself--'She is lost!  Alas, she is lost for ever!'

'No, she is not lost for ever,' cried Vetranio, warmly.  'I have wealth
and power enough to cause her to be sought for to the ends of the
earth! Ulpius shall be secured and questioned--imprisoned, tortured, if
it is necessary.  Your daughter shall be recovered.  Nothing is
impossible to a senator of Rome!'


'I knew not that I loved her, until the morning when I wronged and
banished her!' continued the old man, still speaking to himself.  'I
have lost all traces of my parents and my brother--my wife is parted
from me for ever--I have nothing left but Antonina; and now too she is
gone!  Even my ambition, that I once thought my all in all, is no
comfort to my soul; for I loved it--alas! unconsciously loved
it--through the being of my child!  I destroyed her lute--I thought her
shameless--I drove her from my doors!  Oh, how I wronged her!--how I
wronged her!'

'Remain here, and repose yourself in one of the sleeping apartments,
until my slaves return in the morning.  You will then hear without
delay of the result of their search to-night,' said Vetranio, in kindly
and compassionate tones.

'It grows dark--dark!' groaned the father, tottering towards the door;
'but that is nothing; daylight itself now looks darkness to me!  I must
go:  I have duties at the chapel to perform.  Night is repose for
you--for me, it is tribulation and prayer!'

He departed as he spoke.  Slowly he paced along the streets that led to
his chapel, glancing with penetrating eye at each inhabitant of the
besieged city who passed him on his way.  With some difficulty he
arrived at his destination; for Rome was still thronged with armed men
hurrying backwards and forwards, and with crowds of disorderly citizens
pouring forth, wherever there was space enough for them to assemble.
The report of the affliction that had befallen him had already gone
abroad among his hearers, and they whispered anxiously to each other as
he entered the plain, dimly-lighted chapel, and slowly mounted the
pulpit to open the service, by reading the chapter in the Bible which
had been appointed for perusal that night, and which happened to be the
fifth of the Gospel of St. Mark.  His voice trembled, his face was
ghastly pale, and his hands shook perceptibly as he began; but he read
on, in low, broken tones, and with evident pain and difficulty, until
he came to the verse containing these words:  'My little daughter lieth
at the point of death.'  Here he stopped suddenly, endeavoured vainly
for a few minutes to proceed, and then, covering his face with his
hands, sank down in the pulpit and sobbed aloud. His sorrowing and
startled audience immediately gathered round him, raised him in their
arms, and prepared to conduct him to his own abode.  When, however,
they had gained the door of the chapel, he desired them gently, to
leave him and return to the performance of the service among
themselves.  Ever implicitly obedient to his slightest wishes, the
persons of his little assembly, moved to tears by the sight of their
teacher's suffering, obeyed him, by retiring silently to their former
places.  As soon as he found that he was alone, he passed the door; and
whispering to himself, 'I must join those who seek her!  I must aid
them myself in the search!'--he mingled once more with the disorderly
citizens who thronged the darkened streets.



CHAPTER 10.

THE RIFT IN THE WALL.

When Ulpius suddenly departed from Numerian's house on the morning of
the siege, it was with no distinct intention of betaking himself to any
particular place, or devoting himself to any immediate employment.  It
was to give vent to his joy--to the ecstacy that now filled his heart
to bursting--that he sought the open streets.  His whole moral being
was exalted by that overwhelming sense of triumph, which urges the
physical nature into action.  He hurried into the free air, as a child
runs on a bright day in the wide fields; his delight was too wild to
expand under a roof; his excess of bliss swelled irrepressibly beyond
all artificial limits of space.


The Goths were in sight!  A few hours more, and their scaling ladders
would be planted against the walls.  On a city so weakly guarded as
Rome, their assault must be almost instantaneously successful.
Thirsting for plunder, they would descend in infuriated multitudes on
the defenceless streets.  Christians though they were, the restraints
of religion would, in that moment of fierce triumph, be powerless with
such a nation of marauders against the temptations to pillage.
Churches would be ravaged and destroyed; priests would be murdered in
attempting the defence of their ecclesiastical treasures; fire and
sword would waste to its remotest confines the stronghold of
Christianity, and overwhelm in death and oblivion the boldest of
Christianity's devotees! Then, when the hurricane of ruin and crime had
passed over the city, when a new people were ripe for another
government and another religion--then would be the time to invest the
banished gods of old Rome with their former rule; to bid the survivors
of the stricken multitude remember the judgment that their apostacy to
their ancient faith had demanded and incurred; to strike the very
remembrance of the Cross out of the memory of man; and to reinstate
Paganism on her throne of sacrifices, and under her roof of gold, more
powerful from her past persecutions; more universal in her sudden
restoration, than in all the glories of her ancient rule!

Such thoughts as these passed through the Pagan's toiling mind as,
unobservant of all outward events, he paced through the streets of the
beleaguered city.  Already he beheld the array of the Goths preparing
the way, as the unconscious pioneers of the returning gods, for the
march of that mighty revolution which he was determined to lead.  The
warmth of his past eloquence, the glow of his old courage, thrilled
through his heart, as he figured to himself the prospect that would
soon stretch before him--a city laid waste, a people terrified, a
government distracted, a religion destroyed.  Then, arising amid this
darkness and ruin; amid this solitude, desolation, and decay, it would
be his glorious privilege to summon an unfaithful people to return to
the mistress of their ancient love; to rise from prostration beneath a
dismantled Church; and to seek prosperity in temples repeopled and at
shrines restored!

All remembrance of late events now entirely vanished from his mind.
Numerian, Vetranio, Antonina, they were all forgotten in this memorable
advent of the Goths!  His slavery in the mines, his last visit to
Alexandria, his earlier wanderings--even these, so present to his
memory until the morning of the siege, were swept from its very surface
now. Age, solitude, infirmity--hitherto the mournful sensations which
were proofs to him that he still continued to exist--suddenly vanished
from his perceptions, as things that were not; and now at length he
forgot that he was an outcast, and remembered triumphantly that he was
still a priest.  He felt animated by the same hopes, elevated by the
same aspirations, as in those early days when he had harangued the
wavering Pagans in the Temple, and first plotted the overthrow of the
Christian Church.

It was a terrible and warning proof of the omnipotent influence that a
single idea may exercise over a whole life, to see that old man
wandering among the crowds around him, still enslaved, after years of
suffering and solitude, degradation, and crime, by the same ruling
ambition, which had crushed the promise of his early youth!  It was an
awful testimony to the eternal and mysterious nature of thought, to
behold that wasted and weakened frame; and then to observe how the
unassailable mind within still swayed the wreck of body yet left to
it--how faithfully the last exhausted resources of failing vigour
rallied into action at its fierce command--how quickly, at its mocking
voice, the sunken eye lightened again with a gleam of hope, and the
pale, thin lips parted mechanically with an exulting smile!

The hours passed, but he still walked on--whither or among whom he
neither knew nor cared.  No remorse touched his heart for the
destruction that he had wreaked on the Christian who had sheltered him;
no terror appalled his soul at the contemplation of the miseries that
he believed to be in preparation for the city from the enemy at its
gates. The end that had hallowed to him the long series of his former
offences and former sufferings, now obliterated iniquities just passed,
and stripped of all their horrors, atrocities immediately to come.

The Goths might be destroyers to others, but they were benefactors to
him; for they were harbingers of the ruin which would be the material
of his reform, and the source of his triumph. It never entered his
imagination that, as an inhabitant of Rome, he shared the approaching
perils of the citizens, and in the moment of the assault might share
their doom.  He beheld only the new and gorgeous prospect that war and
rapine were opening before him.  He thought only of the time that must
elapse ere his new efforts could be commenced--of the orders of the
people among whom he should successively make his voice heard--of the
temples which he should select for restoration--of the quarter of Rome
which should first be chosen for the reception of his daring reform.


At length he paused; his exhausted energies yielded under the exertions
imposed on them, and obliged him to bethink himself of refreshment and
repose.  It was now noon.  The course of his wanderings had insensibly
conducted him again to the precincts of his old, familiar
dwelling-place; he found himself at the back of the Pincian Mount, and
only separated by a strip of uneven woody ground, from the base of the
city wall.  The place was very solitary.  It was divided from the
streets and mansions above by thick groves and extensive gardens, which
stretched along the undulating descent of the hill.  A short distance
to the westward lay the Pincian Gate, but an abrupt turn in the wall
and some olive trees which grew near it, shut out all view of objects
in that direction.  On the other side, towards the eastward, the
ramparts were discernible, running in a straight line of some length,
until they suddenly turned inwards at a right angle and were concealed
from further observation by the walls of a distant palace and the pine
trees of a public garden.  The only living figure discernible near this
lonely spot, was that of a sentinel, who occasionally passed over the
ramparts above, which--situated as they were between two stations of
soldiery, one at the Pincian Gate and the other where the wall made the
angle already described--were untenanted, save by the guard within the
limits of whose watch they happened to be placed.  Here, for a short
space of time, the Pagan rested his weary frame, and aroused himself
insensibly from the enthralling meditations which had hitherto blinded
him to the troubled aspect of the world around him.

He now for the first time heard on all sides distinctly, the confused
noises which still rose from every quarter of Rome.  The same incessant
strife of struggling voices and hurrying footsteps, which had caught
his ear in the early morning, attracted his attention now; but no
shrieks of distress, no clash of weapons, no shouts of fury and
defiance, were mingled with them; although, as he perceived by the
position of the sun, the day had sufficiently advanced to have brought
the Gothic army long since to the foot of the walls.  What could be the
cause of this delay in the assault; of this ominous tranquillity on the
ramparts above him? Had the impetuosity of the Goths suddenly vanished
at the sight of Rome? Had negotiations for peace been organised with
the first appearance of the invaders?  He listened again.  No sounds
caught his ear differing in character from those he had just heard.
Though besieged, the city was evidently--from some mysterious
cause--not even threatened by an assault.

Suddenly there appeared from a little pathway near him, which led round
the base of the wall, a woman preceded by a child, who called to her
impatiently, as he ran on, 'Hasten, mother, hasten! There is no crowd
here.  Yonder is the Gate.  We shall have a noble view of the Goths!'

There was something in the address of the child to the woman that gave
Ulpius a suspicion, even then, of the discovery that flushed upon him
soon after.  He rose and followed them.  They passed onward by the
wall, through the olive trees beyond, and then gained the open space
before the Pincian Gate.  Here a great concourse of people had
assembled, and were suffered, in their proper turn, to ascend the
ramparts in divisions, by some soldiers who guarded the steps by which
they were approached.  After a short delay, Ulpius and those around him
were permitted to gratify their curiosity, as others had done before
them. They mounted the walls, and beheld, stretched over the ground
within and beyond the suburbs, the vast circumference of the Gothic
lines.

Terrible and almost sublime as was the prospect of that immense
multitude, seen under the brilliant illumination of the noontide sun,
it was not impressive enough to silence the turbulent loquacity rooted
in the dispositions of the people of Rome.  Men, women, and children,
all made their noisy and conflicting observations on the sight before
them, in every variety of tone, from the tremulous accents of terror,
to the loud vociferations of bravado.


Some spoke boastfully of the achievements that would be performed by
the Romans, when their expected auxiliaries arrived from Ravenna.
Others foreboded, in undissembled terror, an assault under cover of the
night. Here, a group abused, in low confidential tones, the policy of
the government in its relations with the Goths.  There, a company of
ragged vagabonds amused themselves by pompously confiding to each other
their positive conviction, that at that very moment the barbarians must
be trembling in their camp, at the mere sight of the all-powerful
Capital of the World.  In one direction, people were heard noisily
speculating whether the Goths would be driven from the walls by the
soldiers of Rome, or be honoured by an invitation to conclude a peace
with the august Empire, which they had so treasonably ventured to
invade. In another, the more sober and reputable among the spectators
audibly expressed their apprehensions of starvation, dishonour, and
defeat, should the authorities of the city be foolhardy enough to
venture a resistance to Alaric and his barbarian hosts.  But wide as
was the difference of the particular opinions hazarded among the
citizens, they all agreed in one unavoidable conviction, that Rome had
escaped the immediate horrors of an assault, to be threatened--if
unaided by the legions at Ravenna--by the prospective miseries of a
blockade.

Amid the confusion of voices around him, that word 'blockade' alone
reached the Pagan's ear.  It brought with it a flood of emotions that
overwhelmed him.  All that he saw, all that he heard, connected itself
imperceptibly with that expression.  A sudden darkness, neither to be
dissipated nor escaped, seemed to obscure his faculties in an instant.
He struggled mechanically through the crowd, descended the steps of the
ramparts, and returned to the solitary spot where he had first beheld
the woman and the child.

The city was blockaded!  The Goths were bent then, on obtaining a peace
and not on achieving a conquest!  The city was blockaded!  It was no
error of the ignorant multitude--he had seen with his own eyes the
tents and positions of the enemy, he had heard the soldiers on the wall
discoursing on the admirable disposition of Alaric's forces, on the
impossibility of obtaining the smallest communication with the
surrounding country, on the vigilant watch that had been set over the
navigation of the Tiber.  There was no doubt on the matter--the
barbarians had determined on a blockade!

There was even less uncertainty upon the results which would be
produced by this unimaginable policy of the Goths--the city would be
saved!  Rome had not scrupled in former years to purchase the
withdrawal of all enemies from her distant provinces; and now that the
very centre of her glory, the very pinnacle of her declining power, was
threatened with sudden and unexpected ruin, she would lavish on the
Goths the treasures of the whole empire, to bribe them to peace and to
tempt them to retreat.  The Senate might possibly delay the necessary
concessions, from hopes of assistance that would never be realised; but
sooner or later the hour of negotiation would arrive; northern rapacity
would be satisfied with southern wealth; and in the very moment when it
seemed inevitable, the ruin from which the Pagan revolution was to
derive its vigorous source, would be diverted from the churches of Rome.

Could the old renown of the Roman name have retained so much of its
ancient influence as to daunt the hardy Goths, after they had so
successfully penetrated the empire as to have reached the walls of its
vaunted capital?  Could Alaric have conceived so exaggerated an idea of
the strength of the forces in the city as to despair, with all his
multitudes, of storming it with success? It could not be otherwise!  No
other consideration could have induced the barbarian general to abandon
such an achievement as the destruction of Rome.  With the chance of an
assault the prospects of Paganism had brightened--with the certainty of
a blockade, they sunk immediately into disheartening gloom!


Filled with these thoughts, Ulpius paced backwards and forwards in his
solitary retreat, utterly abandoned by the exaltation of feeling which
had restored to his faculties in the morning, the long-lost vigour of
their former youth.  Once more, he experienced the infirmities of his
age; once more he remembered the miseries that had made his existence
one unending martyrdom; once more he felt the presence of his ambition
within him, like a judgment that he was doomed to welcome, like a curse
that he was created to cherish.  To say that his sensations at this
moment were those of the culprit who hears the order for his execution
when he had been assured of a reprieve, is to convey but a faint idea
of the fierce emotions of rage, grief, and despair, that now united to
rend the Pagan's heart.

Overpowered with weariness both of body and mind, he flung himself down
under the shade of some bushes that clothed the base of the wall above
him.  As he lay there--so still in his heavy lassitude that life itself
seemed to have left him--one of the long green lizards, common to
Italy, crawled over his shoulder.  He seized the animal--doubtful for
the moment whether it might not be of the poisonous species--and
examined it.  At the first glance he discovered that it was of the
harmless order of its race, and would have flung it carelessly from
him, but for something in its appearance which, in the wayward
irritability of his present mood, he felt a strange and sudden pleasure
in contemplating.

Through its exquisitely marked and transparent skin he could perceive
the action of the creature's heart, and saw that it was beating
violently, in the agony of fear caused to the animal by its
imprisonment in his hand.  As he looked on it, and thought how
continually a being so timid must be thwarted in its humble anxieties,
in its small efforts, in its little journeys from one patch of grass to
another, by a hundred obstacles, which, trifles though they might be to
animals of a higher species, were yet of fatal importance to creatures
constituted like itself, he began to find an imperfect, yet remarkable
analogy between his own destiny and that of this small unit of
creation.  He felt that, in its petty sphere, the short life of the
humble animal before him must have been the prey of crosses and
disappointments, as serious to it, as the more severed and destructive
afflictions of which he, in his existence, had been the victim; and, as
he watched the shadow-like movement of the little fluttering heart of
the lizard, he experienced a cruel pleasure in perceiving that there
were other beings in the creation, even down to the most insignificant,
who inherited a part of his misery, and suffered a portion of his
despair.

Ere long, however, his emotions took a sterner and a darker hue.  The
sight of the animal wearied him, and he flung it contemptuously aside.
It disappeared in the direction of the ramparts; and almost at the same
moment he heard a slight sound, resembling the falling of several
minute particles of brick or light stone, which seemed to come from the
wall behind him.

That such a noise should proceed from so massive a structure appeared
unaccountable.  He rose, and, parting the bushes before him, advanced
close to the surface of the lofty wall.  To his astonishment, he found
that the brickwork had in many places so completely mouldered away,
that he could move it easily with his fingers.  The cause of the
trifling noise that he had heard was now fully explained:  hundreds of
lizards had made their homes between the fissures of the bricks; the
animal that he had permitted to escape had taken refuge in one of these
cavities, and in the hurry of its flight had detached several of the
loose crumbling fragments that surrounded its hiding-place.

Not content, however, with the discovery he had already made, he
retired a little, and, looking stedfastly up through some trees which
in this particular place grew at the foot of the wall, he saw that its
surface was pierced in many places by great irregular rifts, some of
which extended nearly to its whole height.  In addition to this, he
perceived that the mass of the structure at one particular point,
leaned considerably out of the perpendicular.  Astounded at what he
beheld, he took a stick from the ground, and inserting it in one of the
lowest and smallest of the cracks, easily succeeded in forcing it
entirely into the wall, part of which seemed to be hollow, and part
composed of the same rotten brickwork which had at first attracted his
attention.


It was now evident that the whole structure, over a breadth of several
yards, had been either weakly and carelessly built, or had at some
former period suffered a sudden and violent shock. He left the stick in
the wall to mark the place; and was about to retire, when he heard the
footstep of the sentinel on the rampart immediately above.  Suddenly
cautious, though from what motive he would have been at that moment
hardly able to explain, he remained in the concealment of the trees and
bushes, until the guard had passed onward; then he cautiously emerged
from the place; and, retiring to some distance, fell into a train of
earnest and absorbing thought.

To account to the reader for the phenomenon which now engrossed the
Pagan's attention, it will be necessary to make a brief digression to
the history of the walls of Rome.

The circumference of the first fortifications of the city, built by
Romulus, was thirteen miles.  The greater part, however, of this large
area was occupied by fields and gardens, which it was the object of the
founder of the empire to preserve for arable purposes, from the
incursions of the different enemies by whom he was threatened from
without.  As Rome gradually increased in size, its walls were
progressively enlarged and altered by subsequent rulers.  But it was
not until the reign of the Emperor Aurelian (A.D. 270), that any
extraordinary or important change was effected in the defences of the
city.  That potentate commenced the erection of walls, twenty-one miles
in circumference, which were finally completed in the reign of Probus
(A.D. 276), were restored by Belisarius (A.D. 537), and are to be seen
in detached portions, in the fortifications of the modern city, to the
present day.

At the date of our story, then (A.D. 408), the walls remained precisely
as they had been constructed in the reigns of Aurelian and Probus.
They were for the most part made of brick; and in a few places,
probably, a sort of soft sandstone might have been added to the
pervading material. At several points in their circumference, and
particularly in the part behind the Pincian Hill, these walls were
built in arches, forming deep recesses, and occasionally disposed in
double rows.  The method of building employed in their erection, was
generally that mentioned by Vitruvius, in whose time it originated, as
'opus reticulatum'.

The 'opus reticulatum' was composed of small bricks (or stones) set
together on their angles, instead of horizontally, and giving the
surface of a wall the appearance of a sort of solid network. This was
considered by some architects of antiquity a perishable mode of
construction; and Vitruvius asserts that some buildings where he had
seen it used, had fallen down.  From the imperfect specimens of it
which remain in modern times, it would be difficult to decide upon its
merits. That it was assuredly insufficient to support the weight of the
bank of the Pincian Mount, which rose immediately behind it, in the
solitary spot described some pages back, is still made evident by the
appearance of the wall at that part of the city, which remains in
modern times bent out of the perpendicular, and cracked in some places
almost from top to bottom.  This ruin is now known to the present race
of Italians, under the expressive title of 'Il Muro Torto' or, The
Crooked Wall.

We may here observe that it is extremely improbable that the existence
of this natural breach in the fortifications of Rome was noticed, or if
noticed, regarded with the slightest anxiety or attention by the
majority of the careless and indolent inhabitants, at the period of the
present romance.  It is supposed to have been visible as early as the
time of Aurelian, but is only particularly mentioned by Procopius, an
historian of the sixth century, who relates that Belisarius, in
strengthening the city against a siege of the Goths, attempted to
repair this weak point in the wall, but was hindered in his intended
labour by the devout populace, who declared that it was under the
peculiar protection of St. Peter, and that it would be consequently
impious to meddle with it.  The general submitted without remonstrance
to the decision of the inhabitants, and found no cause afterwards to
repent of his facility of compliance; for, to use the translated words
of the writer above-mentioned, 'During the siege neither the enemy nor
the Romans regarded this place.'  It is to be supposed that so
extraordinary an event as this, gave the wall that sacred character,
which deterred subsequent rulers from attempting its repair; which
permitted it to remain crooked and rent through the convulsions of the
middle ages; and which still preserves it, to attest the veracity of
historians, by appealing to the antiquarian curiosity of the traveller
of modern times.


We now return to Ulpius.  It is a peculiarity observable in the
characters of men living under the ascendancy of one ruling idea, that
they intuitively distort whatever attracts their attention in the outer
world, into a connection more or less intimate with the single object
of their mental contemplation.  Since the time when he had been exiled
from the Temple, the Pagan's faculties had, unconsciously to himself,
acted solely in reference to the daring design which it was the
business of his whole existence to entertain.  Influenced, therefore,
by this obliquity of moral feeling, he had scarcely reflected on the
discovery that he had just made at the base of the city wall, ere his
mind instantly reverted to the ambitious meditations which had occupied
it in the morning; and the next moment, the first dawning conception of
a bold and perilous project began to absorb his restless thoughts.

He reflected on the peculiarities and position of the wall before him.
Although the widest and most important of the rents which he had
observed in it, existed too near the rampart to be reached without the
assistance of a ladder, there were others as low as the ground, which
he knew, by the result of the trial he had already made, might be
successfully and immensely widened by the most ordinary exertion and
perseverance.  The interior of the wall, if judged by the condition of
the surface, could offer no insuperable obstacles to an attempt at
penetration so partial as to be limited to a height and width of a few
feet.  The ramparts, from their position between two guard-houses,
would be unencumbered by an inquisitive populace.  The sentinel, within
the limits of whose allotted watch it happened to fall, would, when
night came on, be the only human being likely to pass the spot; and at
such an hour his attention must necessarily be fixed--in the
circumstances under which the city was now placed--on the prospect
beyond, rather than on the ground below and behind him.  It seemed,
therefore, almost a matter of certainty, that a cautious man, labouring
under cover of the night, might pursue whatever investigations he
pleased at the base of the wall.

He examined the ground where he now stood.  Nothing could be more
lonely than its present appearance.  The private gardens on the hill
above it shut out all communication from that quarter.  It could only
be approached by the foot-path that ran round the Pincian Mount, and
along the base of the walls.  In the state of affairs now existing in
the city, it was not probable that any one would seek this solitary
place, whence nothing could be seen, and where little could be heard,
in preference to mixing with the spirit-stirring confusion in the
streets, or observing the Gothic encampment from such positions on the
ramparts as were easily attainable to all.  In addition to the secresy
offered by the loneliness of this patch of ground to whatever
employments were undertaken on it, was the further advantage afforded
by the trees and thickets which covered its lower end, and which would
effectually screen an intruder, during the darkness of night, from the
most penetrating observation directed from the wall above.

Reflecting thus, he doubted not that a cunning and determined man might
with impunity so far widen any one of the inferior breaches in the
lower part of the wall as to make a cavity (large enough to admit a
human figure) that should pierce to its outer surface, and afford that
liberty of departing from the city and penetrating the Gothic camp
which the closed gates now denied to all the inhabitants alike.  To
discover the practicability of such an attempt as this was, to a mind
filled with such aspirations as the Pagan's, to determine irrevocably
on its immediate execution.  He resolved as soon as night approached to
begin his labours on the wall; to seek--if the breach were made good,
and the darkness favoured him--the tent of Alaric; and once arrived
there, to acquaint the Gothic King with the weakness of the materials
for defence within the city, and dilapidated condition of the
fortifications below the Pincian Mount, insisting, as the condition of
his treachery, on an assurance from the barbarian leader (which he
doubted not would be gladly and instantly accorded) of the destruction
of the Christian churches, the pillage of the Christian possessions,
and the massacre of the Christian priests.


He retired cautiously from the lonely place that had now become the
centre of his new hopes; and entering the streets of the city,
proceeded to provide himself with an instrument that would facilitate
his approaching labours, and food that would give him strength to
prosecute his intended efforts, unthreatened by the hindrance of
fatigue.  As he thought on the daring treachery of his project, his
morning's exultation began to return to him again.  All his previous
attempts to organise the restoration of Paganism sunk into sudden
insignificance before his present design. His defence of the Temple of
Serapis, his conspiracy at Alexandria, his intrigue with Vetranio, were
the efforts of a man; but this projected destruction of the priests,
the churches, and the treasures of a whole city, through the agency of
a mighty army, moved by the unaided machinations of a single
individual, would be the dazzling achievement of a god!

The hours loitered slowly onward.  The sun waned in the gorgeous
heaven, and set, surrounded by red and murky clouds.  Then came silence
and darkness.  The Gothic watch-fires flamed one by one into the dusky
air. The guards were doubled at the different posts.  The populace were
driven from the ramparts, and the fortifications of the great city
echoed to no sound now but the tramp of the restless sentinel, or the
clash of arms from the distant guard-houses that dotted the long line
of the lofty walls.

It was then that Ulpius, passing cautiously along the least-frequented
streets, gained unnoticed the place of his destination.  A thick vapour
lay over the lonely and marshy spot.  Nothing was now visible from it
but the dim, uncertain outline of the palaces above, and the mass, so
sunk in obscurity that it looked like a dark layer of mist itself, of
the rifted fortifications.  A smile of exultation passed over the
Pagan's countenance, as he perceived the shrouding and welcome
thickness of the atmosphere.  Groping his way softly through the
thickets, he arrived at the base of the wall.  For some time he passed
slowly along it, feeling the width of the different rents wherever he
could stretch his hand.  At length he paused at one more extensive than
the rest, drew from its concealment in his garments a thick bar of iron
sharpened at one end, and began to labour at the breach.

Chance had led him to the place best adapted to his purpose.  The
ground he stood on was only encumbered close to the wall by rank weeds
and low thickets, and was principally composed of damp, soft turf.  The
bricks, therefore, as he carefully detached them, made no greater noise
in falling than the slight rustling caused by their sudden contact with
the boughs through which they descended.  Insignificant as this sound
was, it aroused the apprehension of the wary Pagan.  He laid down his
iron bar, and removed the thickets by dragging them up, or breaking
them at the roots, until he had cleared a space of some feet in extent
before the base of the wall.  He then returned to his toilsome task,
and with hands bleeding from the wounds inflicted by the thorns he had
grasped in removing the thickets continued his labour at the
brick-work.  He pursued his employment with perfect impunity; the
darkness covered him from observation; no one disturbed him by
approaching the solitary scene of his operations; and of the two
sentinels who were placed near the part of the wall which was the
centre of all his exertions, one remained motionless at the most
distant extremity of his post, and the other paced restlessly backwards
and forwards on the rampart, singing a wild, rambling song about war,
and women, and wine, which, whatever liberty it might allow to his
organs of perception, effectually hindered the vigilant exercise of his
faculties of hearing.

Brick after brick yielded to the vigorous and well-timed efforts of
Ulpius.  He had already made a cavity, in an oblique direction, large
enough to creep through, and was preparing to penetrate still further,
when a portion of the rotten material of the interior of the wall
suddenly yielded in a mass to a chance pressure of his iron bar, and
slowly sunk down inwards into a bed which, judging by such faint sounds
as were audible at the moment, must have been partly water, and partly
marshy earth and rotten brick-work.  After having first listened, to be
sure that the slight noise caused by this event had not reached the
ears or excited the suspicions of the careless sentinels, Ulpius crept
into the cavity he had made, groping his way with his bar, until he
reached the brink of a chasm, the depth of which he could not probe,
and the breadth of which he could not ascertain.


He lingered irresolute; the darkness around him was impenetrable; he
could feel toads and noisome animals crawling over his limbs.  The damp
atmosphere of the place began to thrill through him to his very bones;
his whole frame trembled under the excess of his past exertions.
Without light, he could neither attempt to proceed, nor hope to
discover the size and extent of the chasm which he had partially laid
open.  The mist was fast vanishing as the night advanced: it was
necessary to arrive at a resolution ere it would be too late.

He crept out of the cavity.  Just as he had gained the open air, the
sentinel halted over the very spot where the Pagan stood, and paused
suddenly in his song.  There was an instant's interval of silence,
during which the inmost soul of Ulpius quailed beneath an apprehension
as vivid, as that which had throbbed in the heart of the despised
lizard, whose flight had guided him to his discovery at the wall.
Soon, however, he heard the voice of the soldier calling cheerfully to
his fellow sentinel, 'Comrade, do you see the moon?  She is rising to
cheer our watch!'

Nothing had been discovered!--he was still safe!  But if he stayed at
the cavity till the mists faded before the moonlight, could he be
certain of preserving his security?  He felt that he could not!

What mattered a night more or a night less, to such a project as his?
Months might elapse before the Goths retired from the walls.  It was
better to suffer delay than to risk discovery.  He determined to leave
the place, and to return on the following night provided with a
lantern, the light of which he would conceal until he entered the
cavity.  Once there, it could not be perceived by the sentinels
above--it would guide him through all obstacles, preserve him through
all dangers.  Massive as it was, he felt convinced that the interior of
the wall was in as ruinous a condition as the outside.  Caution and
perseverance were sufficient of themselves to insure to his efforts the
speediest and completest success.

He waited until the sentinel had again betaken himself to the furthest
limits of his watch, and then softly gathering up the brushwood that
lay round him, he concealed with it the mouth of the cavity in the
outer wall, and the fragments of brick-work that had fallen on the turf
beneath.  This done, he again listened, to assure himself that he had
been unobserved; then, stepping with the utmost caution, he departed by
the path that led round the slope of the Pincian Hill.

'Strength--patience--and to-morrow night!' muttered the Pagan to
himself, as he entered the streets, and congregated once more with the
citizens of Rome.



CHAPTER 11.

GOISVINTHA'S RETURN.

It was morning.  The sun had risen, but his beams were partially
obscured by thick heavy clouds, which scowled already over the
struggling brightness of the eastern horizon.  The bustle and animation
of the new day gradually overspread the Gothic encampment in all
directions.  The only tent whose curtain remained still closed, and
round which no busy crowds congregated in discussion or mingled in
labour, was that of Hermanric.  By the dying embers of his watchfire
stood the young chieftain, with two warriors, to whom he appeared to be
giving some hurried directions.  His countenance expressed emotions of
anxiety and discontent, which, though partially repressed while he was
in the presence of his companions, became thoroughly visible, not only
in his features, but in his manner, when they left him to watch alone
before his tent.


For some time he walked regularly backwards and forwards, looking
anxiously down the westward lines of the encampment, and occasionally
whispering to himself a hasty exclamation of doubt and impatience.
With the first breath of the new morning, the delighting meditations
which had occupied him by his watchfire during the darkness of the
night had begun to subside. And now, as the hour of her expected return
gradually approached, the image of Goisvintha banished from his mind
whatever remained of those peaceful and happy contemplation in which he
had hitherto been absorbed.  The more he thought on his fatal
promise--on the nation of Antonina--on his duties to the army and the
people to whom he belonged, the more doubtful appeared to him his
chance of permanently protecting the young Roman without risking his
degradation as a Goth, and his ruin as a warrior; and the more sternly
and ominously ran in his ears the unassailable truth of Goisvintha's
parting taunt--'You must remember your promise, you cannot save her if
you would!'

Wearied of persisting in deliberations which only deepened his
melancholy and increased his doubts; bent on sinking in a temporary and
delusive oblivion the boding reflections that overcame him in spite of
himself, by seeking--while its enjoyment was yet left to him--the
society of his ill-fated charge, he turned towards his tent, drew aside
the thick, heavy curtains of skins which closed its opening, and
approached the rude couch on which Antonina was still sleeping.

A ray of sunlight, fitful and struggling, burst at this moment through
the heavy clouds, and stole into the opening of the tent as he
contemplated the slumbering girl.  It ran its flowing course up her
uncovered hand and arm, flew over her bosom and neck, and bathed in a
bright fresh glow, her still and reposing features.  Gradually her
limbs began to move, her lips parted gently and half smiled, as if in
welcome to the greeting of the light; her eyes slightly opened, then
dazzled by the brightness that flowed through their raised lids,
tremblingly closed again.  At length thoroughly awakened, she shaded
her face with her hands, and sitting up on the couch, met the gaze of
Hermanric fixed on her in sorrowful examination.

'Your bright armour, and your glorious name, and your merciful words,
have remained with me even in my sleep,' said she, wonderingly; 'and
now, when I awake, I see you before me again!  It is a happiness to be
aroused by the sun which has gladdened me all my life, to look upon you
who have given me shelter in my distress!  But why,' she continued, in
altered and enquiring tones, 'why do you gaze upon me with doubting and
mournful eyes?'

'You have slept well and safely,' said Hermanric, evasively, 'I closed
the opening of the tent to preserve you from the night-damps, but I
have raised it now, for the air is warming under the rising sun--'

'Are you wearied with watching?' she interrupted, rising to her feet,
and looking anxiously into his face.  But he spoke not in reply.  His
head was turned towards the door of the tent.  He seemed to be
listening for some expected sound.  It was evident that he had not
heard her question.  She followed the direction of his eyes.  The sight
of the great city, half brightened, half darkened, as its myriad
buildings reflected the light of the sun, or retained the shadows of
the clouds, brought back to her remembrance her last night's petition
for her father's safety.  She laid her hand upon her companion's arm to
awaken his attention, and hastily resumed:--

'You have not forgotten what I said to you last night?  My father's
name is Numerian.  He lives on the Pincian Mount.  You will save him,
Hermanric--you will save him!  You will remember your promise!'

The young warrior's eyes fell as she spoke, and an irrepressible
shudder shook his whole frame. The last part of Antonina's address to
him, was expressed in the same terms as a past appeal from other lips,
and in other accents, which still clung to his memory.  The same
demand, 'Remember your promise,' which had been advanced to urge him to
bloodshed, by Goisvintha, was now proffered by Antonina, to lure him to
pity.  The petition of affection was concluded in the same terms as the
petition of revenge.  As he thought on both, the human pity of the one,
and the fiend-like cruelty of the other, rose in sinister and
significant contrast on the mind of the Goth, realising in all its
perils the struggle that was to come when Goisvintha returned, and
dispelling instantaneously the last hopes that he had yet ventured to
cherish for the fugitive at his side.

'No assault of the city is commanded--no assault is intended.  Your
father's life is safe from the swords of the Goths,' he gloomily
replied, in answer to Antonina's last words.

The girl moved back from him a few steps as he spoke, and looked
thoughtfully round the tent. The battle-axe that Hermanric had secured
during the scene of the past evening, still lay on the ground, in a
corner.  The sight of it brought back a flood of terrible recollections
to her mind.  She started violently; a sudden change overspread her
features, and when she again addressed Hermanric, it was with quivering
lips and in almost inarticulate words.

'I know now why you look on me so gloomily,' said she; 'that woman is
coming back!  I was so occupied by my dreams and my thoughts of my
father and of you, and my hopes for days to come, that I had forgotten
her when I awoke!  But I remember all now!  She is coming back--I  see
it in your sorrowful eyes--she is coming back to murder me!  I shall
die at the moment when I had such hope in my life!  There is no
happiness for me!  None!--none!'

The Goth's countenance began to darken.  He whispered to himself
several times, 'How can I save her?'  For a few minutes there was a
deep silence, broken only by the sobs of Antonina.  He looked round at
her after an interval.  She held her hands clasped over her eyes.  The
tears were streaming through her parted fingers; her bosom heaved as if
her emotions would burst their way through it in some palpable form;
and her limbs trembled so, that she could scarcely support herself.
Unconsciously, as he looked on her, he passed his arm round her slender
form, drew her hands gently from her face, and said to her, though his
heart belied his words as he spoke, 'Do not be afraid--trust in me!'

'How can I be calm?' she cried, looking up at him entreatingly; 'I was
so happy last night, so sure that you could preserve me, so hopeful
about to-morrow--and now I see by your mournful looks, I know by your
doubting voice, that to soothe my anguish you have promised me more
than you can perform!  The woman who is your companion, has a power
over us both, that it is terrible even to think of!  She will return,
she will withdraw all mercy from your heart, she will glare upon me
with her fearful eyes, she will kill me at your feet!  I shall die
after all I have suffered and all I have hoped!  Oh, Hermanric, while
there is yet time let us escape!  You were not made to shed blood--you
are too merciful!  God never made you to destroy!  You cannot yearn
towards cruelty and woe, for you have aided and protected me!  Let us
escape!  I will follow you wherever you wish!  I will do whatever you
ask!  I will go with you beyond those far, bright mountains behind us,
to any strange and distant land; for there is beauty everywhere; there
are woods that may be dwelt in, and valleys that may be loved, on all
the surface of this wide great earth!'

The Goth looked sadly on her as she paused; but he gave her no
answer--the gloom was deepening over his heart--the false words of
consolation were silenced on his lips.


'Think how many pleasures we should enjoy, how much we might see!'
continued the girl, in soft, appealing tones.  'We should be free to
wander wherever we pleased; we should never be lonely; never be
mournful; never be wearied!  I could listen to you day after day, while
you told me of the country where your people were born!  I could sing
you sweet songs that I have learned upon the lute!  Oh, how I have wept
in my loneliness to lead such a life as this!  How I have longed that
such freedom and joy might be mine!  How I have thought of the distant
lands that I would visit, of the happy nations that I would discover,
of the mountain breezes that I would breathe, of the shady places that
I would repose in, of the rivers that I would follow in their course,
of the flowers I would plant, and the fruits I would gather!  How I
have hoped for such an existence as this!  How I have longed for a
companion who might enjoy it as I should!  Have you never felt this joy
that I have imagined to myself, you who have been free to wander
wherever you pleased?  Let us leave this place, and I will teach it to
you if you have not.  I will be so patient, so obedient, so happy!  I
will never be sorrowful; never repining--but let us escape--Oh,
Hermanric, let us escape while there is yet time!  Will you keep me
here to be slain?  Can you drive me forth into the world alone?
Remember that the gates of the city and the doors of my home are now
closed to me! Remember that I have no mother, and that my father has
forsaken me!  Remember that I am a stranger on the earth which was made
for me to be joyful in!  Think how soon the woman who has vowed that
she will murder me will return; think how terrible it is to be in the
fear of death; and while there is time let us depart--Hermanric,
Hermanric, if you have pity for me, let us depart!'

She clasped her hands, and looked up in his face imploringly.  The
manner of Hermanric had expressed more to her senses, sharpened as they
were by peril, than his words could have conveyed, even had he
confessed to her the cause of the emotions of doubt and apprehension
that oppressed his mind.  Nothing could more strikingly testify to the
innocence of her character and the seclusion of her life, than her
attempt to combine with her escape from Goisvintha's fury, the
acquisition of such a companion as the Goth.  But to the forlorn and
affectionate girl who saw herself--a stranger to the laws of the social
existence of her fellow creatures--suddenly thrust forth friendless
into the unfriendly world, could the heart have naturally prompted any
other desire, than anxiety to secure the companion after having
discovered the protector?  In the guilelessness of her character, in
her absolute ignorance of humanity, of the influence of custom, of the
adaptation of difference of feeling to difference of sex, she vainly
imagined that the tranquil existence she had urged on Hermanric, would
suffice for the attainment of her end, by presenting the same
allurements to him, a warrior and a Goth, that it contained for her--a
lonely, thoughtful, visionary girl!  And yet, so wonderful was the
ascendancy that she had acquired by the magic of her presence, the
freshness of her beauty, and the novelty of her manner, over the heart
of the young chieftain, that he, who would have spurned from him with
contempt any other woman who might have addressed to him such a
petition as Antonina's, looked down sorrowfully at the girl as she
ceased speaking, and for an instant hesitated in his choice.

At that moment, when the attention of each was fixed on the other, a
third person stealthily approached the opening of the tent, and
beholding them together thus, burst into a bitter, taunting laugh.
Hermanric raised his eyes instantly; but the sound of that harsh
unwomanly voice was all-eloquent to Antonina's senses.  She hid her
face against the Goth's breast, and murmured breathlessly--'She has
returned! I must die!  I must die!'

She had returned!  She perceived Hermanric and Antonina in a position,
which left no doubt that a stronger feeling than the mere wish to
protect the victim of her intended revenge, had arisen, during her
absence, in the heart of her kinsman.  Hour after hour, while she had
fulfilled her duties by the beds of Alaric's invalided soldiery, had
she brooded over her projects of vengeance and blood.  Neither the
sickness nor the death which she had beheld around her, had possessed
an influence powerful enough over the stubborn ferocity which now alone
animated her nature, to lure it to mercy or awe it to repentance.
Invigorated by delay, and enlarged by disappointment, the evil passion
that consumed her had strengthened its power, and aroused the most
latent of its energies, during the silent vigil that she had just held.
She had detested the girl on the evening before, for her nation; she
now hated her for herself.

'What have you to do with the trappings of a Gothic warrior?' she
cried, in mocking accents, pointing at Hermanric with a long
hunting-knife which she held in her hand.  'Why are you here in a
Gothic encampment? Go, knock at the gates of Rome, implore her guards
on your knees to admit you among the citizens, and when they ask you
why--show them the girl there!  Tell them that you love her, that you
would wed her, that it is nothing to you that her people have murdered
your brother and his children!  And then, when you yourself have
begotten sons, Gothic bastards infected with Roman blood, be a Roman at
heart yourself, send your children forth to complete what your wife's
people left undone at Aquileia--by murdering me!'

She paused and laughed scornfully.  Then her humour suddenly changed,
she advanced a few steps, and continued in a louder and sterner tone:--


'You have broken your faith; you have lied to me; you have forgotten
your wrongs and mine; but you have not yet forgotten my parting words
when I left you last night!  I told you that she should be slain, and
now that you have refused to avenge me, I will make good my words by
killing her with my own hand!  If you would defend her, you must murder
me.  You must shed her blood or mine!'

She stepped forward, her towering form was stretched to its highest
stature, the muscles started into action on her bare arms as she raised
them above her head.  For one instant, she fixed her glaring eyes
steadily on the girl's shrinking form--the next, she rushed up and
struck furiously with the knife at her bare neck.  As the weapon
descended, Hermanric caught her wrist.  She struggled violently to
disengage herself from his grasp, but in vain.

The countenance of the young warrior grew deadly pale, as he held her.
For a few minutes he glanced eagerly round the tent, in an agony of
bewilderment and despair.  The conflicting interests of his duty
towards his sister, and his anxiety for Antonina's preservation, filled
his heart to distraction.  A moment more he hesitated, and during that
short delay, the despotism of custom had yet power enough to prevail
over the promptings of pity.  He called to the girl--withdrawing his
arm which had hitherto been her support,--'Go, have mercy on me, go!'

But she neither heeded nor heard him.  She fell on her knees at the
woman's feet, and in a low moaning voice faltered out:--

'What have I done that I deserve to be slain?  I never murdered your
children; I never yet saw a child but I loved it; if I had seen your
children, I should have loved them!'

'If I had preserved to this time the child that I saved from the
massacre, and you had approached him,' returned the woman fiercely, 'I
would have taught him to strike at you with his little hands! When you
spoke to him, he should have spat upon you for answer--even thus!'

Trembling, exhausted, terrified as she was, the girl's Roman blood
rushed over her pale cheeks as she felt the insult.  She turned towards
Hermanric, looked up at him appealingly, attempted to speak, and then
sinking lower upon the ground, wept bitterly.

'Why do you weep and pray and mouth it at him?' shrieked Goisvintha,
pointing to Hermanric with her disengaged hand.  'He has neither
courage to protect you, nor honour to aid me.  Do you think that I am
to be moved by your tears and entreaties?  I tell you that your people
have slain my husband and my children, and that I hate you for that.  I
tell you that you have lured Hermanric into love for a Roman and
unfaithfulness to me, and I will slay you for doing it!  I tell you
that there is not a living thing of the blood of your country, or the
name of your nation, throughout the length and breadth of this empire,
that I would not destroy if I had the power!  If the very trees on the
road hither could have had feeling, I would have torn the bark from
their stems with my own hands!  If a bird, native of your skies, had
flown into my bosom from very tameness and sport, I would have crushed
it dead at my feet!  And do you think that you shall escape?  Do you
think that I will not avenge the deaths of my husband and my children
upon you, after this?'

As she spoke, she mechanically unclenched her hands.  The knife dropped
to the ground.  Hermanric instantly stooped and secured it.  For a
moment she stood before him released from his grasp, motionless and
speechless.  Then, starting as if struck by a sudden idea, she moved
towards the opening of the tent, and, in tones of malignant triumph,
addressed him thus:--

'You shall not save her yet!  You are unworthy of your nation and your
name!  I will betray your cowardice and treachery to your brethren in
the camp!'  And she ran to the outside of the tent, calling in a loud
voice to a group of young warriors who happened to be passing at a
short distance.  'Stay, stay!
Fritigern--Athanaric--Colias--Suerid--Witheric--Fravitta!  Hasten
hitherward!  Hermanric has a captive in his tent--a prisoner whom it
will rejoice to see!  Hitherward!  hitherward!'


The group she addressed contained some of the most turbulent and
careless spirits of the whole Gothic army.  They had just been released
from their duties of the past night, and were at leisure to comply with
Goisvintha's request.  She had scarcely concluded her address before
they turned and hurried eagerly up to the tent, shouting to Hermanric,
as they advanced, to make his prisoner visible to them in the open air.

They had probably expected to be regaled by the ludicrous terror of
some Roman slave whom their comrade had discovered lurking in the empty
suburbs; for when they entered the tent, and saw nothing but the
shrinking figure of the unhappy girl, as she crouched on the earth at
Hermanric's feet, they all paused with one accord, and looked round on
each other in speechless astonishment.

'Behold her!' cried Goisvintha, breaking the momentary silence.  'She
is the Roman prisoner that your man of valour there has secured for
himself!  For that trembling child he has forgotten the enmities of his
people!  She is more to him already than army, general, or companions.
You have watched before the city during the night; but he has stood
sentinel by the maiden of Rome! Hope not that he will share in your
toils, or mix in your pleasures more.  Alaric and the warriors have
lost his services--his future king cringes there at his feet!'

She had expected to arouse the anger and excite the jealousy of the
rough audience she addressed; but the result of her envenomed jeers
disappointed her hopes.  The humour of the moment prompted the Goths to
ridicule, a course infinitely more inimical to Antonina's interests
with Hermanric than menaces or recrimination.  Recovered from their
first astonishment, they burst into a loud and universal laugh.

'Mars and Venus caught together!  But, by St.  Peter, I see not Vulcan
and the net!' cried Fravitta, who having served in the armies of Rome,
and acquired a vague knowledge there of the ancient mythology, and the
modern politics of the Empire, was considered by his companions as the
wit of the battalion to which he was attached.

'I like her figure,' growled Fritigern, a heavy, phlegmatic giant,
renowned for his imperturbable good humour and his prowess in drinking.
'What little there is of it looks so limp that Hermanric might pack her
into his light baggage and carry her about with him on his shoulders
wherever he goes!'

'By which process you would say, old sucker of wine-skins, that he will
attain the double advantage of always keeping her to himself, and
always keeping her warm,' interrupted Colias, a ruddy, reckless boy of
sixteen, privileged to be impertinent in consideration of his years.

'Is she Orthodox or Arian?' gravely demanded Athanaric, who piqued
himself on his theological accomplishments and his extraordinary piety.

'What hair she has!' exclaimed Suerid, sarcastically.  'It is as black
as the horse-hides of a squadron of Huns!'

'Show us her face!  Whose tent will she visit next?' cried Witheric,
with an insolent laugh.

'Mine!' replied Fritigern, complacently.  'What says the chorus of the
song?

'Money and wine Make beauty mine!

I have more of both than any of you.  She will come to my tent!'

During the delivery of these clumsy jests, which followed one upon
another with instantaneous rapidity, the scorn at first expressed in
Hermanric's countenance became gradually replaced by a look of
irrepressible anger.  As Fritigern spoke, he lost all command over
himself, and seizing his sword, advanced threateningly towards the
easy-tempered giant, who made no attempt to recede or defend himself,
but called out soothingly, 'Patience, man! patience!  Would you kill an
old comrade for jesting?  I envy you your good luck as a friend, not as
an enemy!'


Yielding to the necessity of lowering his sword before a defenceless
man, Hermanric was about to reply angrily to Fritigern, when his voice
was drowned in the blast of a trumpet, sounding close by the tent.  The
signal that it gave was understood at once by the group of jesters
still surrounding the young Goth.  They turned, and retired without an
instant's delay.  The last of their number had scarcely disappeared,
when the same veteran who had spoken with Hermanric, on the departure
of Goisvintha the evening before, entered and thus addressed him:--

'You are commanded to post yourself with the division that now awaits
you, at a place eastward of your present position, which will be shown
you by a guide.  Make ready at once--you have not an instant to delay.'

As the words passed the old man's lips, Hermanric turned and looked on
Goisvintha.  During the presence of the Goths in the tent, she had sat
listening to their rough jeers in suppressed wrath and speechless
disdain; now she rose and advanced a few steps.  But there suddenly
appeared an unwonted hesitation in her gait; her face was pale; she
breathed fast and heavily.  'Where will you shelter her now?' she
cried, addressing Hermanric, and threatening the girl with her
outstretched hands.  'Abandon her to your companions, or leave her to
me; she is lost either way!  I shall triumph--triumph!'--

At this moment her voice sank to an unintelligible murmur; she tottered
where she stood.  It was evident that the long strife of passions
during her past night of watching, and the fierce and varying emotions
of the morning, suddenly brought to a crisis, as they had been, by her
exultation when she heard the old warrior's fatal message, had at
length overtasked the energies even of her powerful frame.  Yet one
moment more she endeavoured to advance, to speak, to snatch the hunting
knife from Hermanric's hand; the next she fell insensible at his feet.

Goaded almost to madness by the successive trials that he had
undergone; Goisvintha's furious determination to thwart him, still
present to his mind; the scornful words of his companions yet ringing
in his ears; his inexorable duties demanding his attention without
reserve or delay; Hermanric succumbed at last under the difficulties of
his position, and despairingly abandoned all further hope of effecting
the girl's preservation.  Pointing to some food that lay in a corner of
the tent, and to the country behind, he said to her, in broken and
gloomy accents, 'Furnish yourself with those provisions, and fly, while
Goisvintha is yet unable to pursue you.  I can protect you no longer!'

Until this moment, Antonina had kept her face hidden, and had remained
still crouching on the ground; motionless, save when a shudder ran
through her frame as she listened to the loud, coarse jesting of the
Goths; and speechless, except that when Goisvintha sank senseless to
the earth, she uttered an exclamation of terror.  But now, when she
heard the sentence of her banishment proclaimed by the very lips which
but the evening before had assured her of shelter and protection, she
rose up instantly, cast on the young Goth a glance of such speechless
misery and despair, that he involuntarily quailed before it; and then,
without a tear or a sigh, without a look of reproach, or a word of
entreaty, petrified and bowed down beneath a perfect trance of terror
and grief, she left the tent.

Hurrying his actions with the reckless energy of a man determined on
banishing his thoughts by his employments, Hermanric placed himself at
the head of his troop, and marched quickly onwards in an eastward
direction past the Pincian Gate.  Two of his attendants who happened to
enter the tent after his departure, observing Goisvintha still extended
on the earth, proceeded to transport her to part of the camp occupied
by the women who were attached to the army; and then, the little
sheltering canopy which made the abode of the Goth, and which had
witnessed so large a share of human misery and so fierce a war of human
contention in so few hours, was left as silent and lonely as the
deserted country in which Antonina was now fated to seek a refuge and a
home.



CHAPTER 12.

THE PASSAGE OF THE WALL.

'A fair night this, Balbus!  All moonlight and no mist!  I was posted
last evening at the Ostian Gate, and was half choked by the fog.'

'If you were posted last night at the Ostian Gate, you were better
placed than you are now.  The ramparts here are as lonely as a ruin in
the provinces.  Nothing behind us but the back of the Pincian Mount;
nothing before us but the empty suburbs; nothing at each side of us but
brick and stone; nothing at our posts but ourselves.  May I be
crucified like St. Peter, if I believe that there is another place on
the whole round of the walls possessed of such solitary dulness as
this!'

'You are a man to find something to complain of, if you were lodged in
one of the palaces yonder.  The place is solitary enough, it is true;
but whether it is dull or not depends on ourselves, its most honourable
occupants.  I, for one, am determined to promote its joviality by the
very praiseworthy exertion of obliging you, my discontented friend,
with an inexhaustible series of those stories for which, I may say,
without arrogance, I am celebrated throughout the length and breadth of
all the barracks of Rome.'

'You may tell as many stories as you please, but do not imagine that I
will make one of your audience.'

'You are welcome to attend to me or not, as you choose.  Though you do
not listen, I shall still relate my stories by way of practice.  I will
address them to the walls, or to the air, or to the defunct gods and
goddesses of antiquity, should they happen at this moment to be
hovering over the city in a rage, as some of the unconverted would have
us believe; or to our neighbours the Goths, if they are seized with a
sudden desire to quite their encampments, and obtain a near view of the
fortifications that they are so discreetly unwilling to assault.  Or,
these materials for a fit and decent auditory failing me, I will tell
my stories to the most attentive of all listeners--myself.'

And the sentinel, without further delay, opened his budget of
anecdotes, with the easy fluency of of a man who possessed a
well-placed confidence in the perfection of his capacities for
narration. Determined that his saturnine colleague should hear him,
though he would not give him his attention, he talked in a raised
voice, pacing briskly backwards and forwards over the space of his
allotted limits, and laughing with ludicrous regularity and complacency
at every jest that he happened to make in the course of his
ill-rewarded narrative.  He little thought, as he continued to proceed
in his tale that its commencement had been welcomed by an unseen
hearer, with emotions widely different from those which had dictated
the observations of the unfriendly companion of his watch.

True to his determination, Ulpius, with part of the wages which he had
hoarded in Numerian's service, had procured a small lantern from a shop
in one of the distant quarters of Rome; and veiling its light in a
piece of coarse, thick cloth, had proceeded by the solitary pathway to
his second night's labour at the wall.  He arrived at the breach, at
the commencement of the dialogue above related, and heard with delight
the sentinel's noisy resolution to amuse his companion in spite of
himself. The louder and the longer the man talked, the less probable
was the chance that the Pagan's labours in the interior of the wall
would be suspected or overheard.

Softly clearing away the brushwood at the entrance of the hole that he
had made the night before, Ulpius crept in as far as he had penetrated
on that occasion; and then, with mingled emotions of expectation and
apprehension which affected him so powerfully, that he was for the
moment hardly master of his actions, he slowly and cautiously uncovered
his light.


His first glance was intuitively directed to the cavity that opened
beneath him.  He saw immediately that it was less important, both in
size and depth, than he had imagined it to be.  The earth at this
particular place had given way beneath the foundations of the wall,
which had sunk down, deepening the chasm by their weight, into the
yielding ground beneath them.  A small spring of water (probably the
first cause of the sinking in the earth) had bubbled up into the space
in the brick-work, which bit by bit, and year by year, it had gradually
undermined.  Nor did it remain stagnant at this place.  It trickled
merrily and quietly onward--a tiny rivulet, emancipated from one prison
in the ground only to enter another in the wall, bounded by no grassy
banks, brightened by no cheerful light, admired by no human eye,
followed in its small course through the inner fissures in the brick by
no living thing but a bloated toad, or a solitary lizard:  yet wending
as happily on its way through darkness and ruin, as its sisters who
were basking in the sunlight of the meadows, or leaping in the fresh
breezes of the open mountain side.

Raising his eyes from the little spring, Ulpius next directed his
attention to the prospect above him.

Immediately over his head, the material of the interior of the wall
presented a smooth, flat, hard surface, which seemed capable of
resisting the most vigorous attempts at its destruction; but on looking
round, he perceived at one side of him and further inwards, an
appearance of dark, dimly-defined irregularity, which promised
encouragingly for his intended efforts.  He descended into the chasm of
the rivulet, crawled up on a heap of crumbling brick-work, and gained a
hole above it, which he immediately began to widen, to admit of his
passage through.  Inch by inch, he enlarged the rift, crept into it,
and found himself on a fragment of the bow of one of the foundation
arches, which, though partly destroyed, still supported itself,
isolated from all connection with the part of the upper wall which it
had once sustained, and which had gradually crumbled away into the
cavities below.

He looked up.  An immense rift soared above him, stretching its
tortuous ramifications, at different points, into every part of the
wall that was immediately visible.  The whole structure seemed, at this
place, to have received a sudden and tremendous wrench.  But for the
support of the sounder fortifications at each side of it, it could not
have sustained itself after the shock. The Pagan gazed aloft, into the
fearful breaches which yawned above him, with ungovernable awe.  His
small, fitful light was not sufficient to show him any of their
terminations.  They looked, as he beheld them in dark relief against
the rest of the hollow part of the wall, like mighty serpents twining
their desolating path right upward to the ramparts above; and he,
himself, as he crouched on his pinnacle with his little light by his
side, was reduced by the wild grandeur, the vast, solemn gloom of the
obscure, dusky, and fantastic objects around him, to the stature of a
pigmy.  Could he have been seen from the ramparts high overhead, as he
now peered down behind his lantern into the cavities and irregularities
below him, he would have looked, with his flickering light, like a mole
led by a glow-worm.

He paused to consider his next movements.  In a stationary position,
the damp coldness of the atmosphere was almost insupportable, but he
attained a great advantage by his present stillness: he could listen
undisturbed by the noises made by the bricks which crumbled from under
him, if he advanced.


Ere long, he heard a thin, winding, long-drawn sound, now louder, now
softer; now approaching, now retreating; now verging towards
shrillness, now quickly returning to a faint, gentle swell.  Suddenly
this strange unearthly music was interrupted by a succession of long,
deep, rolling sounds, which travelled grandly about the fissures above,
like prisoned thunderbolts striving to escape.  Utterly ignorant that
the first of these noises was occasioned by the night wind winding
through the rents in the brick of the outer wall beyond him; and the
second, by the echoes produced in the irregular cavities above, by the
footfall of the sentries overhead--roused by the influence of the
place, and the mystery of his employment, to a pitch of fanatic
exaltation, which for the moment absolutely unsteadied his
reason--filled with the frantic enthusiasm of his designs, and the
fearful legends of invisible beings and worlds which made the
foundation of his worship, Ulpius conceived, as he listened to the
sounds around and above, that the gods of antiquity were now in
viewless congregation hovering about him, and calling to him in
unearthly voices and in an unknown tongue, to proceed upon his daring
enterprise, in the full assurance of its near and glorious success.

'Roar and mutter, and make your hurricane music in my ears!' exclaimed
the Pagan, raising his withered hands, and addressing in a savage
ecstacy his imagined deities.  'Your servant Ulpius stops not on the
journey that leads him to your repeopled shrines!  Blood, crime,
danger, pain--pride and honour, joy and rest, have I strewn like
sacrifices at your altars' feet!  Time has whirled past me; youth and
manhood have lain long since buried in the hidden Lethe which is the
portion of life; age has wreathed his coils over my body's strength,
but still I watch by your temples and serve your mighty cause!  Your
vengeance is near! Monarchs of the world, your triumph is at hand!'

He remained for some time in the same position, looking fixedly up into
the trackless darkness above him, drinking in the sounds
which--alternately rising and sinking--still floated round him. The
trembling gleam of his lantern fell red and wild upon his livid
countenance.  His shaggy hair floated in the cold breezes that blew by
him.  At this moment he would have appeared from a distance, like a
phantom of fire perishing in a mist of darkness; like a Gnome in
adoration in the bowels of the earth; like a forsaken spirit in a
solitary purgatory, watching for the advent of a glimpse of beauty, or
a breath of air.

At length he aroused himself from his trance, trimmed with careful hand
his guiding lantern, and set forward to penetrate the breadth of the
great rift he had just entered.

He moved on in an oblique direction several feet, now creeping over the
tops of the foundation arches, now skirting the extremities of
protrusions in the ruined brick-work, now descending into dark slimy
rubbish-choked chasms, until the rift suddenly diminished in all
directions.

The atmosphere was warmer in the place he now occupied; he could
faintly distinguish patches of dark moss, dotted here and there over
the uneven surface of the wall; and once or twice, some blades of long
flat grass, that grew from a prominence immediately above his head,
were waved in his face by the wind, which he could now feel blowing
through the narrow fissure that he was preparing to enlarge.  It was
evident that he had by this time advanced to within a few feet of the
outer extremity of the wall.

'Numerian wanders after his child through the streets,' muttered the
Pagan, as he deposited his lantern by his side, bared his trembling
arms, and raised his iron bar, 'the slaves of his neighbour the senator
are forth to pursue me.  On all sides my enemies are out after me; but,
posted here, I mock their strictest search!  If they would track me to
my hiding-place, they must penetrate the walls of Rome!  If they would
hunt me down in my lair, they must assail me to-night in the camp of
the Goths!  Fools! let them look to themselves!  I seal the doom of
their city, with the last brick that I tear from their defenceless
walls!'

He laughed to himself as he thrust his bar boldly into the crevice
before him.  In some places the bricks yielded easily to his efforts;
in others, their resistance was only to be overcome by the exertion of
his utmost strength.  Resolutely and unceasingly he continued his
labours; now wounding his hands against the jagged surfaces presented
by the widening fissure; now involuntarily dropping his instrument from
ungovernable exhaustion; but, still working bravely on, in defiance of
every hindrance that opposed him, until he gained the interior of the
new rift.

As he drew his lantern after him into the cavity that he had made, he
perceived that, unless it was heightened immediately over him, he could
proceed no further, even in a creeping position. Irritated at this
unexpected necessity for more violent exertion, desperate in his
determination to get through the wall at all hazards on that very
night, he recklessly struck his bar upwards with all his strength,
instead of gradually and softly loosening the material of the surface
that opposed him, as he had done before.

A few moments of this labour had scarcely elapsed, when a considerable
portion of the brick-work, consolidated into one firm mass, fell with
lightning suddenness from above.  It hurled him under it, prostrate on
the foundation arch which had been his support; crushed and dislocated
his right shoulder; and shivered his lantern into fragments.  A groan
of irrepressible anguish burst from his lips.  He was left in
impenetrable darkness.

The mass of brick-work, after it had struck him, rolled a little to one
side.  By a desperate exertion he extricated himself from under
it--only to swoon from the fresh anguish caused to him by the effort.

For a short time he lay insensible in his cold dark solitude.  Then,
reviving after this first shock, he began to experience in all their
severity, the fierce spasms, the dull gnawings, the throbbing torments,
that were the miserable consequences of the injury he received.  His
arm lay motionless by his side--he had neither strength nor resolution
to move any one of the other sound limbs in his body.  At one moment
his deep, sobbing, stifled respirations, syllabled horrible and
half-formed curses--at another, his panting breaths suddenly died away
within him; and then he could hear the blood dripping slowly from his
shoulder, with dismal regularity, into a little pool that it had formed
already by his side.

The shrill breezes which wound through the crevices in the wall before
him, were now felt only on his wounded limb.  They touched its surface
like innumerable splinters of thin, sharp ice; they penetrated his
flesh like rushing sparks struck out of a sea of molten lead.  There
were moments, during the first pangs of this agony, when if he had been
possessed of a weapon and of the strength to use it, he would have
sacrificed his ambition for ever by depriving himself of life.

But this desire to end his torments with his existence lasted not long.
Gradually, the anguish in his body awakened a wilder and stronger
distemper in his mind, and then the two agonies, physical and mental,
rioted over him together in fierce rivalry, divesting him of all
thoughts but such as were by their own agency created or aroused.

For some time he lay helpless in his misery, alternately venting by
stifled groans the unalleviated torment of his wounds, and lamenting
with curses the failure of his enterprise, at the very moment of its
apparent success.  At length, the pangs that struck through him seemed
to grow gradually less frequent; he hardly knew now from what part of
his frame they more immediately proceeded. Insensibly, his faculties of
thinking and feeling grew blunted; then he remained a little while in a
mysterious unrefreshing repose of body and mind; and then his
disordered senses, left unguided and unrestrained, became the victims
of a sudden and terrible delusion.

The blank darkness around him appeared, after an interval, to be
gradually dawning into a dull light, thick and misty, like the
reflections on clouds which threaten a thunderstorm at the close of
evening.  Soon, this atmosphere seemed to be crossed and streaked with
a fantastic trellis-work of white, seething vapour.  Then the mass of
brick-work which had struck him down, grew visible at his side,
enlarged to an enormous bulk, and endued with a power of self-motion,
by which it mysteriously swelled and shrank, and raised and depressed
itself, without quitting for a moment its position near him.  And then,
from its dark and toiling surface there rose a long stream of dusky
shapes, which twined themselves about the misty trellis-work above, and
took the prominent and palpable form of human countenances, marked by
every difference of age and distorted by every variety of suffering.


There were infantine faces, wreathed about with grave-worms that hung
round them like locks of filthy hair; aged faces, dabbled with gore and
slashed with wounds; youthful faces, seamed with livid channels, along
which ran unceasing tears; lovely faces, distorted into fixed
expressions of raging pain, wild malignity, and despairing gloom.  Not
one of these countenances exactly resembled the other.  Each was
distinguished by a revolting character of its own.  Yet, however
deformed might be their other features, the eyes of all were preserved
unimpaired.  Speechless and bodiless, they floated in unceasing myriads
up to the fantastic trellis-work, which seemed to swell its wild
proportions to receive them.  There they clustered, in their goblin
amphitheatre, and fixed and silently they all glared down, without one
exception, on the Pagan's face!

Meanwhile, the walls at the side began to gleam out with a light of
their own, making jagged boundaries to the midway scene of phantom
faces.  Then the rifts in their surfaces widened, and disgorged
misshapen figures of priests and idols of the old time, which came
forth in every hideous deformity of aspect, mocking at the faces on the
trellis-work; while behind and over the whole, soared shapes of
gigantic darkness, robed in grim cloudy resemblances of skins such as
were worn by the Goths, and wielding through the quivering vapour,
mighty and shadow-like weapons of war.  From the whole of this ghastly
assemblage there rose not the slightest sound. A stillness, as of a
dead and ruined world, possessed in all its quarters the appalling
scene.  The deep echoes of the sentries' footsteps and the faint
dirging of the melancholy winds were no more.  The blood that had as
yet dripped from his wound, made no sound now in the Pagan's ear; even
his own agony of terror was as silent as were the visionary demons who
had aroused it. Days, years, centuries, seemed to pass, as he lay
gazing up, in a trance of horror, into his realm of peopled and ghostly
darkness.  At last nature yielded under the trial; the phantom prospect
suddenly whirled round him with fearful velocity, and his senses sought
refuge from the thraldom of their own creation in a deep and welcome
swoon.

Time had moved wearily onward, the chiding winds had many times waved
the dry locks of his hair to and fro about his brow, as if to bid him
awaken and arise, ere he again recovered his consciousness.  Once more
aroused to the knowledge of his position and the sensation of his
wound, he slowly raised himself upon his uninjured arm, and looked
wildly around for the faintest appearance of a gleam of light.  But the
winding and uneven nature of the track which he had formed to lead him
through the wall, effectually prevented the moonbeams, then floating
into the outermost of the cavities that he had made, from reaching the
place where he now lay. Not a single object was even faintly
distinguishable around him.  Darkness hemmed him in, in rayless and
triumphant obscurity, on every side.

The first agonies of the injury he had received had resolved themselves
into one dull, heavy, unchanging sensation of pain.  The vision that
had overwhelmed his senses was now, in a vast and shadowy form, present
only to his memory, filling the darkness with fearful recollections,
and not with dismal forms; and urging on him a restless, headlong
yearning to effect his escape from the lonely and unhallowed sepulchre,
the prison of solitude and death, that his own fatal exertions
threatened him with, should he linger much longer in the caverns of the
wall.

'I must pass from this darkness into light--I must breathe the air of
the sky, or I shall perish in the damps of this vault,' he exclaimed in
a hoarse, moaning voice, as he raised himself gradually and painfully
into a creeping position; and turning round slowly, commenced his
meditated retreat.

His brain still whirled with the emotions that had so lately
overwhelmed his mind; his right hand hung helplessly by his side,
dragged after him like a prisoner's chain, and lacerated by the uneven
surface of the ground over which it was slowly drawn, as--supporting
himself on his left arm, and creeping forward a few inches at a
time--he set forth on his toilsome journey.

Here, he paused bewildered in the darkness; there, he either checked
himself by a convulsive effort from falling headlong into the unknown
deeps beneath him, or lost the little ground he had gained in labour
and agony, by retracing his way at the bidding of some unexpected
obstacle. Now he gnashed his teeth in anguish, now he cursed in
despair, now he was breathless with exhaustion; but still, with an
obstinacy that had in it something of the heroic, he never failed in
his fierce resolution to effect his escape.


Slowly and painfully, moving with the pace and the perseverance of the
tortoise, hopeless yet determined as a navigator in a strange sea, he
writhed onward and onward upon his unguided course, until he reaped at
length the reward of his long suffering, by the sudden discovery of a
thin ray of moonlight toiling through a crevice in the murky brickwork
before him.  Hardly did the hearts of the Magi when the vision of 'the
star in the East' first dawned on their eyes, leap within them with a
more vivid transport, than that which animated the heart of Ulpius at
the moment when he beheld the inspiring and guiding light.

Yet a little more exertion, a little more patience, a little more
anguish; and he stood once again, a ghastly and crippled figure, before
the outer cavity in the wall.

It was near daybreak; the moon shone faintly in the dull, grey heaven;
a small, vaporous rain was sinking from the shapeless clouds; the
waning night showed bleak and cheerless to the earth, but cast no
mournful or reproving influence over the Pagan's mind.  He looked round
on his solitary lurking place, and beheld no human figure in its lonely
recesses.  He looked up at the ramparts, and saw that the sentinels
stood silent and apart, wrapped in their heavy watch-cloaks, and
supported on their trusty weapons.  It was perfectly apparent that the
events of his night of suffering and despair had passed unheeded by the
outer world.

He glanced back with a shudder upon his wounded and helpless limb; then
his eyes fixed themselves upon the wall.  After surveying it with an
earnest and defiant gaze, he slowly moved the brushwood with his foot,
against the small cavity in its outer surface.

'Days pass, wounds heal, chances change,' muttered the old man,
departing from his haunt with slow and uncertain steps.  'In the mines
I have borne lashes without a murmur--I have felt my chains widening,
with each succeeding day, the ulcers that their teeth of iron first
gnawed in my flesh, and have yet lived to loosen my fetters, and to
close my sores!  Shall this new agony have a power to conquer me
greater than the others that are past?  I will even yet return in time
to overcome the resistance of the wall!  My arm is crushed, but my
purpose is whole!'



CHAPTER 13.

THE HOUSE IN THE SUBURBS.

Retracing some hours, we turn from the rifted wall to the suburbs and
the country which its ramparts overlook; abandoning the footsteps of
the maimed and darkly-plotting Ulpius, our attention now fixes itself
on the fortunes of Hermanric, and the fate of Antonina.

Although the evening had as yet scarcely closed, the Goth had allotted
to the warriors under his command their different stations for the
night in the lonely suburbs of the city.  This duty performed, he was
left to the unbroken solitude of the deserted tenement which now served
him as a temporary abode.

The house he occupied was the last of the wide and irregular street in
which it stood; it looked towards the wall beneath the Pincian Mount,
from which it was separated by a public garden about half a mile in
extent.  This once well-thronged place of recreation was now totally
unoccupied.  Its dull groves were brightened by no human forms; the
chambers of its gay summer houses were dark and desolate; the booths of
its fruit and flower-sellers stood vacant on its untrodden lawns.
Melancholy and forsaken, it stretched forth as a fertile solitude under
the very walls of a crowded city.


And yet there was a charm inexpressibly solemn and soothing in the
prospect of loneliness that it presented, as its flower-beds and trees
were now gradually obscured to the eye in the shadows of the advancing
night.  It gained in its present refinement as much as it had lost of
its former gaiety; it had its own simple attraction still, though it
failed to sparkle to the eye with its accustomed illuminations, or to
please the ear by the music and laughter, which rose from it in times
of peace.  As he looked forth over the view from the terrace of his new
abode, the remembrance of the employments of his past and busy hours
deserted the memory of the young Goth, leaving his faculties free to
welcome the reflections which night began insensibly to awaken and
create.

Employed under such auspices, whither would the thoughts of Hermanric
naturally stray?

From the moonlight that already began to ripple over the topmost
trembling leaves of the trees beyond him, to the delicate and shadowy
flowers that twined up the pillars of the deserted terrace where he now
stood, every object he beheld connected itself, to his vivid and
uncultured imagination, with the one being of whom all that was
beautiful in nature, seemed to him the eloquent and befitting type.  He
thought of Antonina whom he had once protected; of Antonina whom he had
afterwards abandoned; of Antonina whom he had now lost!

Strong in the imaginative and weak in the reasoning faculties; gifted
with large moral perception and little moral firmness; too easy to be
influenced and too difficult to be resolved, Hermanric had deserted the
girl's interests from an infirmity of disposition, rather than from a
determination of will.  Now, therefore, when the employments of the day
had ceased to absorb his attention; now when silence and solitude led
his memory back to his morning's abandonment of his helpless charge,
that act of fatal impatience and irresolution inspired him with the
strongest emotions of sorrow and remorse.  If during her sojourn under
his care, Antonina had insensibly influenced his heart, her image, now
that he reflected on his guilty share in their parting scene, filled
all his thoughts, at once saddening and shaming him, as he remembered
her banishment from the shelter of his tent.

Every feeling which had animated his reflections on Antonina on the
previous night, was doubled in intensity as he thought on her now.
Again he recalled her eloquent words, and remembered the charm of her
gentle and innocent manner; again he dwelt on the beauties of her
outward form.  Each warm expression; each varying intonation of voice
that had accompanied her petition to him for safety and companionship;
every persuasion that she had used to melt him, now revived in his
memory and moved in his heart with steady influence and increasing
power.  All the hurried and imperfect pictures of happiness which she
had drawn to allure him, now expanded and brightened, until his mind
began to figure to him visions that had been hitherto unknown to
faculties occupied by no other images than those of rivalry,
turbulence, and strife.  Scenes called into being by Antonina's
lightest and hastiest expressions, now rose vague and shadowy before
his brooding spirit.  Lovely places of earth that he had visited and
forgotten now returned to his recollection, idealised and refined as he
thought of her.  She appeared to his mind in every allurement of
action, fulfilling all the duties and enjoying all the pleasures that
she had proposed to him.  He imagined her happy and healthful,
journeying gaily by his side in the fresh morning, with rosy cheek and
elastic step; he imagined her delighting him by her promised songs,
enlivening him by her eloquent words, in the mellow stillness of
evening; he imagined her sleeping, soft and warm and still, in his
protecting arms--ever happy and ever gentle; girl in years, and woman
in capacities; at once lover and companion, teacher and pupil, follower
and guide!

Such she might have been once!  What was she now?


Was she sinking under her loneliness, perishing from exposure and
fatigue, repulsed by the cruel, or mocked by the unthinking?  To all
these perils and miseries had he exposed her; and to what end?  To
maintain the uncertain favour, to preserve the unwelcome friendship, of
a woman abandoned even by the most common and intuitive virtues of her
sex; whose frantic craving for revenge, confounded justice with
treachery, innocence with guilt, helplessness with tyranny; whose
claims of nation and relationship should have been forfeited in his
estimation, by the openly-confessed malignity of her designs, at the
fatal moment when she had communicated them to him in all their
atrocity, before the walls of Rome.  He groaned in despair, as he
thought on this, the most unworthy of the necessities, to which the
forsaken girl had been sacrificed.

Soon, however, his mind reverted from such reflections as these, to his
own duties and his own renown; and here his remorse became partially
lightened, though his sorrow remained unchanged.

Wonderful as had been the influence of Antonina's presence and
Antonina's words over the Goth, they had not yet acquired power enough
to smother in him entirely the warlike instincts of his sex and nation,
or to vanquish the strong and hostile promptings of education and
custom.  She had gifted him with new emotions, and awakened him to new
thought; she had aroused all the dormant gentleness of his disposition
to war against the rugged indifference, the reckless energy, that
teaching and example had hitherto made a second nature to his heart.
She had wound her way into his mind, brightening its dark places,
enlarging its narrow recesses, beautifying its unpolished treasures.
She had created, she had refined, during her short hours of
communication with him, but she had not lured his disposition entirely
from its old habits and its old attachments; she had not yet stripped
off the false glitter from barbarian strife, or the pomp from martial
renown; she had not elevated the inferior intellectual, to the height
of the superior moral faculties, in his inward composition.  Submitted
almost impartially to the alternate and conflicting dominion of the two
masters, Love and Duty, he at once regretted Antonina, and yet clung
mechanically to his old obedience to those tyrannic requirements of
nation and name, which had occasioned her loss.

Oppressed by his varying emotions, destitute alike of consolation and
advice, the very inaction of his present position sensibly depressed
him.  He rose impatiently, and buckling on his weapons, sought to
escape from his thoughts, by abandoning the scene under the influence
of which they had been first aroused.  Turning his back upon the city,
he directed his steps at random, through the complicated labyrinth of
streets, composing the extent of the deserted suburbs.

After he had passed through the dwellings comprised in the occupation
of the Gothic lines, and had gained those situated nearer to the
desolate country beyond, the scene around him became impressive enough
to have absorbed the attention of any man not wholly occupied by other
and more important objects of contemplation.

The loneliness he now beheld on all sides, was not the loneliness of
ruin--the buildings near him were in perfect repair; it was not the
loneliness of pestilence--there were no corpses strewn over the
untrodden pavements of the streets; it was not the loneliness of
seclusion--there were no barred windows, and few closed doors; it was a
solitude of human annihilation.  The open halls were unapproached; the
benches before the wine-shops were unoccupied; remains of gaudy
household wares still stood on the counters of the street booths,
watched by none, bought by none; particles of bread and meat
(treasures, fated to become soon of greater value than silver and gold,
to beleaguered Rome) rotted here in the open air, like garbage upon
dunghills; children's toys, women's ornaments, purses, money,
love-tokens, precious manuscripts, lay scattered hither and thither in
the public ways, dropped and abandoned by their different owners, in
the hurry of their sudden and universal flight.  Every deserted street
was eloquent of darling projects desperately resigned, of valued
labours miserably deserted, of delighting enjoyments irretrievably
lost.  The place was forsaken even by those household gods of rich and
poor, its domestic animals.  They had either followed their owners into
the city, or strayed, unhindered and unwatched, into the country
beyond.  Mansion, bath, and circus, displayed their gaudy pomp and
luxurious comfort in vain; not even a wandering Goth was to be seen
near their empty halls. For, with such a prospect before them as the
subjugation of Rome, the army had caught the infection of its leader's
enthusiasm for his exalted task, and willingly obeyed his commands for
suspending the pillage of the suburbs, disdaining the comparatively
worthless treasures around them, attainable at any time, when they felt
that the rich coffers of Rome herself were now fast opening to their
eager hands.  Voiceless and noiseless, unpeopled and unravaged, lay the
far-famed suburbs of the greatest city of the universe, sunk alike in
the night of Nature, the night of Fortune, and the night of Glory!

Saddening and impressive as was the prospect thus presented to the eyes
of the young Goth, it failed to weaken the powerful influence that his
evening's meditations yet held over his mind.  As, during the hours
that were passed, the image of the forsaken girl had dissipated the
remembrance of the duties he had performed, and opposed the
contemplation of the commands he was yet to fulfil, so it now denied to
his faculties any impressions from the lonely scene, beheld, yet
unnoticed, which spread around him.  Still, as he passed through the
gloomy streets, his vain regrets and self-accusations, his natural
predilections and acquired attachments, ruled over him and contended
within him, as sternly and as unceasingly as in the first moments when
they had arisen with the evening, during his sojourn in the terrace of
the deserted house.

He had now arrived at the extremest boundary of the buildings in the
suburbs.  Before him lay an uninterrupted prospect of smooth, shining
fields, and soft, hazy, indefinable woods.  At one side of him were
some vineyards and cottage gardens; at the other was a solitary house,
the outermost of all the abodes in his immediate vicinity.  Dark and
cheerless as it was, he regarded it for some time with the mechanical
attention of a man more occupied in thought than
observation,--gradually advancing towards it in the moody abstraction
of his reflections, until he unconsciously paused before the low range
of irregular steps which led to its entrance door.

Startled from its meditations by his sudden propinquity to the object
that he had unwittingly approached, he now, for the first time,
examined the lonely abode before him with real attention.

There was nothing remarkable about the house, save the extreme
desolateness of its appearance, which seemed to arise partly from its
isolated position, and partly from the unusual absence of all
decoration on its external front.  It was too extensive to have been
the dwelling of a poor man, too void of pomp and ornament to have been
a mansion of the rich.  It might, perhaps, have belonged to some
citizen, or foreigner, or the middle class--some moody Northman, some
solitary Egyptian, some scheming Jew.  Yet, though it was not
possessed, in itself, of any remarkable or decided character, the Goth
experienced a mysterious, almost an eager curiosity to examine its
interior.  He could assign no cause, discover no excuse for the act, as
he slowly mounted the steps before him.  Some invisible and
incomprehensible magnet attracted him to the dwelling.  If his return
had been suddenly commanded by Alaric himself; if evidences of
indubitable treachery had lurked about the solitary place, at the
moment when he thrust open its unbarred door, he felt that he must
still have proceeded upon his onward course.  The next instant he
entered the house.  The light streamed through the open entrance into
the gloomy hall; the night-wind, rushing upon its track, blew shrill
and dreary among the stone pillars, and in the hidden crevices and
untenanted chambers above.  Not a sign of life appeared, not a sound of
a footstep was audible, not even an article of household use was to be
seen.  The deserted suburbs rose without, like a wilderness; and this
empty house looked within, like a sepulchre--void of corpses, and yet
eloquent of death!

There was an inexplicable fascination to the eyes of the Goth about
this vault-like, solitary hall. He stood motionless at its entrance,
gazing dreamily at the gloomy prospect before him, until a strong gust
of wind suddenly forced the outer door further backwards, and at the
same moment admitted a larger stream of light.

The place was not empty.  In a corner of the hall, hitherto sunk in
darkness, crouched a shadowy form.  It was enveloped in a dark garment,
and huddled up into an indefinable and unfamiliar shape.  Nothing
appeared on it, as a denoting sign of humanity, but one pale hand,
holding the black drapery together, and relieved against it in almost
ghastly contrast under the cold light of the moon.


Vague remembrances of the awful superstitions of his nation's ancient
worship, hurried over the memory of the young Goth, at the first moment
of his discovery of the ghost-like occupant of the hall.  As he stood
in fixed attention before the motionless figure, it soon began to be
endowed with the same strange influence over his will, that the lonely
house had already exerted. He advanced slowly towards the crouching
form.

It never stirred at the noise of his approach.  The pale hand still
held the mantle over the compressed figure, with the same rigid
immobility of grasp.  Brave as he was, Hermanric shuddered as he bent
down and touched the bloodless, icy fingers.  At that action, as if
endowed with instant vitality from contact with a living being, the
figure suddenly started up.

Then, the folds of the dark mantle fell back, disclosing a face as pale
in hue as the stone pillars around it; and the voice of the solitary
being became audible, uttering in faint, monotonous accents, these
words:--

'He has forgotten and abandoned me!--slay me if you will!--I am ready
to die!'

Broken, untuned as it was, there yet lurked in that voice a tone of its
old music, there beamed in that vacant and heavy eye a ray of its
native gentleness.  With a sudden exclamation of compassion and
surprise, the Goth stepped forward, raised the trembling outcast in his
arms; and, in the impulse of the moment quitting the solitary house,
stood the next instant on the firm earth, and under the starry sky,
once more united to the charge that he had abandoned--to Antonina whom
he had lost.

He spoke to her, caressed her, entreated her pardon, assured her of his
future care; but she neither answered nor recognised him.  She never
looked in his face, never moved in his arms, never petitioned for
mercy. She gave no sign of life or being, saving that she moaned at
regular intervals in piteous accents:--'He has forgotten and abandoned
me!' as if that one simple expression comprised in itself, her
acknowledgment of the uselessness of her life, and her dirge for her
expected death.

The Goth's countenance whitened to his very lips.  He began to fear
that her faculties had sunk under her trials.  He hurried on with her
with trembling steps towards the open country, for he nourished a
dreamy, intuitive hope, that the sight of those woods and fields and
mountains which she had extolled to him, in her morning's entreaty for
protection, might aid in restoring her suspended consciousness, if she
now looked on them.

He ran forward, until he had left the suburbs at least half a mile
behind him, and had reached an eminence, bounded on each side by high
grass banks and clustering woods, and commanding a narrow, yet various
prospect, of the valley ground beneath, and the fertile plains that
extended beyond.

Here the warrior paused with his burden; and, seating himself on the
bank, once more attempted to calm the girl's continued bewilderment and
terror.  He thought not on his sentinels, whom he had abandoned--on his
absence from the suburbs, which might be perceived and punished by an
unexpected visit, at his deserted quarters, from his superiors in the
camp.  The social influence that sways the world; the fragile idol at
whose shrine pride learns to bow, and insensibility to feel; the soft,
grateful influence of yielding nature yet eternal rule--the influence
of woman, source alike of virtues and crimes, of earthly glories and
earthly disasters--had, in this moment of anguish and expectation,
silenced in him every appeal of duty, and overthrown every obstacle of
selfish doubt.  He now spoke to Antonina as alluringly as a woman, as
gently as a child.  He caressed her as warmly as a lover, as cheerfully
as a brother, as kindly as a father. He--the rough, northern warrior,
whose education had been of arms, and whose youthful aspirations had
been taught to point towards strife and bloodshed and glory--even he
was now endowed with the tender eloquence of pity and love--with
untiring, skilful care--with calm, enduring patience.


Gently and unceasingly he plied his soothing task; and soon, to his joy
and triumph, he beheld the approaching reward of his efforts, in the
slow changes that became gradually perceptible in the girl's face and
manner.  She raised herself in his arms, looked up fixedly and vacantly
into his face, then round upon the bright, quiet landscape, then back
again more stedfastly upon her companion; and at length, trembling
violently, she whispered softly and several times the young Goth's
name, glancing at him anxiously and apprehensively, as if she feared
and doubted while she recognised him.

'You are bearing me to my death,'--said she suddenly.  'You, who once
protected me--you, who forsook me!--You are luring me into the power of
the woman who thirsts for my blood!--Oh, it is horrible--horrible!'

She paused, averted her face, and shuddering violently, disengaged
herself from his arms.  After an interval, she continued:--

'Through the long day, and in the beginning of the cold night, I have
waited in one solitary place for the death that is in store for me!  I
have suffered all the loneliness of my hours of expectation, without
complaint; I have listened with little dread, and no grief, for the
approach of my enemy who has sworn that she will shed my blood!  Having
none to love me, and being a stranger in the land of my own nation, I
have nothing to live for!  But it is a bitter misery to me to behold in
you the fulfiller of my doom; to be snatched by the hand of Hermanric
from the heritage of life that I have so long struggled to preserve!'

Her voice had altered, as she pronounced these words, to an impressive
lowness and mournfulness of tone.  Its quiet, saddened accents were
expressive of an almost divine resignation and sorrow; they seemed to
be attuned to a mysterious and untraceable harmony with the melancholy
stillness of the night-landscape.  As she now stood looking up with
pale, calm countenance, and gentle, tearless eyes, into the sky whose
moonlight brightness shone softly over her form, the Virgin watching
the approach of her angel messenger could hardly have been adorned with
a more pure and simple loveliness, than now dwelt over the features of
Numerian's forsaken child.

No longer master of his agitation; filled with awe, grief, and despair,
as he looked on the victim of his heartless impatience; Hermanric bowed
himself at the girl's feet, and, in the passionate utterance of real
remorse, offered up his supplications for pardon and his assurances of
protection and love.  All that the reader has already learned--the
bitter self-upbraidings of his evening, the sorrowful wanderings of his
night, the mysterious attraction that led him to the solitary house,
his joy at once more discovering his lost charge--all these confessions
he now poured forth in the simple yet powerful eloquence of strong
emotion and true regret.

Gradually and amazedly, as she listened to his words, Antonina awoke
from her abstraction. Even the expression of his countenance and the
earnestness of his manner, viewed by the intuitive penetration of her
sex, wrought with kind and healing influence on her mind.  She started
suddenly, a bright flush flew over her colourless cheeks; she bent
down, and looked earnestly and wistfully into the Goth's face.  Her
lips moved, but her quick convulsive breathing stifled the words that
she vainly endeavoured to form.

'Yes,' continued Hermanric, rising and drawing her towards him again,
'you shall never mourn, never fear, never weep more!  Though you have
lost your father, and the people of your nation are as strangers to
you, though you have been threatened and forsaken, you shall still be
beautiful--still be happy; for I will watch you, and you shall never be
harmed; I will labour for you, and you shall never want!  People and
kindred--fame and duty, I will abandon them all to make atonement to
you!'

Its youthful freshness and hope returned to the girl's heart, as water
to the long-parched spring, when the young warrior ceased.  The tears
stood in her eyes, but she neither sighed nor spoke. Her frame trembled
all over with the excess of her astonishment and delight, as she still
steadfastly looked on him and still listened intently as he proceeded:--


'Fear, then, no longer for your safety--Goisvintha, whom you dread, is
far from us; she knows not that we are here; she cannot track our
footsteps now, to threaten or to harm you!  Remember no more how you
have suffered and I have sinned!  Think only how bitterly I have
repented our morning's separation, and how gladly I welcome our meeting
of to-night!  Oh, Antonina! you are beautiful with a wondrous
loveliness, you are young with a perfected and unchildlike youth, your
words fall upon my ear with the music of a song of the olden time; it
is like a dream of the spirits that my fathers worshipped, when I look
up and behold you at my side!'

An expression of mingled confusion, pleasure, and surprise, flushed the
girl's half-averted countenance as she listened to the Goth.  She rose
with a smile of ineffable gratitude and delight, and pointed to the
prospect beyond, as she softly rejoined:--

'Let us go a little further onward, where the moonlight shines over the
meadow below.  My heart is bursting in this shadowy place!  Let us seek
the light that is yonder; it seems happy like me!'

They walked forward; and as they went, she told him again of the
sorrows of her past day; of her lonely and despairing progress from his
tent to the solitary house where he had found her in the night, and
where she had resigned herself from the first to meet a death that had
little horror for her then.  There was no thought of reproach, no
utterance of complaint, in this renewal of her melancholy narration.
It was solely that she might luxuriate afresh in those delighting
expressions of repentance and devotion, which she knew that it would
call forth from the lips of Hermanric, that she now thought of
addressing him once more with the tale of her grief.

As they still went onward; as she listened to the rude fervent
eloquence of the language of the Goth; as she looked on the deep repose
of the landscape, and the soft transparency of the night sky; her mind,
ever elastic under the shock of the most violent emotions, ever ready
to regain its wonted healthfulness and hope--now recovered its old
tone, and re-assumed its accustomed balance.  Again her memory began to
store itself with its beloved remembrances, and her heart to rejoice in
its artless longings and visionary thoughts.  In spite of all her fears
and all her sufferings, she now walked on blest in a disposition that
woe had no shadow to darken long, and neglect no influence to warp;
still as happy in herself; even yet as forgetful of her past, as
hopeful for her future, as on that first evening when we beheld her in
her father's garden, singing to the music of her lute.

Insensibly as they proceeded, they had diverged from the road, had
entered a bye-path, and now stood before a gate which led to a small
farm house, surrounded by its gardens and vineyards, and, like the
suburbs that they had quitted, deserted by its inhabitants on the
approach of the Goths.  They passed through the gate, and arriving at
the plot of ground in front of the house, paused for a moment to look
around them.

The meadows had been already stripped of their grass, and the young
trees of their branches by the foragers of the invading army, but here
the destruction of the little property had been stayed. The house with
its neat thatched roof and shutters of variegated wood, the garden with
its small stock of fruit and its carefully tended beds of rare flowers,
designed probably to grace the feast of a nobleman or the statue of a
martyr, had presented no allurements to the rough tastes of Alaric's
soldiery.  Not a mark of a footstep appeared on the turf before the
house door; the ivy crept in its wonted luxuriance about the pillars of
the lowly porch; and as Hermanric and Antonina walked towards the
fish-pond at the extremity of the garden, the few water-fowl placed
there by the owners of the cottage, came swimming towards the bank, as
if to welcome in their solitude the appearance of a human form.


Far from being melancholy, there was something soothing and attractive
about the loneliness of the deserted farm.  Its ravaged outhouses and
plundered meadows, which might have appeared desolate by day, were so
distanced, softened, and obscured, by the atmosphere of night, that
they presented no harsh contrast to the prevailing smoothness and
luxuriance of the landscape around.  As Antonina beheld the brightened
fields and the shadowed woods, here mingled, there succeeding each
other, stretched far onward and onward until they joined the distant
mountains, that eloquent voice of nature, whose audience is the human
heart, and whose theme is eternal love, spoke inspiringly to her
attentive senses.  She stretched out her arms as she looked with steady
and enraptured gaze upon the bright view before her, as if she longed
to see its beauties resolved into a single and living form--into a
spirit human enough to be addressed, and visible enough to be adored.

'Beautiful earth!' she murmured softly to herself, 'Thy mountains are
the watch-towers of angels, thy moonlight is the shadow of God!'

Her eyes filled with bright, happy tears; she turned to Hermanric, who
stood watching her, and continued:--

'Have you never thought that light, and air, and the perfume of
flowers, might contain some relics of the beauties of Eden that escaped
with Eve, when she wandered into the lonely world? They glowed and
breathed for her, and she lived and was beautiful in them!  They were
united to one another, as the sunbeam is united to the earth that it
warms; and could the sword of the cherubim have sundered them at once?
When Eve went forth, did the closed gates shut back in the empty
Paradise, all the beauty that had clung, and grown, and shone round
her?  Did no ray of her native light steal forth after her into the
desolateness of the world?  Did no print of her lost flowers remain on
the bosom they must once have pressed?  It cannot be!  A part of her
possessions of Eden must have been spared to her with a part of her
life.  She must have refined the void air of the earth when she entered
it, with a breath of the fragrant breezes, and gleam of the truant
sunshine of her lost Paradise!  They must have strengthened and
brightened, and must now be strengthening and brightening with the slow
lapse of mortal years, until, in the time when earth itself will be an
Eden, they shall be made one again with the hidden world of perfection,
from which they are yet separated.  So that, even now, as I look forth
over the landscape, the light that I behold has in it a glow of
Paradise, and this flower that I gather a breath of the fragrance that
once stole over the senses of my first mother, Eve!'

Though she paused here, as if in expectation of an answer, the Goth
preserved an unbroken silence.  Neither by nature nor position was he
capable of partaking the wild fancies and aspiring thoughts, drawn by
the influences of the external world from their concealment in
Antonina's heart.

The mystery of his present situation; his vague remembrance of the
duties he had abandoned; the uncertainty of his future fortunes and
future fate; the presence of the lonely being so inseparably connected
with his past emotions and his existence to come, so strangely
attractive by her sex, her age, her person, her misfortunes, and her
endowments; all contributed to bewilder his faculties.  Goisvintha, the
army, the besieged city, the abandoned suburbs, seemed to hem him in
like a circle of shadowy and threatening judgments; and in the midst of
them stood the young denizen of Rome, with her eloquent countenance and
her inspiring words, ready to hurry him, he knew not whither, and able
to influence him, he felt not how.

Unconsciously interpreting her companion's silence into a wish to
change the scene and the discourse, Antonina, after lingering over the
view from the garden for a moment longer, led the way back towards the
untenanted house.  They removed the wooden padlock from the door of the
dwelling, and guided by the brilliant moonlight, entered its principal
apartment.


The homely adornments of the little room had remained undisturbed, and
dimly distinguishable though they now were, gave it to the eyes of the
two strangers, the same aspect of humble comfort which had probably
once endeared it to its exiled occupants.  As Hermanric seated himself
by Antonina's side on the simple couch which made the principal piece
of furniture in the place, and looked forth from the window over the
same view that they had beheld in the garden, the magic stillness and
novelty of the scene now began to affect his slow perceptions, as they
had already influenced the finer and more sensitive faculties of the
thoughtful girl.  New hopes and tranquil ideas arose in his young mind,
and communicated an unusual gentleness to his expression, an unusual
softness to his voice, as he thus addressed his silent companion:--

'With such a home as this, with this garden, with that country beyond,
with no warfare, no stern teachers, no enemy to threaten you; with
companions and occupations that you loved--tell me, Antonina, would not
your happiness be complete?'

As he looked round at the girl to listen to her reply, he saw that her
countenance had changed. Their past expression of deep grief had again
returned to her features.  Her eyes were fixed on the short dagger that
hung over the Goth's breast, which seemed to have suddenly aroused in
her a train of melancholy and unwelcome thoughts.  When she at length
spoke, it was in a mournful and altered voice, and with a mingled
expression of resignation and despair.

'You must leave me--we must be parted again,' said she; 'the sight of
your weapons has reminded me of all that until now I had forgotten, of
all that I have left in Rome, of all that you have abandoned before the
city walls.  Once I thought we might have escaped together from the
turmoil and the danger around us, but now I know that it is better that
you should depart! Alas! for my hopes and my happiness, I must be left
alone once more!'

She paused for an instant, struggling to retain her self-possession,
and then continued:--

'Yes, you must quit me, and return to your post before the city; for in
the day of assault there will be none to care for my father but you!
Until I know that he is safe, until I can see him once more, and ask
him for pardon, and entreat him for love, I dare not remove from the
perilous precincts of Rome!  Return, then, to your duties, and your
companions, and your occupations of martial renown; and do not forget
Numerian when the city is assailed, nor Antonina, who is left to think
on you in the solitary plains!'

She rose from her place, as if to set the example of departing; but her
strength and resolution both failed her, and she sank down again on the
couch, incapable of making another movement, or uttering another word.

Strong and conflicting emotions passed over the heart of the Goth.  The
language of the girl had quickened the remembrance of his
half-forgotten duties, and strengthened the failing influence of his
old predilections of education and race.  Both conscience and
inclination now opposed his disputing her urgent and unselfish request.
For a few minutes he remained in deep reflection; then he rose and
looked earnestly from the window; then back again upon Antonina and the
room they occupied.  At length, as if animated by a sudden
determination, he again approached his companion, and thus addressed
her:--

'It is right that I should return.  I will do your bidding, and depart
for the camp (but not till the break of day), while you, Antonina,
remain in concealment and in safety here.  None can come hither to
disturb you.  The Goths will not revisit the fields they have already
stripped; the husbandman who owns this dwelling is imprisoned in the
beleaguered city; the peasants from the country beyond dare not
approach so near to the invading hosts; and Goisvintha, whom you dread,
knows not even of the existence of such a refuge as this.  Here, though
lonely, you will be secure; here you can await my return, when each
succeeding night gives me the opportunity of departing from the camp;
and here I will warn you beforehand, if the city is devoted to an
assault.  Though solitary, you will not be abandoned--we shall not be
parted one from the other. Often and often I shall return to look on
you, and to listen to you, and to love you!  You will be happier here,
even in this lonely place, than in the former home that you have lost
through your father's wrath!'


'Oh!  I will willingly remain--I will joyfully await you!' cried the
girl, raising her beaming eyes to Hermanric's face.  'I will never
speak mournfully to you again; I will never remind you more of all that
I have suffered, and all that I have lost!  How merciful you were to
me, when I first saw you in your tent--how doubly merciful you are to
me here!  I am proud when I look on your stature, and your strength,
and your heavy weapons, and know that you are happy in remaining with
me; that you will succour my father; that you will return from your
glittering encampments to this farm-house, where I am left to await
you!  Already I have forgotten all that has happened to me of woe;
already I am more joyful than ever I was in my life before!  See, I am
no longer weeping in sorrow!  If there are any tears still on my
cheeks, they are the tears of gladness that every one welcomes--tears
to sing and rejoice in!'

She ceased abruptly, as if words failed to give expression to her new
delight.  All the gloomy emotions that had oppressed her but a short
time before had now completely vanished; and the young, fresh heart,
superior still to despair and woe, basked as happily again in its
native atmosphere of joy as a bird in the sunlight of morning and
spring.

Then, when after an interval of delay their former tranquility had
returned to them, how softly and lightly the quiet hours of the
remaining night flowed onward to the two watchers in the lonely house!
How gladly the delighted girl disclosed her hidden thoughts, and poured
forth her innocent confessions, to the dweller among other nations and
the child of other impressions than her own! All the various
reflections aroused in her mind by the natural objects she had secretly
studied, by the mighty imagery of her Bible lore, by the gloomy
histories of saints' visions and martyrs' sufferings, which she had
learnt and pondered over by her father's side, were now drawn from
their treasured places in her memory, and addressed to the ear of the
Goth.  As the child flies to the nurse with the story of its first toy;
as the girl resorts to the sister with the confession of her first
love; as the poet hurries to the friend with the plan of his first
composition; so did Antonina seek the attention of Hermanric with the
first outward revealings enjoyed by her faculties and the first
acknowledgment of her emotions liberated from her heart.

The longer the Goth listened to her, the more perfect became the
enchantment of her words, half struggling into poetry, and her voice
half gliding into music.  As her low, still, varying tones wound
smoothly into his ear, his thoughts suddenly and intuitively reverted
to her formerly expressed remembrances of her lost lute, inciting him
to ask her, with new interest and animation, of the manner of her
acquisition of that knowledge of song, which she had already assured
him that she possessed.

'I have learned many odes of many poets,' said she, quickly and
confusedly avoiding the mention of Vetranio, which a direct answer to
Hermanric's question must have produced, 'but I remember none
perfectly, save those whose theme is of spirits and of other worlds,
and of the invisible beauty that we think of but cannot see.  Of the
few that I know of these, there is one that I first learned and loved
most.  I will sing it, that you may be assured I will not fail to you
in my promised art.'

She hesitated for a moment.  Sorrowful remembrances of the events that
had followed the utterance of the last notes she sang in her father's
garden, swelled within her, and held her speechless.  Soon, however,
after a short interval of silence, she recovered her self-possession,
and began to sing, in low tremulous tones, that harmonised well with
the character of the words and the strain of the melody which she had
chosen.

THE MISSION OF THE TEAR


I.

    The skies were its birth-place--the TEAR was the child
    Of the dark maiden SORROW, by young JOY beguil'd;
    It was born in convulsion; 'twas nurtur'd in woe;
    And the world was yet young when it wander'd below.


II.

    No angel-bright guardians watch'd over its birth,
    Ere yet it was suffer'd to roam upon earth;
    No spirits of gladness its soft form caress'd;
    SIGHS mourned round its cradle, and hush'd it to rest.


III.

    Though JOY might endeavour, with kisses and wiles,
    To lure it away to his household of smiles:
    From the daylight he lived in it turn'd in affright,
    To nestle with SORROW in climates of night.


IV.

    When it came upon earth, 'twas to choose a career,
    The brightest and best that is left to a TEAR;
    To hallow delight, and bestow the relief
    Denied by despair to the fulness of grief.


V.

    Few repell'd it--some bless'd it--wherever it came;
    Whether soft'ning their sorrow, or soothing their shame;
    And the joyful themselves, though its name they might fear,
    Oft welcom'd the calming approach of the TEAR!


VI.

    Years on years have worn onward, as--watch'd from above--
    Speeds that meek spirit yet on its labour of love;
    Still the exile of Heav'n, it ne'er shall away,
    Every heart has a home for it, roam where it may!

For the first few minutes after she had concluded the ode, Hermanric
was hardly conscious that she had ceased; and when at length she looked
up at him, her mute petition for approval had an eloquence which would
have been marred to the Goth at that moment, by the utterance of single
word. A rapture, an inspiration, a new life moved within him.  The hour
and the scene completed what the magic of the song had begun.  His
expression now glowed with a southern warmth; his words assumed a Roman
fervour.  Gradually, as they discoursed, the voice of the girl was less
frequently audible.  A change was passing over her spirit; from the
teacher, she was now becoming the pupil.

As she still listened to the Goth, as she felt the birth of new
feelings within her while he spoke, her cheeks glowed, her features
lightened up, her very form seemed to freshen and expand.  No intruding
thought or awakening remembrance disturbed her rapt attention.  No cold
doubt, no gloomy hesitation, appeared in her companion's words.  The
one listened, the other spoke, with the whole heart, the undivided
soul.  While a world-wide revolution was concentrating its hurricane
forces around them; while the city of an Empire tottered already to its
tremendous fall; while Goisvintha plotted new revenge; while Ulpius
toiled for his revolution of bloodshed and ruin; while all these dark
materials of public misery and private strife seethed and strengthened
around them, they could as completely forget the stormy outward world,
in themselves; they could think as serenely of tranquil love; the kiss
could be given as passionately and returned as tenderly, as if the lot
of their existence had been cast in the pastoral days of the shepherd
poets, and the future of their duties and enjoyments was securely
awaiting them in a land of eternal peace!



CHAPTER 14.

THE FAMINE.

The end of November is approaching.  Nearly a month has elapsed since
the occurrence of the events mentioned in the last chapter, yet still
the Gothic lines stretch round the city walls.  Rome, that we left
haughty and luxurious even while ruin threatened her at her gates, has
now suffered a terrible and warning change.  As we approach her again,
woe, horror, and desolation have already gone forth to shadow her lofty
palaces and to darken her brilliant streets.


Over Pomp that spurned it, over Pleasure that defied it, over Plenty
that scared it in its secret rounds, the spectre Hunger has now risen
triumphant at last.  Day by day has the city's insufficient allowance
of food been more and more sparingly doled out; higher and higher has
risen the value of the coarsest and simplest provision; the hoarded
supplies that pity and charity have already bestowed to cheer the
sinking people have reached their utmost limits.  For the rich, there
is still corn in the city--treasure of food to be bartered for treasure
of gold.  For the poor, man's natural nourishment exists no more; the
season of famine's loathsome feasts, the first days of the sacrifice of
choice to necessity have darkly and irretrievably begun.

It is morning.  A sad and noiseless throng is advancing over the cold
flagstones of the great square before the Basilica of St. John Lateran.
The members of the assembly speak in whispers. The weak are
tearful--the strong are gloomy--they all move with slow and languid
gait, and hold in their arms their dogs or other domestic animals.  On
the outskirts of the crowd march the enfeebled guards of the city,
grasping in their rough hands rare favourite birds of gaudy plumage and
melodious note, and followed by children and young girls vainly and
piteously entreating that their favourites may be restored.

This strange procession pauses, at length, before a mighty caldron
slung over a great fire in the middle of the square, round which stand
the city butchers with bare knives, and the trustiest men of the Roman
legions with threatening weapons.  A proclamation is then repeated,
commanding the populace who have no money left to purchase food, to
bring up their domestic animals to be boiled together over the public
furnace, for the sake of contributing to the public support.

The next minute, in pursuance of this edict, the dumb favourites of the
crowd passed from the owner's caressing hand into the butcher's ready
grasp.  The faint cries of the animals, starved like their masters,
mingled for a few moments with the sobs and lamentations of the women
and children, to whom the greater part of them belonged.  For, in this
the first stage of their calamities, that severity of hunger which
extinguishes pity and estranges grief was unknown to the populace; and
though fast losing spirit, they had not yet sunk to the depths of
ferocious despair which even now were invisibly opening between them.
A thousand pangs were felt, a thousand humble tragedies were acted, in
the brief moments of separation between guardian and charge.  The child
snatched its last kiss of the bird that had sung over its bed; the dog
looked its last entreaty for protection from the mistress who had once
never met it without a caress.  Then came the short interval of agony
and death, then the steam rose fiercely from the greedy caldron, and
then the people for a time dispersed; the sorrowful to linger near the
confines of the fire, and the hungry to calm their impatience by a
visit to the neighbouring church.

The marble aisles of the noble basilica held a gloomy congregation.
Three small candles were alone lighted on the high altar.  No sweet
voices sang melodious anthems or exulting hymns. The monks, in hoarse
tones and monotonous harmonics, chanted the penitential psalms.  Here
and there knelt a figure clothed in mourning robes, and absorbed in
secret prayer; but over the majority of the assembly either blank
despondency or sullen inattention universally prevailed.

As the last dull notes of the last psalm died away among the lofty
recesses of the church, a procession of pious Christians appeared at
the door and advanced slowly to the altar.  It was composed both of men
and women barefooted, clothed in black garments, and with ashes
scattered over their dishevelled hair.  Tears flowed from their eyes,
and they beat their breasts as they bowed their foreheads on the marble
pavement of the altar steps.


This humble public expression of penitence under the calamity that had
now fallen on the city was, however, confined only to its few really
religious inhabitants, and commanded neither sympathy nor attention
from the heartless and obstinate population of Rome.  Some still
cherished the delusive hope of assistance from the court at Ravenna;
others believed that the Goths would ere long impatiently abandon their
protracted blockade, to stretch their ravages over the rich and
unprotected fields of Southern Italy.  But the same blind confidence in
the lost terrors of the Roman name, the same fierce and reckless
determination to defy the Goths to the very last, sustained the sinking
courage and suppressed the despondent emotions of the great mass of the
suffering people, from the beggar who prowled for garbage, to the
patrician who sighed over his new and unwelcome nourishment of simple
bread.

While the penitents who formed the procession above described were yet
engaged in the performance of their unnoticed and unshared duties of
penance and prayer, a priest ascended the great pulpit of the basilica,
to attempt the ungrateful task of preaching patience and piety to the
hungry multitude at his feet.

He began his sermon by retracing the principal occurrences in Rome
since the beginning of the Gothic blockade.  He touched cautiously upon
the first event that stained the annals of the besieged city--the
execution of the widow of the Roman general Stilicho, on the
unauthorised suspicion that she had held treasonable communication with
Alaric and the invading army; he noticed lengthily the promises of
assistance transmitted from Ravenna, after the perpetration of that
ill-omened act. He spoke admiringly of the skill displayed by the
government in making the necessary and immediate reductions in the
daily supplies of food; he lamented the terrible scarcity which
followed, too inevitably, those seasonable reductions.  He pronounced
an eloquent eulogium on the noble charity of Laeta, the widow of the
Emperor Gratian, who, with her mother, devoted the store of provisions
obtained by their imperial revenues to succouring, at that important
juncture, the starving and desponding poor:  he admitted the new
scarcity, consequent on the dissipation of Laeta's stores; deplored the
present necessity of sacrificing the domestic animals of the citizens;
condemned the enormous prices now demanded for the last remnants of
wholesome food that were garnered up; announced it as the firm
persuasion of every one that a few days more would bring help from
Ravenna; and ended his address by informing his auditory that, as they
had suffered so much already, they could patiently suffer a little
more, and that if, after this, they were so ill-fated as to sink under
their calamities, they would feel it a noble consolation to die in the
cause of Catholic and Apostolic Rome, and would assuredly be canonised
as saints and martyrs by the next generation of the pious in the first
interval of fertile and restoring peace.

Flowing as was the eloquence of this oration, it yet possessed not the
power of inducing one among those whom it addressed to forget the
sensation of his present suffering, and to fix his attention on the
vision of future advantage, spread before all listeners by the fluent
priest.  With the same murmurs of querulous complaint, and the same
expressions of impotent hatred and defiance of the Goths which had
fallen from them as they entered the church, the populace now departed
from it, to receive from the city officers the stinted allowance of
repugnant food, prepared for their hunger from the caldron in the
public square.

And see, already from other haunts in the neighbouring quarter of Rome
their fellow-citizens press onward at the given signal, to meet them
round the caldron's sides!  The languid sentinel, released from duty,
turns his gaze from the sickening prospect of the Gothic camp, and
hastens to share the public meal; the baker starts from sleeping on his
empty counter, the beggar rises from his kennel in the butcher's vacant
out-house, the slave deserts his place by the smouldering
kitchen-fire--all hurry to swell the numbers of the guests that are
bidden to the wretched feast. Rapidly and confusedly, the congregation
in the basilica pours through its lofty gates; the priests and
penitents retire from the altar's foot, and in the great church, so
crowded but a few moments before, there now only remains the figure of
a solitary man.


Since the commencement of the service, neither addressed nor observed,
this lonely being has faltered round the circle of the congregation,
gazing long and wistfully over the faces that met his view.  Now that
the sermon is ended, and the last lingerer has quitted the church, he
turns from the spot whence he has anxiously watched the different
members of the departing throng, and feebly crouches down on his knees
at the base of a pillar that is near him.  His eyes are hollow, and his
cheeks are wan; his thin grey hairs are few and fading on his aged
head. He makes no effort to follow the crowd and partake their
sustenance; no one is left behind to urge, no one returns to lead him
to the public meal.  Though weak and old, he is perfectly forsaken in
his loneliness, perfectly unsolaced in his grief; his friends have lost
all trace of him; his enemies have ceased to fear or to hate him now.
As he crouches by the pillar alone, he covers his forehead with his
pale, palsied hands, his dim eyes fill with bitter tears, and such
expressions as these are ever and anon faintly audible in the intervals
of his heavy sighs:  'Day after day!  Day after day!  And my lost one
is not found! my loved and wronged one is not restored!  Antonina!
Antonina!'

Some days after the public distribution of food in the square of St.
John Lateran, Vetranio's favourite freedman might have been observed
pursuing his way homeward, sadly and slowly, to his master's palace.

It was not without cause that the pace of the intelligent Carrio was
funereal and his expression disconsolate.  Even during the short period
that had elapsed since the scene in the basilica already described, the
condition of the city had altered fearfully for the worse.  The famine
advanced with giant strides; every succeeding hour endued it with new
vigour, every effort to repel it served but to increase its spreading
and overwhelming influence.  One after another the pleasures and
pursuits of the city declined beneath the dismal oppression of the
universal ill, until the public spirit in Rome became moved alike in
all classes by one gloomy inspiration--a despairing defiance of the
famine and the Goths.

The freedman entered his master's palace neither saluted nor welcomed
by the once obsequious slaves in the outer lodge.  Neither harps nor
singing-boys, neither woman's ringing laughter nor man's bacchanalian
glee, now woke the echoes in the lonely halls.  The pulse of pleasure
seemed to have throbbed its last in the joyless being of Vetranio's
altered household.

Hastening his steps as he entered the mansion, Carrio passed into the
chamber where the senator awaited him.

On two couches, separated by a small table, reclined the lord of the
palace and his pupil and companion at Ravenna, the once sprightly
Camilla.  Vetranio's open brow had contracted a clouded and severe
expression, and he neither regarded nor addressed his visitor, who, on
her part, remained as silent and as melancholy as himself.  Every trace
of the former characteristics of the gay, elegant voluptuary and the
lively, prattling girl seemed to have completely vanished. On the table
between them stood a large bottle containing Falernian wine, and a vase
filled with a little watery soup, in the middle of which floated a
small dough cake, sparingly sprinkled with common herbs.  As for the
usual accompaniments of Vetranio's luxurious privacy, they were nowhere
to be seen.  Poems, pictures, trinkets, lutes, all were absent.  Even
the 'inestimable kitten of the breed most worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians' appeared no more.  It had been stolen, cooked, and eaten by
a runaway slave, who had already bartered its ruby collar for a lean
parrot and the unroasted half of the carcase of a dog.

'I lament to confess it, O estimable patron, but my mission has
failed,' observed Carrio, producing from his cloak several bags of
money and boxes of jewels, which he carefully deposited on the table.
'The Prefect has himself assisted in searching the public and private
granaries, and has arrived at the conclusion that not a handful of corn
is left in the city.  I offered publicly in the market-place five
thousand sestertii for a living cock and hen, but was told that the
race had long since been exterminated, and that, as money would no
longer buy food, money was no longer desired by the poorest beggar in
Rome.  There is no more even of the hay I yesterday purchased to be
obtained for the most extravagant bribes.  Those still possessing the
smallest supplies of provision guard and hide them with the most
jealous care.  I have done nothing but obtain for the consumption of
the few slaves who yet remain faithful in the house this small store of
dogs' hides, reserved from the public distribution of some days since
in the square of the Basilica of St. John.'


And the freedman, with an air of mingled triumph and disgust, produced
as he spoke his provision of dirty skins.

'What supplies have we still left in our possession?' demanded
Vetranio, after drinking a deep draught of the Falernian, and motioning
his servant to place his treasured burden out of sight.

'I have hidden in a secure receptacle, for I know not how soon hunger
may drive the slaves to disobedience,' rejoined Carrio, 'seven bags of
hay, three baskets stocked with salted horse-flesh, a sweetmeat-box
filled with oats, and another with dried parsley; the rare Indian
singing birds are still preserved inviolate in their aviary; there is a
great store of spices, and some bottles of the Nightingale Sauce yet
remain.'

'What is the present aspect of the city?' interrupted Vetranio
impatiently.

'Rome is as gloomy as a subterranean sepulchre,' replied Carrio, with a
shudder.  'The people congregate in speechless and hungry mobs at the
doors of their houses and the corners of the streets, the sentinels at
the ramparts totter on their posts, women and children are sleeping
exhausted on the very pavements of the churches, the theatres are
emptied of actors and audience alike, the baths resound with cries for
food and curses on the Goths, thefts are already committed in the open
and unguarded shops, and the barbarians remain fixed in their
encampments, unapproached by our promised legions from Ravenna, neither
assaulting us in our weakness, nor preparing to raise the blockade!
Our situation grows more and more perilous.  I have great hopes in our
store of provisions; but--'

'Cast your hopes to the court at Ravenna, and your beasts' provender to
the howling mob!' cried Vetranio with sudden energy.  'It is now too
late to yield; if the next few days bring us no assistance, the city
will be a human shambles!  And think you that I, who have already lost
in this public suspension of social joys my pleasures, my employments,
and my companions, will wait serenely for the lingering and ignoble
death that must then threaten us all?  No, it shall never be said that
I died starving with the herd, like a slave that his master deserts!
Though the plates in my banqueting hall must now be empty, my vases and
wine-cups shall yet sparkle for my guests!  There is still wine in the
cellar, and spices and perfumes remain in the larder stores!  I will
invite my friends to a last feast; a saturnalia in a city of famine; a
banquet of death, spread by the jovial labours of Silenus and his
fauns! Though the Parcae have woven for me the destiny of a dog, it is
the hand of Bacchus that shall sever the fatal thread!'

His cheeks were flushed, his eyes sparkled; all the mad energy of his
determination appeared in his face as he spoke.  He was no longer the
light, amiable, smooth-tongued trifler, but a moody, reckless,
desperate man, careless of every obligation and pursuit which had
hitherto influenced the easy surface of his patrician life.  The
startled Camilla, who had as yet preserved a melancholy silence, ran
towards him with affrighted looks and undissembled tears.  Carrio
stared in vacant astonishment on his master's disordered countenance;
and, forgetting his bundle of dogskins, suffered them to drop unheeded
on the floor.  A momentary silence followed, which was suddenly
interrupted by the abrupt entrance of a fourth person, pale, trembling
and breathless, who was no other than Vetranio's former visitor, the
Prefect Pompeianus.

'I bid you welcome to my approaching feast of brimming wine-cups and
empty dishes!' cried Vetranio, pouring the sparkling Falernian into his
empty glass.  'The last banquet given in Rome, ere the city is
annihilated, will be mine!  The Goths and the famine shall have no part
in my death! Pleasure shall preside at my last moments, as it has
presided at my whole life!  I will die like Sardanapalus, with my loves
and my treasures around me, and the last of my guests who remains proof
against our festivity shall set fire to my palace, as the kingly
Assyrian set fire to his!'


'This is no season for jesting,' exclaimed the Prefect, staring round
him with bewildered eyes and colourless cheeks.  'Our miseries are but
dawning as yet!  In the next street lies the corpse of a woman,
and--horrible omen!--a coil of serpents is wreathed about her neck!  We
have no burial-place to receive her, and the thousands who may die like
her, ere assistance arrives.  The city sepulchres outside the walls are
in the hands of the Goths.  The people stand round the body in a trance
of horror, for they have now discovered a fatal truth we would fain
have concealed from them--' Here the Prefect paused, looked round
affrightedly on his listeners, and then added in low trembling tones--

'The citizens are lying dead from famine in the streets of Rome!'



CHAPTER 15.

THE CITY AND THE GODS.

We return once more to the Gothic encampment in the suburbs eastward of
the Pincian Gate, and to Hermanric and the warriors under his command,
who are still posted at that particular position on the great circle of
the blockade.

The movements of the young chieftain from place to place expressed, in
their variety and rapidity, the restlessness that was agitating his
mind.  He glanced back frequently from the warriors around him to the
remote and opposite quarter of the suburbs, occasionally directing his
eyes towards the western horizon, as if anxiously awaiting the approach
of some particular hour of the coming night. Weary at length of
pursuing occupations which evidently irritated rather than soothed his
impatience, he turned abruptly from his companions, and advancing
towards the city, paced slowly backwards and forwards over the waste
ground between the suburbs and the walls of Rome.

At intervals he still continued to examine the scene around him.  A
more dreary prospect than now met his view, whether in earth or sky,
can hardly be conceived.

The dull sunless day was fast closing, and the portentous heaven gave
promise of a stormy night. Thick, black layers of shapeless cloud hung
over the whole firmament, save at the western point; and here lay a
streak of pale, yellow light, enclosed on all sides by the firm,
ungraduated, irregular edges of the masses of gloomy vapour around it.
A deep silence hung over the whole atmosphere. The wind was voiceless
among the steady trees.  The stir and action in the being of nature and
the life of man seemed enthralled, suspended, stifled.  The air was
laden with a burdensome heat; and all things on earth, animate and
inanimate, felt the oppression that weighed on them from the higher
elements.  The people who lay gasping for breath in the famine-stricken
city, and the blades of grass that drooped languidly on the dry sward
beyond the walls, owned the enfeebling influence alike.

As the hours wore on and night stealthily and gradually advanced, a
monotonous darkness overspread, one after another, the objects
discernible to Hermanric from the solitary ground he still occupied.
Soon the great city faded into one vast, impenetrable shadow, while the
suburbs and the low country around them vanished in the thick darkness
that gathered almost perceptibly over the earth.  And now the sole
object distinctly visible was the figure of a weary sentinel, who stood
on the frowning rampart immediately above the rifted wall, and whose
drooping figure, propped upon his weapon, was indicated in hard relief
against the thin, solitary streak of light still shining in the cold
and cloudy wastes of the western sky.

But as the night still deepened, this one space of light faded,
contracted, vanished, and with it disappeared the sentinel and the line
of rampart on which he was posted.  The rule of the darkness now became
universal.  Densely and rapidly it overspread the whole city with
startling suddenness; as if the fearful destiny now working its
fulfilment in Rome had forced the external appearances of the night
into harmony with its own woe-boding nature.


Then, as the young Goth still lingered at his post of observation, the
long, low, tremulous, absorbing roll of thunder afar off became grandly
audible.  It seemed to proceed from a distance almost incalculable; to
be sounding from its cradle in the frozen north; to be journeying about
its ice-girdled chambers in the lonely poles.  It deepened rather than
interrupted the dreary, mysterious stillness of the atmosphere.  The
lightning, too, had a summer softness in its noiseless and frequent
gleam.  It was not the fierce lightning of winter, but a warm, fitful
brightness, almost fascinating in its light, rapid recurrence, tinged
with the glow of heaven, and not with the glare of hell.

There was no wind--no rain; and the air was as hushed as if it slept
over chaos in the infancy of a new creation.

Among the various objects displayed, instant by instant, by the rapid
lightning to the eyes of Hermanric, the most easily and most distinctly
visible was the broad surface of the rifted wall.  The large, loose
stones, scattered here and there at its base, and the overhanging lid
of its broad rampart, became plainly though fitfully apparent in the
brief moments of their illumination.  The lightning had played for some
time over that structure of the fortifications, and the bare ground
that stretched immediately beyond them, when the smooth prospect which
it thus gave by glimpses to view, was suddenly chequered by a flight of
birds appearing from one of the lower divisions of the wall, and
flitting uneasily to and fro at one spot before its surface.

As moment after moment the lightning continued to gleam, so the black
forms of the birds were visible to the practised eye of the
Goth--perceptible, yet evanescent, as sparks of fire or flakes of
snow--whirling confusedly and continually about the spot whence they
had evidently been startled by some unimaginable interruption.  At
length, after a lapse of some time, they vanished as suddenly as they
had appeared, with shrill notes of affright which were audible even
above the continuous rolling of the thunder; and immediately
afterwards, when the lightning alternated with the darkness, there
appeared to Hermanric, in the part of the wall where the birds had been
first disturbed, a small red gleam, like a spark of fire lodged in the
surface of the structure.  Then this was lost; a longer obscurity than
usual prevailed in the atmosphere, and when the Goth gazed eagerly
through the next succession of flashes, they showed him the momentary
and doubtful semblance of a human figure, standing erect on the stones
at the base of the wall.

Hermanric started with astonishment.  Again the lightning ceased.  In
the ardour of his anxiety to behold more, he strained his eyes with the
vain hope of penetrating the obscurity around him.  The darkness seemed
interminable.  Once again the lightning flashed brilliantly out.  He
looked eagerly towards the wall--the figure was still there.

His heart throbbed quickly within him, as he stood irresolute on the
spot he had occupied since the first peal of thunder had struck upon
his ear.  Were the light and the man--one seen but for an instant, the
other still perceptible--mere phantoms of his erring sight, dazzled by
the quick recurrence of atmospheric changes through which it had acted?
Or did he indubitably behold a human form, and had he really observed a
material light?  Some strange treachery, some dangerous mystery might
be engendering in the besieged city, which it would be his duty to
observe and unmask.  He drew his sword, and, at the risk of being
observed through the lightning, and heard during the pauses in the
thunder, by the sentinel on the wall, resolutely advanced to the very
foot of the fortifications of hostile Rome.

He heard no sound, perceived no light, observed no figure, as, after
several unsuccessful attempts to reach the place where they stood, he
at length paused at the loose stones which he knew were heaped at the
base of the wall.  The next moment he was so close to it, that he could
pass his sword-point over parts of its rugged surface.  He had scarcely
examined thus a space of more than ten yards, before his weapon
encountered a sharp, jagged edge; and a sudden presentiment assured him
instantly that he had found the spot where he had beheld the momentary
light, and that he stood on the same stone which had been occupied by
the figure of the man.


After an instant's hesitation, he was about to mount higher on the
loose stones, and examine more closely the irregularity he had just
discovered in the wall, when a vivid flash of lightning, unusually
prolonged, showed him, obstructing at scarcely a yard's distance his
onward path, the figure he had already distantly beheld from the plain
behind.

There was something inexpressibly fearful in his viewless vicinity,
during the next moment of darkness, to this silent, mysterious form, so
imperfectly shown by the lightning that quivered over its half-revealed
proportions.  Every pulse in the body of the Goth seemed to pause as he
stood, with ready weapon, looking into the gloomy darkness, and wafting
for the next flash.  It came, and displayed to him the man's fierce
eyes glaring steadily down upon his face; another gleam, and he beheld
his haggard finger placed upon his lip in token of silence; a third,
and he saw the arm of the figure pointing towards the plain behind him;
and then in the darkness that followed, a hot breath played upon his
ear, and a voice whispered to him, through a pause in the rolling of
the thunder--'Follow me.'

The next instant Hermanric felt the momentary contact of the man's
body, as with noiseless steps he passed him on the stones.  It was no
time to deliberate or to doubt.  He followed close upon the stranger's
footsteps, gaining glimpses of his dark form moving onward before,
whenever the lightning briefly illuminated the scene, until they
arrived at a clump of trees, not far distant from the houses in the
suburbs that were occupied by the Goths under his own command.

Here the stranger paused before the trunk of a tree which stood between
the city wall and himself, and drew from beneath his ragged cloak a
small lantern, carefully covered with a piece of cloth, which he now
removed, and holding the light high above his head, regarded the Goth
with a steady and anxious scrutiny.

Hermanric attempted to address him first, but the appearance of the
man, barely visible though it was by the feeble light of his lantern,
was so startling and repulsive, that the half-formed words died away on
his lips.  The face of the stranger was of a ghastly paleness; his
hollow cheeks were seamed with deep wrinkles; and his eyes glared with
an expression of ferocious suspicion.  One of his arms was covered with
old bandages, stiff with coagulated blood, and hung paralysed at his
side. The hand that held the light trembled, so that the lantern
containing it vibrated continuously in his unsteady grasp.  His limbs
were lank and shrivelled almost to deformity, and it was with evident
difficulty that he stood upright on his feet.  Every member of his body
seemed to be wasting with a gradual death, while his expression, ardent
and forbidding, was stamped with all the energy of manhood, and all the
daring of youth.

It was Ulpius!  The wall was passed!  The breach was made good!

After a protracted examination of Hermanric's countenance and attire,
the man, with an imperious expression, strangely at variance with his
faltering voice, thus addressed him:--

'You are a Goth?'

'I am,' rejoined the young chief; 'and you are--'

'A friend of the Goths,' was the quick answer.

An instant of silence followed.  The dialogue was then again begun by
the stranger.

'What brought you alone to the base of the ramparts?' he demanded, and
an expression of ungovernable apprehension shot from his eyes as he
spoke.

'I saw the appearance of a man in the gleam of the lightning,' answered
Hermanric.  'I approached it, to assure myself that my eyes had not
deluded me, to discover--'


'There is but one man of your nation who shall discover whence I came
and what I would obtain,' interrupted the stranger fiercely; 'that man
is Alaric, your king.'

Surprise, indignation, and contempt appeared in the features of the
Goth, as he listened to such a declaration from the helpless outcast
before him.  The man perceived it, and motioning him to be silent,
again addressed him.

'Listen!' cried he.  'I have that to reveal to the leader of your
forces which will stir the heart of every man in your encampment, if
you are trusted with the secret after your king has heard it from my
lips! Do you still refuse to guide me to his tent?'

Hermanric laughed scornfully.

'Look on me,' pursued the man, bending forward, and fixing his eyes
with savage earnestness upon his listener's face.  'I am alone, old,
wounded, weak,--a stranger to your nation,--a famished and a helpless
man! Should I venture into your camp--should I risk being slain for a
Roman by your comrades--should I dare the wrath of your imperious ruler
without a cause?'

He paused; and then, still keeping his eyes on the Goth, continued in
lower and more agitated tones--

'Deny me your help, I will wander through your camp till I find your
king!  Imprison me, your violence will not open my lips!  Slay me, you
will gain nothing by my death!  But aid me, and to the latest moment of
your life you will rejoice in the deed!  I have words of terrible
import for Alaric's ear,--a secret in the gaining of which I have paid
the penalty thus!'

He pointed to his wounded arm.  The solemnity of his voice, the rough
energy of his words, the stern determination of his aspect, the
darkness of the night that was round them, the rolling thunder that
seemed to join itself to their discourse, the impressive mystery of
their meeting under the city walls, all began to exert their powerful
and different influences over the mind of the Goth, changing insensibly
the sentiments at first inspired in him by the man's communications.
He hesitated, and looked round doubtfully towards the lines of the camp.

There was a long silence, which was again interrupted by the stranger.

'Guard me, chain me, mock at me if you will,' he cried, with raised
voice and flashing eyes, 'but lead me to Alaric's tent!  I swear to you
by the thunder pealing over our heads, that the words I would speak to
him will be more precious in his eyes than the brightest jewel he could
ravish from the coffers of Rome.'

Though visibly troubled and impressed, Hermanric still hesitated.

'Do you yet delay?' exclaimed the man, with contemptuous impatience.
'Stand back!  I will pass on by myself into the very heart of your
camp! I entered on my project alone--I will work its fulfilment without
help! Stand back!'

And he moved past Hermanric in the direction of the suburbs, with the
same look of fierce energy on his withered features which had marked
them so strikingly at the outset of his extraordinary interview with
the young chieftain.


The daring devotion to his purpose, the reckless toiling after a
dangerous and doubtful success, manifested in the words and actions of
one so feeble and unaided as the stranger, aroused in the Goth that
sentiment of irrepressible admiration which the union of moral and
physical courage inevitably awakens.  In addition to the incentive to
aid the man thus created, an ardent curiosity to discover his secret
filled the mind of Hermanric, and further powerfully inclined him to
conduct his determined companion into Alaric's presence--for by such
proceeding only could he hope, after the man's firm declaration that he
would communicate in the first instance to no one but the king, to
penetrate ultimately the object of his mysterious errand.  Animated,
therefore, by such motives as these, he called to the stranger to stop,
and briefly communicated to him his willingness to conduct him
instantly to the presence of the leader of the Goths.

The man intimated by a sign his readiness to accept the offer.  His
physical powers were now evidently fast failing, but he still tottered
painfully onward as they moved to the headquarters of the camp,
muttering and gesticulating to himself almost incessantly.  Once only
did he address his conductor during their progress; and then with a
startling abruptness of manner, and in tones of vehement anxiety and
suspicion, he demanded of the young Goth if he had ever examined the
surface of the city wall before that night.  Hermanric replied in the
negative; and they then proceeded in perfect silence.

Their way lay through the line of encampment to the westward, and was
imperfectly lighted by the flame of an occasional torch or the glow of
a distant watch-fire.  The thunder had diminished in frequency, but had
increased in volume; faint breaths of wind soared up fitfully from the
west, and already a few raindrops fell slowly to the thirsty earth.
The warriors not actually on duty at the different posts of observation
had retired to the shelter of their tents; none of the thousand idlers
and attendants attached to the great army appeared at their usual
haunts; even the few voices that were audible sounded distant and low.
The night-scene here, among the ranks of the invaders of Italy, was as
gloomy and repelling as on the solitary plains before the walls of Rome.

Ere long the stranger perceived that they had reached a part of the
camp more thickly peopled, more carefully illuminated, more strongly
fortified, than that through which they had already passed; and the
liquid, rushing sound of the waters of the rapid Tiber now caught his
suspicious and attentive ear.  They still moved onward a few yards; and
then paused suddenly before a tent, immediately surrounded by many
others, and occupied at all its approaches by groups of richly-armed
warriors. Here Hermanric stopped an instant to parley with the
sentinel, who, after a short delay, raised the outer covering of the
entrance to the tent, and the moment after the Roman adventurer beheld
himself standing by his conductor's side in the presence of the Gothic
king.

The interior of Alaric's tent was lined with skins, and illuminated by
one small lamp, fastened to the centre pole that supported its roof.
The only articles of furniture in the place were some bundles of furs
flung down loosely on the ground, and a large, rudely-carved wooden
chest, on which stood a polished human skull, hollowed into a sort of
clumsy wine-cup.  A thoroughly Gothic ruggedness of aspect, a stately
Northern simplicity prevailed over the spacious tent, and was indicated
not merely in its thick shadows, its calm lights, and its freedom from
pomp and glitter, but even in the appearance and employment of its
remarkable occupant.


Alaric was seated alone on the wooden chest already described,
contemplating with bent brow and abstracted gaze some old Runic
characters, traced upon the carved surface of a brass and silver
shield, full five feet high, which rested against the side of the tent.
The light of the lamp falling upon the polished surface of the
weapon--rendered doubly bright by the dark skins behind it--was
reflected back upon the figure of the Goth chief.  It glowed upon his
ample cuirass; it revealed his firm lips, slightly curled by an
expression of scornful triumph; it displayed the grand, muscular
formation of his arm, which rested--clothed in tightly-fitting
leather--upon his knee; it partly brightened over his short, light
hair, and glittered steadily in his fixed, thoughtful, manly eyes,
which were just perceptible beneath the partial shadow of his
contracted brow; while it left the lower part of his body and his right
hand, which was supported on the head of a huge, shaggy dog couching at
his side, shadowed almost completely by the thick skins heaped
confusedly against the sides of the wooden chest.  He was so completely
absorbed in the contemplation of the Runic characters, traced among the
carved figures on his immense shield, that he did not notice the entry
of Hermanric and the stranger until the growl of the watchful dog
suddenly disturbed him in his occupation.  He looked up instantly, his
quick, penetrating glance dwelling for a moment on the young chieftain,
and then resting steadily and inquiringly on his companion's feeble and
mutilated form.

Accustomed to the military brevity and promptitude exacted by his
commander in all communications addressed to him by his inferiors,
Hermanric, without waiting to be interrogated or attempting to preface
or excuse his narrative, shortly related the conversation that had
taken place between the stranger and himself on the plain near the
Pincian Gate; and then waited respectfully to receive the commendation
or incur the rebuke of the king, as the chance of the moment might
happen to decide.

After again fixing his eyes in severe scrutiny on the person of the
Roman, Alaric spoke to the young warrior in the Gothic language thus:--

'Leave the man with me--return to your post, and there await whatever
commands it may be necessary that I should despatch to you to-night.'

Hermanric immediately departed.  Then, addressing the stranger for the
first time, and speaking in the Latin language, the Gothic leader
briefly and significantly intimated to his unknown visitant that they
were now alone.

The man's parched lips moved, opened, quivered; his wild, hollow eyes
brightened till they absolutely gleamed, but he seemed incapable of
uttering a word; his features became horribly convulsed, the foam
gathered about his lips, he staggered forward and would have fallen to
the ground, had not the king instantly caught him in his strong grasp,
and placed him on the wooden chest that he had hitherto occupied
himself.

'Can a starving Roman have escaped from the beleaguered city?' muttered
Alaric, as he took the skull cup, and poured some of the wine it
contained down the stranger's throat.

The liquor was immediately successful in restoring composure to the
man's features and consciousness to his mind.  He raised himself from
the seat, dashed off the cold perspiration that overspread his
forehead, and stood upright before the king--the solitary, powerless
old man before the vigorous lord of thousands, in the midst of his
warriors--without a tremor in his steady eye or a prayer for protection
on his haughty lip.

'I, a Roman,' he began, 'come from Rome, against which the invader wars
with the weapon of famine, to deliver the city, her people, her
palaces, and her treasures into the hands of Alaric the Goth.'

The king started, looked on the speaker for a moment, and then turned
from him in impatience and contempt.

'I lie not,' pursued the enthusiast, with a calm dignity that affected
even the hardy sensibilities of the Gothic hero.  'Eye me again!  Could
I come starved, shrivelled, withered thus from any place but Rome?
Since I quitted the city an hour has hardly passed, and by the way that
I left it the forces of the Goths may enter it to-night.'

'The proof of the harvest is in the quantity of the grain, not in the
tongue of the husbandman.  Show me your open gates, and I will believe
that you have spoken truth,' retorted the king, with a rough laugh.

'I betray the city,' resumed the man sternly, 'but on one condition;
grant it me, and--'

'I will grant you your life,' interrupted Alaric haughtily.


'My life!' cried the Roman, and his shrunken form seemed to expand, and
his tremulous voice to grow firm and steady in the very bitterness of
his contempt, as he spoke.  'My life!  I ask it not of your power!  The
wreck of my body is scarce strong enough to preserve it to me a single
day!  I  have no home, no loves, no friends, no possessions!  I live in
Rome a solitary in the midst of the multitude, a pagan in a city of
apostates!  What is my life to me?  I cherish it but for the service of
the gods, whose instruments of vengeance against the nation that has
denied them I would make you and your hosts!  If you slay me, it is a
sign to me from them that I am worthless in their cause. I shall die
content.'

He ceased.  The king's manner, as he listened to him, gradually lost
the bluntness and carelessness that had hitherto characterised it, and
assumed an attention and a seriousness more in accordance with his high
station and important responsibilities.  He began to regard the
stranger as no common renegade, no ordinary spy, no shallow impostor,
who might be driven from his tent with disdain; but as a man important
enough to be heard, and ambitious enough to be distrusted.
Accordingly, he resumed the seat from which he had risen during the
interview, and calmly desired his new ally to explain the condition, on
the granting of which depended the promised betrayal of the city of
Rome.

The pain-worn and despondent features of Ulpius became animated by a
glow of triumph as he heard the sudden mildness and moderation of the
king's demand; he raised his head proudly, and advanced a few steps, as
he thus loudly and abruptly resumed:--

'Assure to me the overthrow of the Christian churches, the
extermination of the Christian priests, and the universal revival of
the worship of the gods, and this night shall make you master of the
chief city of the empire you are labouring to subvert!'

The boldness, the comprehensiveness, the insanity of wickedness
displayed in such a proposition, and emanating from such a source, so
astounded the mind of Alaric, as to deprive him for the moment of
speech.  The stranger, perceiving his temporary inability to answer
him, broke the silence which ensued and continued--

'Is my condition a hard one?  A conqueror is all-powerful; he can
overthrow the worship, as he can overthrow the government of a nation.
What matters it to you, while empire, renown, and treasure are yours,
what deities the people adore?  Is it a great price to pay for an easy
conquest, to make a change which threatens neither your power, your
fame, nor your wealth?  Do you marvel that I  desire from you such a
revolution as this?  I was born for the gods, in their service I
inherited rank and renown, for their cause I have suffered degradation
and woe, for their restoration I will plot, combat, die!  Assure me
then by oath, that with a new rule you will erect our ancient worship,
and through my secret inlet to the city I will introduce men enough of
the Goths to murder with security the sentinels at the guard-houses,
and open the gates of Rome to the numbers of your whole invading
forces. Think not to despise the aid of a man unprotected and unknown!
The citizens will never yield to your blockade; you shrink from risking
the dangers of an assault; the legions of Ravenna are reported on their
way hitherward.  Outcast as I am, I tell it to you here, in the midst
of your camp--your speediest assurance of success rests on my discovery
and on me!'

The king started suddenly from his seat.  'What fool or madman!' he
cried, fixing his eyes in furious scorn and indignation on the
stranger's face, 'prates to me about the legions of Ravenna and the
dangers of an assault!  Think you, renegade, that your city could have
resisted me had I chosen to storm it on the first day when I encamped
before its walls?  Know you that your effeminate soldiery have laid
aside the armour of their ancestors, because their puny bodies are too
feeble to bear its weight, and that the half of my army here trebles
the whole number of the guards of Rome?  Now, while you stand before
me, I have but to command, and the city shall be annihilated with fire
and sword, without the aid of one of the herd of traitors cowering
beneath the shelter of its ill-defended walls!'


As Alaric spoke thus, some invisible agency seemed to crush, body and
mind, the lost wretch whom he addressed.  The shock of such an answer
as he now heard seemed to strike him idiotic, as a flash of lightning
strikes with blindness.  He regarded the king with a bewildered stare,
waving his hand tremulously backwards and forwards before his face, as
if to clear some imaginary darkness off his eyes; then his arm fell
helpless by his side, his head drooped upon his breast, and he moaned
out in low, vacant tones, 'The restoration of the gods--that is the
condition of conquest--the restoration of the gods!'

'I come not hither to be the tool of a frantic and forgotten
priesthood,' cried Alaric disdainfully.  'Wherever I meet with your
accursed idols I will melt them down into armour for my warriors and
shoes for my horses; I will turn your temples into granaries and cut
your images of wood into billets for the watchfires of my hosts!'

'Slay me and be silent!' groaned the man, staggering back against the
side of the tent, and shrinking under the merciless words of the Goth
like a slave under the lash.

'I leave the shedding of such blood as yours to your fellow Romans,'
answered the king; 'they alone are worthy of the deed.'

No syllable of reply now escaped the stranger's lips, and after an
interval of silence Alaric resumed, in tones divested of their former
fiery irritation, and marked by a solemn earnestness that conferred
irresistible dignity and force on every word that he uttered.

'Behold the characters engraven there!' said he, pointing to the
shield; 'they trace the curse denounced by Odin against the great
oppressor, Rome!  Once these words made part of the worship of our
fathers; the worship has long since vanished, but the words remain;
they seal the eternal hatred of the people of the North to the people
of the South; they contain the spirit of the great destiny that has
brought me to the walls of Rome.  Citizen of a fallen empire, the
measure of your crimes is full!  The voice of a new nation calls
through me for the freedom of the earth, which was made for man, and
not for Romans!  The rule that your ancestors won by strength their
posterity shall no longer keep by fraud.  For two hundred years, hollow
and unlasting truces have alternated with long and bloody wars between
your people and mine. Remembering this, remembering the wrongs of the
Goths in their settlements in Thrace, the murder of the Gothic youths
in the towns of Asia, the massacre of the Gothic hostages in Aquileia,
I come--chosen by the supernatural decrees of Heaven--to assure the
freedom and satisfy the wrath of my nation, by humbling at its feet the
power of tyrannic Rome!  It is not for battle and bloodshed that I am
encamped before yonder walls.  It is to crush to the earth, by famine
and woe, the pride of your people and the spirit of your rulers; to
tear from you your hidden wealth, and to strip you of your boasted
honour; to overthrow by oppression the oppressors of the world; to deny
you the glories of a resistance, and to impose on you the shame of a
submission.  It is for this that I now abstain from storming your city,
to encircle it with an immovable blockade!'

As the declaration of his great mission burst thus from the lips of the
Gothic king, the spirit of his lofty ambition seemed to diffuse itself
over his outward form.  His noble stature, his fine proportions, his
commanding features, became invested with a simple, primeval grandeur.
Contrasted as he now was with the shrunken figure of the spirit-broken
stranger, he looked almost sublime.


A succession of protracted shuddering ran through the Pagan's frame,
but he neither wept nor spoke.  The unavailing defence of the Temple of
Serapis, the defeated revolution at Alexandria, and the abortive
intrigue with Vetranio, were now rising on his memory, to heighten the
horror of his present and worst overthrow.  Every circumstance
connected with his desperate passage through the rifted wall revived,
fearfully vivid, on his mind.  He remembered all the emotions of his
first night's labour in the darkness, all the miseries of his second
night's torture under the fallen brickwork, all the woe, danger, and
despondency that accompanied his subsequent toil--persevered in under
the obstructions of a famine-weakened body and a helpless arm--until he
passed, in delusive triumph, the last of the hindrances in the
long-laboured breach.  One after another these banished recollections
returned to his memory as he listened to Alaric's rebuking
words--reviving past infirmities, opening old wounds, inflicting new
lacerations.  But, saving the shudderings that still shook his body, no
outward witness betrayed the inward torment that assailed him.  It was
too strong for human words, too terrible for human sympathy;--he
suffered it in brute silence. Monstrous as was his plot, the moral
punishment of its attempted consummation was severe enough to be worthy
of the projected crime.

After watching the man for a few minutes more, with a glance of
pitiless disdain, Alaric summoned one of the warriors in attendance;
and, having previously commanded him to pass the word to the sentinels,
authorising the stranger's free passage through the encampment, he then
turned, and, for the last time, addressed him as follows:--

'Return to Rome, through the hole whence, reptile-like, you
emerged!--and feed your starving citizens with the words you have heard
in the barbarian's tent!'

The guard approached, led him from the presence of the king, issued the
necessary directions to the sentinels, and left him to himself.  Once
he raised his eyes in despairing appeal to the heaven that frowned over
his head; but still, no word, or tear, or groan, escaped him.  He moved
slowly on through the thick darkness; and turning his back on the city,
passed, careless whither he strayed, into the streets of the desolate
and dispeopled suburbs.



CHAPTER 16.

LOVE MEETINGS.

Who that has looked on a threatening and tempestuous sky, has not felt
the pleasure of discovering unexpectedly a small spot of serene blue,
still shining among the stormy clouds?  The more unwillingly the eye
has wandered over the gloomy expanse of the rest of the firmament, the
more gladly does it finally rest on the little oasis of light which
meets at length its weary gaze, and which, when it was dispersed over
the whole heaven, was perhaps only briefly regarded with a careless
glance. Contrasted with the dark and mournful hues around it, even that
small spot of blue gradually acquires the power of investing the wider
and sadder prospect with a certain interest and animation that it did
not before possess--until the mind recognises in the surrounding
atmosphere of storm an object adding variety to the view--a spectacle
whose mournfulness may interest as well as repel.

Was it with sensations resembling these (applied, however, rather to
the mind than to the eye) that the reader perused those pages devoted
to Hermanric and Antonina?  Does the happiness there described now
appear to him to beam through the stormy progress of the narrative as
the spot of blue beams through the gathering clouds?  Did that small
prospect of brightness present itself, at the time, like a garden of
repose amid the waste of fierce emotions which encompassed it?  Did it
encourage him, when contrasted with what had gone before, to enter on
the field of gloomier interest which was to follow?  If, indeed, it has
thus affected him, if he can still remember the scene at the farm-house
beyond the suburbs with emotions such as these, he will not now be
unwilling to turn again for a moment from the gathering clouds to the
spot of blue,--he will not deny us an instant's digression from Ulpius
and the city of famine to Antonina and the lonely plains.

During the period that has elapsed since we left her, Antonina has
remained secure in her solitude, happy in her well-chosen concealment.
The few straggling Goths who at rare intervals appeared in the
neighbourhood of her sanctuary never intruded on its peaceful limits.
The sight of the ravaged fields and emptied granaries of the deserted
little property sufficed invariably to turn their marauding steps in
other directions.  Day by day ran smoothly and swiftly onwards for the
gentle usurper of the abandoned farm-house.  In the narrow round of its
gardens and protecting woods was comprised for her the whole circle of
the pleasures and occupations of her new life.


The simple stores left in the house, the fruits and vegetables to be
gathered in the garden, sufficed amply for her support.  The pastoral
solitude of the place had in it a quiet, dreamy fascination, a novelty,
an unwearying charm, after the austere loneliness to which her former
existence had been subjected in Rome.  And when evening came, and the
sun began to burnish the tops of the western tress, then, after the
calm emotions of the solitary day, came the hour of absorbing cares and
happy expectations--ever the same, yet ever delighting and ever new.
Then the rude shutters were carefully closed; the open door was shut
and barred; the small light--now invisible to the world without--was
joyfully kindled; and then, the mistress and author of these
preparations resigned herself to await, with pleased anxiety, the
approach of the guest for whose welcome they were designed.

And never did she expect the arrival of that treasured companion in
vain.  Hermanric remembered his promise to repair constantly to the
farm-house, and performed it with all the constancy of love and all the
enthusiasm of youth.  When the sentinels under his command were
arranged in their order of watching for the night, and the trust
reposed in him by his superiors exempted his actions from
superintendence during the hours of darkness that followed, he left the
camp, passed through the desolate suburbs, and gained the dwelling
where the young Roman awaited him--returning before daybreak to receive
the communications regularly addressed to him, at that hour, by his
inferior in the command.

Thus, false to his nation, yet true to the new Egeria of his thoughts
and actions--traitor to the requirements of vengeance and war, yet
faithful to the interests of tranquility and love--did he seek, night
after night, Antonina's presence.  His passion, though it denied him to
his warrior duties, wrought not deteriorating change in his
disposition. All that it altered in him it altered nobly.  It varied
and exalted his rude emotions, for it was inspired, not alone by the
beauty and youth that he saw, but by the pure thoughts, the artless
eloquence that he heard.  And she--the forsaken daughter, the source
whence the Northern warrior derived those new and higher sensations
that had never animated him until now--regarded her protector, her
first friend and companion, as her first love, with a devotion which,
in its mingled and exalted nature, may be imagined by the mind, but can
be but imperfectly depicted by the pen.  It was a devotion created of
innocence and gratitude, of joy and sorrow, of apprehension and hope.
It was too fresh, too unworldly to own any upbraidings of artificial
shame, any self-reproaches of artificial propriety.  It resembled in
its essence, though not in its application, the devotion of the first
daughters of the Fall to their brother-lords.

But it is now time that we return to the course of our narrative;
although, ere we again enter on the stirring and rapid present, it will
be necessary for a moment more to look back in another direction to the
eventful past.

But it is not on peace, beauty, and pleasure that our observation now
fixes itself. It is to anger, disease, and crime--to the unappeasable
and unwomanly Goisvintha, that we now revert.

Since the day when the violence of her conflicting emotions had
deprived her of consciousness, at the moment of her decisive triumph
over the scruples of Hermanric and the destiny of Antonina, a raging
fever had visited on her some part of those bitter sufferings that she
would fain have inflicted on others.  Part of the time she lay in a
raving delirium; part of the time in helpless exhaustion; but she never
forgot, whatever the form assumed by her disease, the desperate purpose
in the pursuit of which she had first incurred it.  Slowly and
doubtfully her vigour at length returned to her, and with it
strengthened and increased the fierce ambition of vengeance that
absorbed her lightest thoughts and governed her most careless actions.


Report informed her of the new position, on the line of blockade, on
which Hermanric was posted, and only enumerated as the companions of
his sojourn the warriors sent thither under his command. But, though
thus persuaded of the separation of Antonina and the Goth, her
ignorance of the girl's fate rankled unintermittingly in her savage
heart.  Doubtful whether she had permanently reclaimed Hermanric to the
interests of vengeance and bloodshed; vaguely suspecting that he might
have informed himself in her absence of Antonina's place of refuge or
direction of flight; still resolutely bent on securing the death of her
victim, wherever she might have strayed, she awaited with trembling
eagerness that day of restoration to available activity and strength
which would enable her to resume her influence over the Goth, and her
machinations against the safety of the fugitive girl. The time of her
final and long-expected recovery, was the very day preceding the stormy
night we have already described, and her first employment of her
renewed energy was to send word to the young Goth of her intention of
seeking him at his encampment ere the evening closed.

It was this intimation which caused the inquietude mentioned as
characteristic of the manner of Hermanric at the commencement of the
preceding chapter.  The evening there described was the first that saw
him deprived, through the threatened visit of Goisvintha, of the
anticipation of repairing to Antonina, as had been his wont, under
cover of the night; for to slight his kinswoman's ominous message was
to risk the most fatal of discoveries.  Trusting to the delusive
security of her sickness, he had hitherto banished the unwelcome
remembrance of her existence from his thoughts.  But, now that she was
once more capable of exertion and of crime, he felt that if he would
preserve the secret of Antonina's hiding-place and the security of
Antonina's life, he must remain to oppose force to force and stratagem
to stratagem, when Goisvintha sought him at his post, even at the risk
of inflicting, by his absence from the farm-house, all the pangs of
anxiety and apprehension on the lonely girl.

Absorbed in such reflections as these, longing to depart, yet
determined to remain, he impatiently awaited Goisvintha's approach,
until the rising of the storm with its mysterious and all-engrossing
train of events forced his thoughts and actions into a new channel.
When, however, his interviews with the stranger and the Gothic king
were past, and he had returned as he had been bidden to his appointed
sojourn in the camp, his old anxieties, displaced but not destroyed,
resumed their influence over him.  He demanded eagerly of his comrades
if Goisvintha had arrived in his absence, and received the same answer
in the negative from each.

As he now listened to the melancholy rising of the wind and the
increasing loudness of the thunder, to the shrill cries of the distant
night-birds hurrying to shelter, emotions of mournfulness and awe
possessed themselves of his heart.  He now wondered that any events,
however startling, however appalling, should have had the power to turn
his mind for a moment from the dreary contemplations that had engaged
it at the close of day.  He thought of Antonina, solitary and helpless,
listening to the tempest in affright, and watching vainly for his
long-delayed approach.  His fancy arrayed before him dangers, plots,
and crimes, robed in all the horrible exaggerations of a dream.  Even
the quick, monotonous dripping of the rain-drops outside aroused within
him dark and indefinable forebodings of ill.  The passion that had
hitherto created for him new pleasures was now fulfilling the other
half of its earthly mission, and causing him new pains.

As the storm strengthened, as the darkness lowered deeper and deeper,
so did his inquietude increase, until at length it mastered the last
feeble resistance of his wavering firmness.  Persuading himself that,
after having delayed so long, Goisvintha would now refrain from seeking
him until the morrow, and that all communications from Alaric, had they
been despatched, would have reached him ere this; unable any longer to
combat his anxiety for the safety of Antonina; determined to risk the
worst possibilities rather than be absent at such a time of tempest and
peril from the farm-house, he made a last visit to the stations of the
watchful sentinels, and quitted the camp for the night.



CHAPTER 17.

THE HUNS.

More than an hour after Hermanric had left the encampment, a man
hurriedly entered the house set apart for the young chieftain's
occupation.  He made no attempt to kindle either light or fire, but sat
down in the principal apartment, occasionally whispering to himself in
a strange and barbarous tongue.


He had remained but a short time in possession of his comfortless
solitude, when he was intruded on by a camp-follower, bearing a small
lamp, and followed closely by a woman, who, as he started up and
confronted her, announced herself as Hermanric's kinswoman, and eagerly
demanded an interview with the Goth.

Haggard and ghastly though it was from recent suffering and long
agitation, the countenance of Goisvintha (for it was she) appeared
absolutely attractive as it was now opposed by the lamp-light to the
face and figure of the individual she addressed.  A flat nose, a
swarthy complexion, long, coarse, tangled locks of deep black hair, a
beardless, retreating chin, and small, savage, sunken eyes, gave a
character almost bestial to this man's physiognomy.  His broad, brawny
shoulders overhung a form that was as low in stature as it was athletic
in build; you looked on him and saw the sinews of a giant strung in the
body of a dwarf.  And yet this deformed Hercules was no solitary error
of Nature--no extraordinary exception to his fellow-beings, but the
actual type of a whole race, stunted and repulsive as himself.  He was
a Hun.

This savage people, the terror even of their barbarous neighbours,
living without government, laws, or religion, possessed but one feeling
in common with the human race--the instinct of war.  Their historical
career may be said to have begun with their early conquests in China,
and to have proceeded in their first victories over the Goths, who
regarded them as demons, and fled at their approach.  The hostilities
thus commenced between the two nations were at length suspended by the
temporary alliance of the conquered people with the empire, and
subsequently ceased in the gradual fusion of the interests of each in
one animating spirit--detestation of Rome.

By this bond of brotherhood, the Goths and the Huns became publicly
united, though still privately at enmity--for the one nation remembered
its former defeats as vividly as the other remembered its former
victories.  With various disasters, dissensions, and successes, they
ran their career of battle and rapine, sometimes separate, sometimes
together, until the period of our romance, when Alaric's besieging
forces numbered among the ranks of their barbarian auxiliaries a body
of Huns, who, unwillingly admitted to the title of Gothic allies, were
dispersed about the army in subordinate stations, and of whom the
individual above described was one of those contemptuously favoured by
promotion to an inferior command, under Hermanric, as a Gothic chief.

An expression of aversion, but not of terror, passed over Goisvintha's
worn features as she approached the barbarian, and repeated her desire
to be conducted to Hermanric's presence.  For the second time, however,
the man gave her no answer.  He burst into a shrill, short laugh, and
shook his huge shoulders in clumsy derision.

The woman's cheek reddened for an instant, and then turned again to
livid paleness as she thus resumed--

'I came not hither to be mocked by a barbarian, but to be welcomed by a
Goth!  Again I ask you, where is my kinsman, Hermanric?'

'Gone!' cried the Hun.  And his laughter grew more wild and discordant
as he spoke.

A sudden tremor ran through Goisvintha's frame as she marked the manner
of the barbarian and heard his reply.  Repressing with difficulty her
anger and agitation, she continued, with apprehension in her eyes and
entreaty in her tones--

'Whither has he gone?  Wherefore has he departed?  I know that the hour
I appointed for our meeting here has long passed; but I have suffered a
sickness of many weeks, and when, at evening, I prepared to set forth,
my banished infirmities seemed suddenly to return to me again.  I was
borne to my bed.  But, though the woman who succoured me bid me remain
and repose, I found strength in the night to escape them, and through
storm and darkness to come hither alone--for I was determined, though I
should perish for it, to seek the presence of Hermanric, as I had
promised by my messengers.  You, that are the companion of his watch,
must know whither he is gone.  Go to him, and tell him what I have
spoken.  I will await his return!'


'His business is secret,' sneered the Hun.  'He has departed, but
without telling me whither.  How should I, that am a barbarian, know
the whereabouts of an illustrious Goth?  It is not for me to know his
actions, but to obey his words!'

'Jeer not about your obedience,' returned Goisvintha with breathless
eagerness.  'I say to you again, you know whither he is gone, and you
must tell me for what he has departed.  You obey him--there is money to
make you obey me!'

'When I said his business was secret, I lied not,' said the Hun,
picking up with avidity the coins she flung to him--'but he has not
kept it secret from me!  The Huns are cunning!  Aha, ugly and cunning!'

Suspicion, the only refined emotion in a criminal heart, half
discovered to Goisvintha, at this moment, the intelligence that was yet
to be communicated.  No word, however, escaped her, while she signed
the barbarian to proceed.

'He has gone to a farm-house on the plains beyond the suburbs behind
us. He will not return till daybreak,' continued the Hun, tossing his
money carelessly in his great, horny hands.

'Did you see him go?' gasped the woman.

'I tracked him to the house,' returned the barbarian.  'For many nights
I watched and suspected him--to-night I saw him depart.  It is but a
short time since I returned from following him.  The darkness did not
delude me; the place is on the high-road from the suburbs--the first
by-path to the westward leads to its garden gate.  I know it!  I have
discovered his secret!  I am more cunning than he!'

'For what did he seek the farm-house at night?' demanded Goisvintha
after an interval, during which she appeared to be silently fixing the
man's last speech in her memory; 'are you cunning enough to tell me
that?'

'For what do men venture their safety and their lives, their money and
their renown?' laughed the barbarian.  'They venture them for women!
There is a girl at the farm-house; I saw her at the door when the chief
went in!'

He paused; but Goisvintha made no answer.  Remembering that she was
descended from a race of women who slew their wounded husbands,
brothers, and sons with their own hands when they sought them after
battle dishonoured by a defeat; remembering that the fire of the old
ferocity of such ancestors as these still burnt at her heart;
remembering all that she had hoped from Hermanric, and had plotted
against Antonina; estimating in all its importance the shock of the
intelligence she now received, we are alike unwilling and unable to
describe her emotions at this moment.  For some time the stillness in
the room was interrupted by no sounds but the rolling of the thunder
without, the quick, convulsive respiration of Goisvintha, and the
clinking of the money which the Hun still continued to toss
mechanically from hand to hand.

'I shall reap good harvest of gold and silver after to-night's work,'
pursued the barbarian, suddenly breaking the silence.  'You have given
me money to speak--when the chief returns and hears that I have
discovered him, he will give me money to be silent.  I shall drink
to-morrow with the best men in the army, Hun though I am!'

He returned to his seat as he ceased, and began beating in monotonous
measure, with one of his pieces of money on the blade of his sword,
some chorus of a favourite drinking song; while Goisvintha, standing
pale and breathless near the door of the chamber, looked down on him
with fixed, vacant eyes.  At length a deep sigh broke from her; her
hands involuntarily clenched themselves at her side; her lips moved
with a bitter smile; then, without addressing another word to the Hun,
she turned, and softly and stealthily quitted the room.


The instant she was gone, a sudden change arose in the barbarian's
manner.  He started from his seat, a scowl of savage hatred and triumph
appeared on his shaggy brows, and he paced to and fro through the
chamber like a wild beast in his cage.  'I shall tear him from the
pinnacle of his power at last!' he whispered fiercely to himself.  'For
what I have told her this night, his kinswoman will hate him--I knew it
while she spoke!  For his desertion of his post, Alaric may dishonour
him, may banish him, may hang him!  His fate is at my mercy; I shall
rid myself nobly of him and his command! More than all the rest of his
nation I loathe this Goth!  I will be by when they drag him to the
tree, and taunt him with his shame, as he has taunted me with my
deformity.' Here he paused to laugh in complacent approval of his
project, quickening his steps and hugging himself joyfully in the
barbarous exhilaration of his triumph.

His secret meditations had thus occupied him for some time longer, when
the sound of a footstep was audible outside the door.  He recognised it
instantly, and called softly to the person without to approach.  At the
signal of his voice a man entered--less athletic in build, but in
deformity the very counterpart of himself.  The following discourse was
then immediately held between the two Huns, the new-comer beginning it
thus:--

'Have you tracked him to the door?'

'To the very threshold.'

'Then his downfall is assured!  I have seen Alaric.'

'We shall trample him under our feet!--this boy, who has been set over
us that are his elders, because he is a Goth and we are Huns!  But what
of Alaric?  How did you gain his ear?'

'The Goths round his tent scoffed at me as a savage, and swore that I
was begotten between a demon and a witch.  But I remembered the time
when these boasters fled from their settlements; when our tribes
mounted their black steeds and hunted them like beasts!  Aha, their
very lips were pale with fear in those days.'

'Speak of Alaric--our time is short,' interrupted the other fiercely.

'I answered not a word to their taunts,' resumed his companion, 'but I
called out loudly that I was a Gothic ally, that I brought messages to
Alaric, and that I had the privilege of audience like the rest. My
voice reached the ears of the king:  he looked forth from his tent, and
beckoned me in.  I saw his hatred of my nation lowering in his eye as
we looked on one another, but I spoke with submission and in a soft
voice. I told him how his chieftain whom he had set over us secretly
deserted his post; I told him how we had seen his favoured warrior for
many nights journeying towards the suburbs;  how on this night, as on
others before, he had stolen from the encampment, and how you had gone
forth to track him to his lurking-place.'

'Was the tyrant angered?'

'His cheeks reddened, and his eyes flashed, and his fingers trembled
round the hilt of his sword while I spoke!  When I ceased he answered
me that I lied.  He cursed me for an infidel Hun who had slandered a
Christian chieftain.  He threatened me with hanging!  I cried to him to
send messengers to our quarters to prove the truth ere he slew me.  He
commanded a warrior to return hither with me.  When we arrived, the
most Christian chieftain was nowhere to be beheld--none knew whither he
had gone!  We turned back again to the tent of the king; his warrior,
whom he honoured, spoke the same words to him as the Hun whom he
despised. Then the wrath of Alaric rose.  "This very night," he cried,
"did I with my own lips direct him to await my commands with vigilance
at his appointed post!  I would visit such disobedience with punishment
on my own son!  Go, take with you others of your troop--your comrade
who has tracked him will guide you to his hiding-place--bring him
prisoner into my tent!"  Such were his words!  Our companions wait us
without--lest he should escape let us depart without delay.'


'And if he should resist us,' cried the other, leading the way eagerly
towards the door; 'what said the king if he should resist us?'

'Slay him with your own hands.'



CHAPTER 18.

THE FARM-HOUSE.

As the night still advanced, so did the storm increase.  On the plains
in the open country its violence was most apparent.  Here no living
voices jarred with the dreary music of the elements; no flaming torches
opposed the murky darkness or imitated the glaring lightning.  The
thunder pursued uninterruptedly its tempest symphony, and the fierce
wind joined it, swelling into wild harmony when it rushed through the
trees, as if in their waving branches it struck the chords of a mighty
harp.

In the small chamber of the farm-house sat together Hermanric and
Antonina, listening in speechless attention to the increasing tumult of
the storm.

The room and its occupants were imperfectly illuminated by the flame of
a smouldering wood fire. The little earthenware lamp hung from its
usual place in the ceiling, but its oil was exhausted and its light was
extinct.  An alabaster vase of fruit lay broken by the side of the
table, from which it had fallen unnoticed to the floor.  No other
articles of ornament appeared in the apartment.  Hermanric's downcast
eyes and melancholy, unchanging expressions betrayed the gloomy
abstraction in which he was absorbed.  With one hand clasped in his,
and the other resting with her head on his shoulder, Antonina listened
attentively to the alternate rising and falling of the wind.  Her
beauty had grown fresher and more woman-like during her sojourn at the
farm-house.  Cheerfulness and hope seemed to have gained at length all
the share in her being assigned to them by nature at her birth.  Even
at this moment of tempest and darkness there was more of wonder and awe
than of agitation and affright in her expression, as she sat
hearkening, with flushed cheek and brightened eye, to the progress of
the nocturnal storm.

Thus engrossed by their thoughts, Hermanric and Antonina remained
silent in their little retreat, until the reveries of both were
suddenly interrupted by the snapping asunder of the bar of wood which
secured the door of the room, the stress of which, as it bent under the
repeated shocks of the wind, the rotten spar was too weak to sustain
any longer. There was something inexpressibly desolate in the flood of
rain, wind, and darkness that seemed instantly to pour into the chamber
through the open door, as it flew back violently on its frail hinges.
Antonina changed colour, and shuddered involuntarily, as Hermanric
hastily rose and closed the door again, by detaching its rude latch
from the sling which held it when not wanted for use.  He looked round
the room as he did so for some substitute for the broken bar, but
nothing that was fit for the purpose immediately met his eye, and he
muttered to himself as he returned impatiently to his seat:  'While we
are here to watch it the latch is enough; it is new and strong.'

He seemed on the point of again relapsing into his former gloom, when
the voice of Antonina arrested his attention, and aroused him for the
moment from his thoughts.

'Is it in the power of the tempest to make you, a warrior of a race of
heroes, thus sorrowful and sad?' she asked, in accents of gentle
reproach.  'Even I, as I look on these walls that are so eloquent of my
happiness, and sit by you whose presence makes that happiness, can
listen to the raging storm, and feel no heaviness over my heart!  What
is there to either of us in the tempest that should oppress us with
gloom?  Does not the thunder come from the same heaven as the sunshine
of the summer day? You are so young, so generous, so brave,--you have
loved, and pitied, and succoured me,--why should the night language of
the sky cast such sorrow and such silence over you?'

'It is not from sorrow that I am silent,' replied Hermanric, with a
constrained smile, 'but from weariness with much toil in the camp.'


He stifled a sigh as he spoke.  His head returned to its old downcast
position.  The struggle between his assumed carelessness and his real
inquietude was evidently unequal.  As she looked fixedly on him, with
the vigilant eye of affection, the girl's countenance saddened with
his. She nestled closer to his side and resumed the discourse in
anxious and entreating tones.

'It is haply the strife between our two nations which has separated us
already, and may separate us again, that thus oppresses you,' said she;
'but think, as I do, of the peace that must come, and not of the
warfare that now is.  Think of the pleasures of our past days, and of
the happiness of our present moments,--thus united, thus living,
loving, hoping for each other; and, like me, you will doubt not of the
future that is in preparation for us both!  The season of tranquillity
may return with the season of spring.  The serene heaven will then be
reflected on a serene country and a happy people; and in those days of
sunshine and peace, will any hearts among all the glad population be
more joyful than ours?'

She paused a moment.  Some sudden thought or recollection heightened
her colour and caused her to hesitate ere she proceeded.  She was about
at length to continue, when a peal of thunder, louder than any which
had preceded it, burst threateningly over the house and drowned the
first accents of her voice.  The wind moaned loudly, the rain splashed
against the door, the latch rattled long and sharply in its socket.
Once more Hermanric rose from his seat, and approaching the fire,
placed a fresh log of wood upon the dying embers.  His dejection seemed
now to communicate itself to Antonina, and as he reseated himself by
her side, she did not address him again.

Thoughts, dreary and appalling beyond any that had occupied it before,
were rising in the mind of the Goth.  His inquietude at the encampment
in the suburbs was tranquillity itself compared to the gloom which now
oppressed him.  All the evaded dues of his nation, his family, and his
calling; all the suppressed recollections of the martial occupation he
had slighted, and the martial enmities he had disowned, now revived
avengingly in his memory.  Yet, vivid as these remembrances were, they
weakened none of those feelings of passionate devotion to Antonina by
which their influence within him had hitherto been overcome.  They
existed with them--the old recollections with the new emotions--the
stern rebukings of the warrior's nature with the anxious forebodings of
the lover's heart.  And now, his mysterious meeting with Ulpius;
Goisvintha's unexpected return to health; the dreary rising and furious
progress of the night tempest, began to impress his superstitious mind
as a train of unwonted and meaning incidents, destined to mark the
fatal return of his kinswoman's influence over his own actions and
Antonina's fate.

One by one, his memory revived with laborious minuteness every incident
that had attended his different interviews with the Roman girl, from
the first night when she had strayed into his tent to the last happy
evening that he had spent with her at the deserted farm-house.  Then
tracing further backwards the course of his existence, he figured to
himself his meeting with Goisvintha among the Italian Alps; his
presence at the death of her last child, and his solemn engagement, on
hearing her recital of the massacre at Aquileia, to avenge her on the
Romans with his own hands.  Roused by these opposite pictures of the
past, his imagination peopled the future with images of Antonina again
endangered, afflicted, and forsaken; with visions of the impatient
army, spurred at length into ferocious action, making universal havoc
among the people of Rome, and forcing him back for ever into their
avenging ranks.  No decision for resistance or resignation to flight
presented itself to his judgment.  Doubt, despair, and apprehension
held unimpeded sway over his impressible but inactive faculties.  The
night itself, as he looked forth on it, was not more dark; the wild
thunder, as he listened to it, not more gloomy; the name of Goisvintha,
as he thought on it, not more ominous of evil, than the sinister
visions that now startled his imagination and oppressed his weary mind.


There was something indescribably simple, touching, and eloquent in the
very positions of Hermanric and Antonina as they now sat together--the
only members of their respective nations who were united in affection
and peace--in the lonely farm-house.  Both the girl's hands were
clasped over Hermanric's shoulder, and her head rested on them, turned
from the door towards the interior of the room, and so displaying her
rich, black hair in all its luxuriance.  The head of the Goth was still
sunk on his breast, as though he were wrapped in a deep sleep, and his
hands hung listlessly side by side over the scabbard of his sheathed
sword, which lay across his knees.  The fire flamed only at intervals,
the fresh log that had been placed on it not having been thoroughly
kindled as yet. Sometimes the light played on the white folds of
Antonina's dress; sometimes over the bright surface of Hermanric's
cuirass, which he had removed and laid by his side on the ground;
sometimes over his sword, and his hands, as they rested on it; but it
was not sufficiently powerful or lasting to illuminate the room, the
walls and corners of which it left in almost complete darkness.

The thunder still pealed from without, but the rain and wind had
partially lulled.  The night hours had moved on more swiftly than our
narrative of the events that marked them.  It was now midnight.

No sound within the room reached Antonina's ear but the quick rattling
of the door-latch, shaken in its socket by the wind.  As one by one the
moments journeyed slowly onward, it made its harsh music with as
monotonous a regularity as though it were moved by their progress, and
kept pace with their eternal march.  Gradually the girl found herself
listening to this sharp, discordant sound, with all the attention she
could have bestowed at other times on the ripple of a distant rivulet
or the soothing harmony of a lute, when, just as it seemed adapting
itself most easily to her senses, it suddenly ceased, and the next
instant a gust of wind, like that which had rushed through the open
door on the breaking of the rotten bar, waved her hair about her face
and fluttered the folds of her light, loose dress.  She raised her head
and whispered tremulously to Hermanric--

'The door is open again--the latch has given way!'

The Goth started from his reverie and looked up hastily.  At that
instant the rattling of the latch recommenced as suddenly as it had
ceased, and the air of the room recovered its former tranquillity.

'Calm yourself, beloved one,' said Hermanric gently; 'your fancy has
misled you--the door is safe.'

He parted back her dishevelled hair caressingly as he spoke.  Incapable
of doubting the lightest word that fell from his lips, and hearing no
suspicious or unwonted sound in the room, she never attempted to
justify her suspicions.  As she again rested her head on his shoulder,
a vague misgiving oppressed her heart, and drew from her an
irrepressible sigh; but she gave her apprehensions no expression in
words.  After listening for a moment more to assure himself of the
security of the latch, the Goth resumed insensibly the contemplations
from which he had been disturbed; once more his head drooped, and again
his hands returned mechanically to their old listless position, side by
side, on the scabbard of his sword.

The faint, fickle flames still rose and fell, gleaming here and sinking
there, the latch sounded sharply in its socket, the thunder yet uttered
its surly peal, but the wind was now subsiding into fainter moans, and
the rain began to splash faintly and more faintly against the shutters
without.  To the watchers in the farm-house nothing was altered to the
eye, and little to the ear.  Fatal security!  The last few minutes had
darkly determined their future destinies--in the loved and cherished
retreat they were now no longer alone.

They heard no stealthy footsteps pacing round their dwelling, they saw
no fierce eyes peering into the interior of the farm-house through a
chink in the shutters, they marked no dusky figure passing through the
softly and quickly opened door, and gliding into the darkest corner of
the room.  Yet, now as they sat together, communing in silence with
their young, sad hearts, the threatening figure of Goisvintha stood,
shrouded in congenial darkness, under their protecting roof and in
their beloved chamber, rising still and silent almost at their very
sides.

Though the fire of her past fever had raged again through her veins,
and though startling visions of the murders at Aquileia had flashed
before her mind as the wild lightning before her eyes, she had traced
her way through the suburbs and along the high-road, and down the
little path to the farm-house gate, without straying, without
hesitating.  Regardless of the darkness and the storm, she had prowled
about the house, had raised the latch, had waited for a loud peal of
thunder ere she passed the door, and had stolen shadow-like into the
darkest corner of the room, with a patience and a determination that
nothing could disturb. And now, when she stood at the goal of her worst
wishes, even now, when she looked down upon the two beings by whom she
had been thwarted and deceived, her fierce self-possession did not
desert her; her lips quivered over her locked teeth, her bosom heaved
beneath her drenched garments, but neither sighs nor curses, not even a
smile of triumph or a movement of anger escaped her.

She never looked at Antonina; her eyes wandered not for a moment from
Hermanric's form.  The quickest, faintest gleam of firelight that
gleamed over it was followed through its fitful course by her eager
glance, rapid and momentary as itself.  Soon her attention was fixed
wholly upon his hands, as they lay over the scabbard of his sword; and
then, slowly and obscurely, a new and fatal resolution sprung up within
her.  The various emotions pictured in her face became resolved into
one sinister expression, and, without removing her eyes from the Goth,
she slowly drew from the bosom-folds of her garment a long sharp knife.

The flames alternately trembled into light and subsided into darkness
as at first; Hermanric and Antonina yet continued in their old
positions, absorbed in their thoughts and in themselves; and still
Goisvintha remained unmoved as ever, knife in hand, watchful, steady,
silent as before.

But beneath the concealment of her outward tranquillity raged a
contention under which her mind darkened and her heart writhed.  Twice
she returned the knife to its former hiding-place, and twice she drew
it forth again; her cheeks grew paler and paler, she pressed her
clenched hand convulsively over her bosom, and leant back languidly
against the wall behind her.  No thought of Antonina had part in this
great strife of secret emotions; her wrath had too much of anguish in
it to be spent against a stranger and an enemy.

After the lapse of a few moments more, her strength returned--her
firmness was aroused.  The last traces of grief and despair that had
hitherto appeared in her eyes vanished from them in an instant. Rage,
vengeance, ferocity, lowered over them as she crept stealthily forward
to the very side of the Goth, and, when the next gleam of the fire
played upon him, drew the knife fiercely across the back of his hands.
The cut was true, strong, and rapid--it divided the tendons from first
to last--he was crippled for life.

At that instant the fire touched the very heart of the log that had
been laid on it.  It crackled gaily; it blazed out brilliantly.  The
whole room was as brightly illuminated as if a Christmas festival of
ancient England had been preparing within its walls!

The warm, cheerful light showed the Goth the figure of his assassin,
ere the first cry of anguish had died away on his lips, or the first
start of irrepressible horror ceased to vibrate through his frame.  The
cries of his hapless companion, as the whole scene of vengeance,
treachery, and mutilation flashed in one terrible instant before her
eyes, seemed not even to reach his ears.  Once he looked down upon his
helpless hands, when the sword rolled heavily from them to the floor.
Then his gaze directed itself immovably upon Goisvintha, as she stood
at a little distance from him, with her blood-stained knife, silent as
himself.


There was no fury--no defiance--not even the passing distortion of
physical suffering in his features, as he now looked on her.  Blank,
rigid horror--tearless, voiceless, helpless despair, seemed to have
petrified the expression of his face into an everlasting form,
unyouthful and unhopeful--as if he had been imprisoned from his
childhood, and a voice was now taunting him with the pleasures of
liberty, from a grating in his dungeon walls.  Not even when Antonina,
recovering from her first agony of terror, pressed her convulsive
kisses on his cold cheek, entreating him to look on her, did he turn
his head, or remove his eyes from Goisvintha's form.

At length the deep steady accents of the woman's voice were heard
through the desolate silence.

'Traitor in word and thought you may be yet, but traitor in deed you
never more shall be!' she began, pointing to his hands with her knife.
'Those hands, that have protected a Roman life, shall never grasp a
Roman sword, shall never pollute again by their touch a Gothic weapon!
I remembered, as I watched you in the darkness, how the women of my
race once punished their recreant warriors when they fled to them from
a defeat.  So have I punished you!  The arm that served not the cause
of sister and sister's children--of king and king's nation--shall serve
no other!  I am half avenged of the murders at Aquileia, now that I am
avenged on you!  Go, fly with the Roman you have chosen to the city of
her people!  Your life as a warrior is at an end!'

He made her no answer.  There are emotions, the last of a life, which
tear back from nature the strongest barriers that custom raises to
repress her, which betray the lurking existence of the first rude
social feeling of the primeval days of a great nation, in the breasts
of their most distant descendants, however widely their acquirements,
their prosperities, or their changes may seem to have morally separated
them from their ancestors of old.  Such were the emotions now awakened
in the heart of the Goth.  His Christianity, his love, his knowledge of
high aims, and his experience of new ideas, sank and deserted him, as
though he had never known them.  He thought on his mutilated hands, and
no other spirit moved within him, but the ancient Gothic spirit of
centuries back; the inspiration of his nation's early Northern songs
and early Northern achievements--the renown of courage and the
supremacy of strength.

Vainly did Antonina, in the midst of the despair that still possessed
her, yearn for a word from his lips or a glance from his eyes; vainly
did her trembling fingers, tearing the bandages from her robe, stanch
the blood on his wounded hands; vainly did her voice call on him to fly
and summon help from his companions in the camp!  His mind was far
away, brooding over the legends of the battle-fields of his ancestors,
remembering how, even in the day of victory, they slew themselves if
they were crippled in the fray, how they scorned to exist for other
interests than the interests of strife, how they mutilated traitors as
Goisvintha had mutilated him!  Such were the objects that enchained his
inward faculties, while his outward senses were still enthralled by the
horrible fascination that existed for him in the presence of the
assassin by his side.  His very consciousness of his existence, though
he moved and breathed, seemed to have ceased.

'You thought to deceive me in my sickness, you hoped to profit by my
death,' resumed Goisvintha, returning contemptuously her victim's
glance.  'You trusted in the night, and the darkness, and the storm;
you were secure in your boldness, in your strength, in the secrecy of
this lurking-place that you have chosen for your treachery, but your
stratagems and your expectations have failed you!  At Aquileia I learnt
to be wily and watchful as you!  I discovered your desertion of the
warriors and the camp; I penetrated the paths to your hiding-place; I
entered it as softly as I once departed from the dwelling where my
children were slain!  In my just vengeance I have treated you as
treacherously as you would have treated me!  Remember your murdered
brother; remember the child I put into your arms wounded and received
from them dead; remember your broken oaths and forgotten promises, and
make to your nation, to your duties, and to me, the atonement--the last
and the only one--that in my mercy I have left in your power--the
atonement of death.'


Again she paused, and again no reply awaited her.  Still the Goth
neither moved nor spoke, and still Antonina--kneeling unconsciously
upon the sword, now useless to him for ever--continued to stanch the
blood on his hands with a mechanical earnestness that seemed to shut
out the contemplation of every other object from her eyes.  The tears
streamed incessantly down her cheeks, but she never turned towards
Goisvintha, never suspended her occupation.

Meanwhile, the fire still blazed noisily on the cheerful hearth; but
the storm, as if disdaining the office of heightening the human horror
of the farm-house scene, was rapidly subsiding.  The thunder pealed
less frequently and less loudly, the wind fell into intervals of
noiseless calm, and occasionally the moonlight streamed, in momentary
brightness, through the ragged edges of the fast breaking clouds.  The
breath of the still morning was already moving upon the firmament of
the stormy night.

'Has life its old magic for you yet?' continued Goisvintha, in tones of
pitiless reproach.  'Have you forgotten, with the spirit of your
people, the end for which your ancestors lived?  Is not your sword at
your feet? Is not the knife in my hand?  Do not the waters of the
Tiber, rolling yonder to the sea, offer to you the grave of oblivion
that all may seek? Die then!  In your last hour be a Goth; even to the
Romans you are worthless now!  Already your comrades have discovered
your desertion; will you wait till you are hung for a rebel?  Will you
live to implore the mercy of your enemies, or, dishonoured and
defenceless, will you endeavour to escape?  You are of the blood of my
family, but again I say it to you--die!'

His pale lips trembled; he looked round for the first time at Antonina,
but his utterance struggled ineffectually, even yet, against unyielding
despair.  He was still silent.

Goisvintha turned from him disdainfully, and approaching the fire sat
down before it, bending her haggard features over the brilliant flames.
For a few minutes she remained absorbed in her evil thoughts, but no
articulate word escaped her; and when at length she again abruptly
broke the silence, it was not to address the Goth or to fix her eyes on
him as before.

Still cowering over the fire, apparently as regardless of the presence
of the two beings whose happiness she had just crushed for ever as if
they had never existed, she began to recite, in solemn, measured,
chanting tones, a legend of the darkest and earliest age of Gothic
history, keeping time to herself with the knife that she still held in
her hand.  The malignity in her expression, as she pursued her
employment, betrayed the heartless motive that animated it, almost as
palpably as the words of the composition she was repeating:  thus she
now spoke:--

    'The tempest-god's pinions o'ershadow the sky,
    The waves leap to welcome the storm that is nigh,
    Through the hall of old Odin re-echo the shocks
    That the fierce ocean hurls at his rampart of rocks,
    As, alone on the crags that soar up from the sands,
    With his virgin SIONA the young AGNAR stands;
    Tears sprinkle their dew on the sad maiden's cheeks,
    And the voice of the chieftain sinks low while he speaks:

    "Crippled in the fight for ever,
    Number'd with the worse than slain;
    Weak, deform'd, disabled!--never
    Can I join the hosts again!
    With the battle that is won
    AGNAR'S earthly course is run!

    "When thy shatter'd frame must yield,
    If thou seek'st a future field;
    When thy arm, that sway'd the strife,
    Fails to shield thy worthless life;
    When thy hands no more afford
    Full employment to the sword;
    Then, preserve--respect thy name;
    Meet thy death--to live is shame!
    Such is Odin's mighty will;
    Such commands I now fulfil!"'

At this point in the legend, she paused and turned suddenly to observe
its effect on Hermanric.  All its horrible application to himself
thrilled through his heart.  His head drooped, and a low groan burst
from his lips.  But even this evidence of the suffering she was
inflicting failed to melt the iron malignity of Goisvintha's
determination.


'Do you remember the death of Agnar?' she cried.  'When you were a
child, I sung it to you ere you slept, and you vowed as you heard it,
that when you were a man, if you suffered his wounds you would die his
death!  He was crippled in a victory, yet he slew himself on the day of
his triumph; you are crippled in your treachery, and have forgotten
your boy's honour, and will live in the darkness of your shame!  Have
you lost remembrance of that ancient song?  You heard it from me in the
morning of your years; listen, and you shall hear it to the end; it is
the dirge for your approaching death!'

She continued--

    "SIONA, mourn not!--where I go
    The warriors feel nor pain nor woe;
    They raise aloft the gleaming steel,
    Their wounds, though warm, untended heal;
    Their arrows bellow through the air
    In showers, as they battle there;
    In mighty cups their wine is pour'd,
    Bright virgins throng their midnight board!

    "Yet think not that I die unmov'd;
    I mourn the doom that sets me free,
    As I think, betroth'd--belov'd,
    On all the joys I lose in thee!
    To form my boys to meet the fray,
    Where'er the Gothic banner streams;
    To guard thy night, to glad thy day,
    Made all the bliss of AGNAR'S dreams--
    Dreams that must now be all forgot,
    Earth's joys have passed from AGNAR'S lot!

    "See, athwart the face of light
    Float the clouds of sullen Night!
    Odin's warriors watch for me
    By the earth-encircling sea!
    The water's dirges howl my knell;
    'Tis time I die--Farewell-Farewell!"

    'He rose with a smile to prepare for the spring,
    He flew from the rock like a bird on the wing;
    The sea met her prey with a leap and a roar,
    And the maid stood alone by the wave-riven shore!

    The winds mutter'd deep, with a woe-boding sound,
    As she wept o'er the footsteps he'd left on the ground;
    And the wild vultures shriek'd, for the chieftain who spread
    Their battle-field banquets was laid with the dead!'

As, with a slow and measured emphasis, Goisvintha pronounced the last
lines of the poem she again approached Hermanric.  But the eyes of the
Goth sought her no longer.  She had calmed the emotions that she had
hoped to irritate.  Of the latter divisions of her legend, those only
which were pathetic had arrested the lost chieftain's attention, and
the blunted faculties of his heart recovered their old refinement as he
listened to them.  A solemn composure of love, grief, and pity appeared
in the glance of affection that he now directed on the girl's
despairing countenance.  Years of good thoughts, an existence of tender
cares, an eternity of youthful devotion spoke in that rapt, momentary,
eloquent gaze, and imprinted on his expression a character ineffably
beautiful and calm--a nobleness above the human, and approaching the
angelic and divine.

Intuitively Goisvintha followed the direction of his eyes, and looked,
like him, on the Roman girl's face.  A lowering expression of hatred
replaced the scorn that had hitherto distorted her passionate features.
Mechanically her hand again half raised the knife, and the accents of
her wrathful voice once more disturbed the sacred silence of affection
and grief.

'Is it for the girl there that you would still live?' she cried
sternly. 'I foreboded it, coward, when I  first looked on you!  I
prepared for it when I wounded you!  I made sure that when my anger
again threatened this new ruler of your thoughts and mover of your
actions, you should have lost the power to divert it from her again!
Think you that, because my disdain has delayed it, my vengeance on her
is abandoned? Long since I swore to you that she should die, and I will
hold to my purpose! I have punished you; I will slay her!  Can you
shield her from the blow to-night, as you shielded her in your tent?
You are weaker before me than a child!'

She ceased abruptly, for at this moment a noise of hurrying footsteps
and contending voices became suddenly audible from without.  As she
heard it, a ghastly paleness chased the flush of anger from her cheeks.
With the promptitude of apprehension she snatched the sword of
Hermanric from under Antonina, and ran it through the staples intended
to hold the rude bar of the door.  The next instant the footsteps
sounded on the garden path, and the next the door was assailed.

The good sword held firm, but the frail barrier that it sustained
yielded at the second shock and fell inwards, shattered, to the floor.
Instantly the gap was darkened by human forms, and the firelight glowed
over the repulsive countenances of two Huns who headed the intruders,
habited in complete armour and furnished with naked swords.

'Yield yourself prisoner by Alaric's command,' cried one of the
barbarians, 'or you shall be slain as a deserter where you now stand!'

The Goth had risen to his feet as the door was burst in.  The arrival
of his pursuers seemed to restore his lost energies, to deliver him at
once from an all-powerful thraldom.  An expression of triumph and
defiance shone over his steady features when he heard the summons of
the Hun. For a moment he stooped towards Antonina, as she clung
fainting round him.  His mouth quivered and his eye glistened as he
kissed her cold cheek.  In that moment all the hopelessness of his
position, all the worthlessness of his marred existence, all the
ignominy preparing for him when he returned to the camp, rushed over
his mind.  In that moment the worst horrors of departure and death, the
fiercest rackings of love and despair, assailed but did not overcome
him.  In that moment he paid his final tribute to the dues of
affection, and braced for the last time the fibres of manly
dauntlessness and Spartan resolve!

The next instant he tore himself from the girl's arms, the old
hero-spirit of his conquering nation possessed every nerve in his
frame, his eye brightened again gloriously with its lost warrior-light,
his limbs grew firm, his face was calm, he confronted the Huns with a
mien of authority and a smile of disdain, and, as he presented to them
his defenceless breast, not the faintest tremor was audible in his
voice, while he cried in accents of steady command--

'Strike!  I yield not!'

The Huns rushed forward with fierce cries, and buried their swords in
his body.  His warm young blood gushed out upon the floor of the
dwelling which had been the love-shrine of the heart that shed it.
Without a sigh from his lips or a convulsion on his features, he fell
dead at the feet of his enemies; all the valour of his disposition, all
the gentleness of his heart, all the vigour of his form, resolved in
one humble instant into a senseless and burdensome mass!

Antonina beheld the assassination, but was spared the sight of the
death that followed it.  She fell insensible by the side of her young
warrior--her dress was spotted with his blood, her form was motionless
as his own.

'Leave him there to rot!  His pride in his superiority will not serve
him now--even to a grave!' cried the Hun leader to his companions, as
he dried on the garments of the corpse his reeking sword.

'And this woman,' demanded one of his comrades, 'is she to be liberated
or secured?'

He pointed as he spoke to Goisvintha.  During the brief scene of the
assassination, the very exercise of her faculties seemed to have been
suspended.  She had never stirred a limb or uttered a word.

The Hun recognised her as the woman who had questioned and bribed him
at the camp.  'She is the traitor's kinswoman and is absent from the
tents without leave,' he answered.  'Take her prisoner to Alaric; she
will bear us witness that we have done as he commanded us.  As for the
girl,' he continued, glancing at the blood on Antonina's dress, and
stirring her figure carelessly with his foot, 'she may be dead too, for
she neither moves nor speaks, and may be left like her protector to lie
graveless where she is.  For us, it is time that we depart--the king is
impatient of delay.'


As they led her roughly from the house, Goisvintha shuddered, and
attempted to pause for a moment when she passed the corpse of the Goth.
Death, that can extinguish enmities as well as sunder loves, rose awful
and appealing as she looked her last at her murdered brother, and
remembered her murdered husband.  No tears flowed from her eyes, no
groans broke from her bosom; but there was a pang, a last momentary
pang of grief and pity at her heart as she murmured while they forced
her away--'Aquileia! Aquileia! have I outlived thee for this!'

The troops retired. For a few minutes silence ruled uninterruptedly
over the room where the senseless girl still lay by the side of all
that was left to her of the object of her first youthful love. But ere
long footsteps again approached the farm-house door, and two Goths, who
had formed part of the escort allotted to the Hun, approached the young
chieftain's corpse. Quickly and silently they raised it in their arms
and bore it into the garden. There they scooped a shallow hole with
their swords in the fresh, flower-laden turf, and having laid the body
there, they hastily covered it, and rapidly departed without returning
to the house.

These men had served among the warriors committed to Hermanric's
command.  By many acts of frank generosity and encouragement, the young
chieftain had won their rough attachment.  They mourned his fate, but
dared not obstruct the sentence, or oppose the act that determined it.
At their own risk they had secretly quitted the advancing ranks of
their comrades, to use the last privilege and obey the last dictate of
human kindness; and they thought not of the lonely girl as they now
left her desolate, and hurried away to reassume their appointed
stations ere it was too late.

The turf lay caressingly round the young warrior's form; its crushed
flowers pressed softly against his cold cheek; the fragrance of the new
morning wafted its pure incense gently about his simple grave! Around
him flowered the delicate plants that the hand of Antonina had raised
to please his eye.  Near him stood the dwelling, sacred to the first
and last kiss that he had impressed upon her lips; and about him, on
all sides, rose the plains and woodlands that had engrossed, with her
image, the devotion of all her dearest thoughts.  He lay, in his death,
in the midst of the magic circle of the best joys of his life!  It was
a fitter burial-place for the earthly relics of that bright and
generous spirit than the pit in the carnage-laden battle-field, or the
desolate sepulchres of a northern land!



CHAPTER 19.

THE GUARDIAN RESTORED.

Not long is the new-made grave left unwatched to the solemn
guardianship of Solitude and Night. More than a few minutes have
scarcely elapsed since it was dug, yet already human footsteps press
its yielding surface, and a human glance scans attentively its small
and homely mound.

But it is not Antonina, whom he loved; it is not Goisvintha, through
whose vengeance he was lost, who now looks upon the earth above the
young warrior's corpse.  It is a stranger, an outcast; a man lost,
dishonoured, abandoned--it is the solitary and ruined Ulpius who now
gazes with indifferent eyes upon the peaceful garden and the eloquent
grave.

In the destinies of woe committed to the keeping of the night, the
pagan had been fatally included. The destruction that had gone forth
against the body of the young man who lay beneath the earth had
overtaken the mind of the old man who stood over his simple grave.  The
frame of Ulpius, with all its infirmities, was still there, but the
soul of ferocious patience and unconquerable daring that had lighted it
grandly in its ruin was gone.  Over the long anguish of that woeful
life the veil of self-oblivion had closed for ever!


He had been dismissed by Alaric, but he had not returned to the city
whither he was bidden.  Throughout the night he had wandered about the
lonely suburbs, striving in secret and horrible suffering for the
mastery of his mind.  There did the overthrow of all his hopes from the
Goths expand rapidly into the overthrow of the whole intellect that had
created his aspirations.  There had reason burst the bonds that had so
long chained, perverted, degraded it!  At length, wandering hither and
thither, he had dragged the helpless body, possessed no longer by the
perilous mind, to the farm-house garden in which he now stood, gazing
alternately at the upturned sods of the chieftain's grave and the red
gleam of the fire as it glowed from the dreary room through the gap of
the shattered door.

His faculties were fatally disordered rather than utterly destroyed.
His penetration, his firmness, and his cunning were gone; but a wreck
of memory, useless and unmanageable--a certain capacity for momentary
observation still remained to him.  The shameful miscarriage in the
tent of Alaric, which had overthrown his faculties, had passed from him
as an event that never happened, but he remembered fragments of his
past existence--he still retained a vague consciousness of the ruling
purpose of his whole life.

These embryo reflections, disconnected and unsustained, flitted to and
fro over his dark mind as luminous exhalations over a marsh--rising and
sinking, harmless and delusive, fitful and irregular. What he
remembered of the past he remembered carelessly, viewing it with as
vacant a curiosity as if it were the visionary spectacle of another
man's struggles and misfortunes and hopes, acting under it as under a
mysterious influence, neither the end nor the reason of which he cared
to discover.  For the future, it was to his thoughts a perfect blank;
for the present, it was a jarring combination of bodily weariness and
mental repose.

He shuddered as he stood shelterless under the open heaven.  The cold,
that he had defied in the vaults of the rifted wall, pierced in the
farm-house garden; his limbs, which had resisted repose on the hard
journey from Rome to the camp of the Goths, now trembled so that he was
fain to rest them on the ground.  For a short time he sat glaring with
vacant and affrighted eyes upon the open dwelling before him, as though
he longed to enter it but dare not.  At length the temptation of the
ruddy firelight seemed to vanquish his irresolution; he rose with
difficulty, and slowly and hesitatingly entered the house.

He had advanced, thief-like, but a few steps, he had felt but for a
moment the welcome warmth of the fire, when the figure of Antonina,
still extended insensible upon the floor, caught his eye; he approached
it with eager curiosity, and, raising the girl on his arm, looked at
her with a long and rigid scrutiny.

For some moments no expression of recognition passed his lips or
appeared on his countenance, as, with a mechanical, doting gesture of
fondness, he smoothed her dishevelled hair over her forehead.  While he
was thus engaged, while the remains of the gentleness of his childhood
were thus awfully revived in the insanity of his age, a musical string
wound round a small piece of gilt wood fell from its concealment in her
bosom; he snatched it from the ground--it was the fragment of her
broken lute, which had never quitted her since the night when, in her
innocent grief, she had wept over it in her maiden bed-chamber.

Small, obscure, insignificant as it was, this little token touched the
fibre in the Pagan's shattered mind which the all-eloquent form and
presence of its hapless mistress had failed to reach; his memory flew
back instantly to the garden on the Pincian Mount, and to his past
duties in Numerian's household, but spoke not to him of the calamities
he had wreaked since that period on his confiding master.  His
imagination presented to him at this moment but one image--his
servitude in the Christian's abode; and as he now looked on the girl he
could regard himself but in one light--as 'the guardian restored'.

'What does she with her music here?' he whispered apprehensively.
'This is not her father's house, and the garden yonder looks not from
the summit of the hill!'

As he curiously examined the room, the red spots on the floor suddenly
attracted his attention.  A panic, a frantic terror seemed instantly to
overwhelm him.  He rose with a cry of horror, and, still holding the
girl on his arm, hurried out into the garden trembling and breathless,
as if the weapon of an assassin had scared him from the house.


The shock of her rough removal, the sudden influence of the fresh, cold
air, restored Antonina to the consciousness of life at the moment when
Ulpius, unable to support her longer, laid her against the little heap
of turf which marked the position of the young chieftain's grave.  Her
eyes opened wildly; their first glance fixed upon the shattered door
and the empty room.  She rose from the ground, advanced a few steps
towards the house, then paused, rigid, breathless, silent, and, turning
slowly, faced the upturned turf.

The grave was all-eloquent of its tenant.  His cuirass, which the
soldiers had thought to bury with the body that it had defended in
former days, had been overlooked in the haste of the secret interment,
and lay partly imbedded in the broken earth, partly exposed to view--a
simple monument over a simple grave!  Her tearless, dilated eyes looked
down on it as though they would number each blade of grass, each morsel
of earth by which it was surrounded!  Her hair waved idly about her
cheeks, as the light wind fluttered it; but no expression passed over
her face, no gestures escaped her limbs.  Her mind toiled and quivered,
as if crushed by a fiery burden; but her heart was voiceless, and her
body was still.

Ulpius had stood unnoticed by her side.  At this moment he moved so as
to confront her, and she suddenly looked up at him.  A momentary
expression of bewilderment and suspicion lightened the heavy vacancy of
despair which had chased their natural and feminine tenderness from her
eyes, but it disappeared rapidly.  She turned from the Pagan, knelt
down by the grave, and pressed her face and bosom against the little
mound of turf beneath her.

No voice comforted her, no arm caressed her, as her mind now began to
penetrate the mysteries, to probe the darkest depths of the long
night's calamities!  Unaided and unsolaced, while the few and waning
stars glimmered from their places in the sky, while the sublime
stillness of tranquillised Nature stretched around her, she knelt at
the altar of death, and raised her soul upward to the great heaven
above her, charged with its sacred offering of human grief!

Long did she thus remain; and when at length she arose from the ground,
when, approaching the Pagan, she fixed on him her tearless, dreary
eyes, he quailed before her glance, as his dull faculties struggled
vainly to resume the old, informing power that they had now for ever
lost. Nothing but the remembrance aroused by his first sight of the
fragment of the lute lived within even yet, as he whispered to her in
low, entreating tones--

'Come home--come home!  Your father may return before us--come home!'

As the words 'home' and 'father'--those household gods of the heart's
earliest existence--struck upon her ears, a change flashed with
electric suddenness over the girl's whole aspect.  She raised her wan
hands to the sky; all her woman's tenderness repossessed itself of her
heart; and as she again knelt down over the grave, her sobs rose
audibly through the calmed and fragrant air.

With Hermanric's corpse beneath her, with the blood-sprinkled room
behind her, with a hostile army and a famine-wasted city beyond her, it
was only through that flood of tears, that healing passion of gentle
emotions, that she rose superior to the multiplied horrors of her
situation at the very moment when her faculties and her life seemed
sinking under them alike.  Fully, freely, bitterly she wept, on the
kindly and parent earth--the patient, friendly ground that once bore
the light footsteps of the first of a race not created for death; that
now holds in its sheltering arms the loved ones, whom, in mourning, we
lay there to sleep; that shall yet be bound to the farthermost of its
depths, when the sun-bright presence of returning spirits shines over
its renovated frame, and love is resumed in angel perfection at the
point where death suspended it in mortal frailness!

'Come home--your father is awaiting you--come home!' repeated the Pagan
vacantly, moving slowly away as he spoke.


At the sound of his voice she started up, and clasping his arm with her
trembling fingers, to arrest his progress, looked affrightedly into his
seared and listless countenance.  As she thus gazed on him she appeared
for the first time to recognise him.  Fear and astonishment mingled in
her expression with grief and despair as she sunk at his feet, moaning
in tones of piercing entreaty--

'O Ulpius!--if Ulpius you are--have pity on me and take me to my
father! My father! my father!  In all the lonely world there is nothing
left to me but my father!'

'Why do you weep to me about your broken lute?' answered Ulpius, with a
dull, unmeaning smile; 'it was not I that destroyed it!'

'They have slain him!' she shrieked distractedly, heedless of the
Pagan's reply.  'I saw them draw their swords on him!  See, his blood
is on me--me!--Antonina, whom he protected and loved!  Look there; that
is a grave--his grave--I know it!  I have never seen him since; he is
down--down there! under the flowers I grew to gather for him!  They
slew him; and when I knew it not, they have buried him!--or you--you
have buried him!  You have hidden him under the cold garden earth!  He
is gone!--Ah, gone, gone--for ever gone!'

And she flung herself again with reckless violence on the grave.  After
looking steadfastly on her for a moment, Ulpius approached and raised
her from the earth.

'Come!' he cried angrily, 'the night grows on--your father waits!'

'The walls of Rome shut me from my father!  I shall never see my father
nor Hermanric again!' she cried, in tones of bitter anguish,
remembering more perfectly all the miseries of her position, and
struggling to release herself from the Pagan's grasp.

The walls of Rome!  At those words the mind of Ulpius opened to a flow
of dark remembrances, and lost the visions that had occupied it until
that moment.  He laughed triumphantly.

'The walls of Rome bow to my arm!' he cried, in exulting tones; 'I
pierced them with my good bar of iron!  I wound through them with my
bright lantern!  Spirits roared on me, and struck me down, and grinned
upon me in the thick darkness, but I passed the wall!  The thunder
pealed around me as I crawled along the winding rifts; but I won my way
through them!  I came out conquering on the other side!  Come, come,
come, come!  We will return!  I know the track, even in the darkness!
I can outwatch the sentinels!  You shall walk in the pathway that I
have broken through the bricks!

The girl's features lost for a moment their expression of grief, and
grew rigid with horror, as she glanced at his fiery eyes, and felt the
fearful suspicion of his insanity darkening over her mind.  She stood
powerless, trembling, unresisting, in his grasp, without attempting to
delude him into departure or to appease him into delay.

'Why did I make my passage through the wall?' muttered the Pagan in a
low, awe-struck voice, suddenly checking himself, as he was about to
step forward.  'Why did I tear down the strong brick-work and go forth
into the dark suburbs?'

He paused, and for a few moments struggled with his purposeless and
disconnected thoughts; but a blank, a darkness, an annihilation
overwhelmed Alaric and the Gothic camp, which he vainly endeavoured to
disperse.  He sighed bitterly to himself--'It is gone!' and still
grasping Antonina by the hand, drew her after him to the garden gate.

'Leave me!' she shrieked, as he passed onward into the pathway that led
to the high-road.  'Oh, be merciful, and leave me to die where he has
died!'

'Peace! or I will rend you limb by limb, as I rent the stones from the
wall when I passed through it!' he whispered to her in fierce accents,
as she struggled to escape him.  'You shall return with me to Rome!
You shall walk in the track that I have made in the rifted brick-work!'


Terror, anguish, exhaustion, overpowered her weak efforts.  Her lips
moved, partly in prayer and partly in ejaculation; but she spoke in
murmurs only, as she mechanically suffered the Pagan to lead her onward
by the hand.

They paced on under the waning starlight, over the cold, lonely road,
and through the dreary and deserted suburbs,--a fearful and discordant
pair!  Coldly, obediently, impassively, as if she were walking in a
dream, the spirit-broken girl moved by the side of her scarce-human
leader.  Disjointed exclamation, alternating horribly between infantine
simplicity and fierce wickedness, poured incessantly from the Pagan's
lips, but he never addressed himself further to his terror-stricken
companion.  So, wending rapidly onward, they gained the Gothic lines;
and here the madman slackened his pace, and paused, beast-like, to
glare around him, as he approached the habitations of men.

Still not opposed by Antonina, whose faculties of observation were
petrified by her terror into perfect inaction, even here, within reach
of the doubtful aid of the enemies of her people, the Pagan crept
forward through the loneliest places of the encampment, and, guided by
the mysterious cunning of his miserable race, eluded successfully the
observation of the drowsy sentinels.  Never bewildered by the
darkness--for the moon had gone down--always led by the animal instinct
co-existent with his disease, he passed over the waste ground between
the hostile encampment and the city, and arrived triumphant at the heap
of stones that marked his entrance to the rifted wall.

For one moment he stopped, and turning towards the girl, pointed
proudly to the dark, low breach he was about to penetrate.  Then,
drawing her half-fainting form closer to his side, looking up
attentively to the ramparts, and stepping as noiselessly as though turf
were beneath his feet, he entered the dusky rift with his helpless
charge.

As they disappeared in the recesses of the wall, Night--the stormy, the
eventful, the fatal!--reached its last limit; and the famished sentinel
on the fortifications of the besieged city roused himself from his
dreary and absorbing thoughts, for he saw that the new day was dawning
in the east.



CHAPTER 20.

THE BREACH REPASSED.

Slowly and mournfully the sentinel at the rifted wall raised his eyes
towards the eastern clouds as they brightened before the advancing
dawn. Desolate as was the appearance of the dull, misty daybreak, it
was yet the most welcome of all the objects surrounding the starving
soldier on which he could fix his languid gaze.  To look back on the
city behind him was to look back on the dreary charnel-house of famine
and death; to look down on the waste ground without the walls was to
look down on the dead body of the comrade of his watch, who, maddened
by the pangs of hunger which he had suffered during the night, had cast
himself from the rampart to meet a welcome death on the earth beneath.
Famished and despairing, the sentinel crouched on the fortifications
which he had now neither strength to pace nor care to defend, yearning
for the food that he had no hope to obtain, as he watched the grey
daybreak from his solitary post.

While he was thus occupied, the gloomy silence of the scene was
suddenly broken by the sound of falling brick-work at the inner base of
the wall, followed by faint entreaties for mercy and deliverance, which
rose on his ear, strangely mingled with disjointed expression of
defiance and exultation from a second voice.  He slowly turned his
head, and, looking down, saw on the ground beneath a young girl
struggling in the grasp of an old man, who was hurrying her onward in
the direction of the Pincian Gate.


For one moment the girl's eye met the sentinel's vacant glance, and she
renewed, with a last effort of strength, and a greater vehemence of
supplication, her cries for help; but the soldier neither moved nor
answered.  Exhausted as he was, no sight could affect him now but the
sight of food.  Like the rest of the citizens, he was sunk in a heavy
stupor of starvation--selfish, reckless, brutalised. No disasters could
depress, no atrocities rouse him.  Famine had torn asunder every social
tie, had withered every human sympathy among his besieged
fellow-citizens, and he was famishing like them.

At the moment when the dawn had first appeared, could he have looked
down by some mysterious agency to the interior foundations of the wall,
from the rampart on which he kept his weary watch, such a sight must
then have presented itself as would have aroused even his sluggish
observation to rigid attention and involuntary surprise.

Winding upward and downward among jagged masses of ruined brick-work,
now lost amid the shadows of dreary chasms, now prominent over the
elevations of rising arches, the dark irregular passages broken by
Ulpius in the rotten wall would then have presented themselves to his
eyes; not stretching forth in dismal solitude, not peopled only by the
reptiles native to the place, but traced in all their mazes by human
forms.  Then he would have perceived the fierce, resolute Pagan, moving
through darkness and obstacles with a sure, solemn progress, drawing
after him, like a dog devoted to his will, the young girl whose hapless
fate had doomed her to fall into his power.  Her half-fainting figure
might have been seen, sometimes prostrate on the higher places of the
breach, while her fearful guide descended before her into a chasm
beyond, and then turned to drag her after him to a darker and a lower
depth yet; sometimes bent in supplication, when her lips moved once
more with a last despairing entreaty, and her limbs trembled with a
final effort to escape from her captor's relentless grasp.  While
still, through all that opposed him, the same fierce tenacity of
purpose would have been invariably visible in every action of Ulpius,
constantly confirming him in his mad resolution to make his victim the
follower of his progress through the wall, ever guiding him with a
strange instinct through every hindrance, and preserving him from every
danger in his path, until it brought him forth triumphant, with his
prisoner still in his power, again free to tread the desolate streets
and mingle with the famine-stricken citizens of Rome.

And now when, after peril and anguish, she once more stood within the
city of her home, what hope remained to Antonina of obtaining her last
refuge under her father's roof, and deriving her solitary consolation
from the effort to regain her father's love?  With the termination of
his passage through the breach in the wall had ended every recollection
associated with it in the Pagan's shattered memory.  A new blank now
pervaded his lost faculties, desolate as that which had overwhelmed
them in the night when he first stood in the farm-house garden by the
young chieftain's grave.  He moved onward, unobservant, unthinking,
without aim or hope, driven by a mysterious restlessness, forgetting
the very presence of Antonina as she followed him, but still
mechanically grasping her hand, and dragging her after him he knew not
whither.

And she, on her part, made no effort more for deliverance.  She had
seen the sentinel unmoved by her entreaties, she had seen the walls of
her father's house receding from her longing eyes, as Ulpius pitilessly
hurried her father and farther from its distant door; and she lost the
last faint hope of restoration, the last lingering desire of life, as
the sense of her helplessness now weighed heaviest on her mind.  Her
heart was full of her young warrior, who had been slain, and of her
father, from whom she had parted in the hour of his wrath, as she now
feebly followed the Pagan's steps, and resigned herself to a speedy
exhaustion and death in her utter despair.


They turned from the Pincian Gate and gained the Campus Martius; and
here the aspect of the besieged city and the condition of its doomed
inhabitants were fully and fearfully disclosed to view. On the surface
of the noble area, once thronged with bustling crowds passing to and
fro in every direction as their various destinations or caprices might
lead them, not twenty moving figures were now discernible.  These few,
who still retained their strength or the resolution to pace the
greatest thoroughfare of Rome, stalked backwards and forwards
incessantly, their hollow eyes fixed on vacancy, their wan hands
pressed over their mouths; each separate, distrustful, and silent;
fierce as imprisoned madmen; restless as spectres disturbed in a place
of tombs.

Such were the citizens who still moved over the Campus Martius; and,
besetting their path wherever they turned, lay the gloomy numbers of
the dying and the dead--the victims already stricken by the pestilence
which had now arisen in the infected city, and joined the famine in its
work of desolation and death.  Around the public fountains, where the
water still bubbled up as freshly as in the summer-time of prosperity
and peace, the poorer population of beleaguered Rome had chiefly
congregated to expire.  Some still retained strength enough to drink
greedily at the margin of the stone basins, across which others lay
dead--their heads and shoulders immersed in the water--drowned from
lack of strength to draw back after their first draught.  Children
mounted over the dead bodies of their parents to raise themselves to
the fountain's brim; parents stared vacantly at the corpses of their
children alternately floating and sinking in the water, into which they
had fallen unsuccoured and unmourned.

In other parts of the place, at the open gates of the theatres and
hippodromes, in the unguarded porticoes of the palaces and the baths
lay the discoloured bodies of those who had died ere they could reach
the fountains--of women and children especially--surrounded in
frightful contrast by the abandoned furniture of luxury and the
discarded inventions of vice--by gilded couches--by inlaid tables--by
jewelled cornices--by obscene picture and statues--by brilliantly
framed, gaudily tinted manuscripts of licentious songs, still hanging
at their accustomed places on the lofty marble walls.  Farther on, in
the by-streets and the retired courts, where the corpse of the
tradesman was stretched on his empty counter; where the soldier of the
city guard dropped down overpowered ere he reached the limit of his
rounds; where the wealthy merchant lay pestilence-stricken upon the
last hoards of repulsive food which his gold had procured; the assassin
and the robber might be seen--now greedily devouring the offal that lay
around them, now falling dead upon the bodies which they had rifled but
the moment before.

Over the whole prospect, far and near, wherever it might extend,
whatever the horrors by which it might be occupied, was spread a blank,
supernatural stillness.  Not a sound arose; the living were as silent
as the dead; crime, suffering, despair, were all voiceless alike; the
trumpet was unheard in the guard-house; the bell never rang from the
church; even the thick, misty rain, that now descended from the black
and unmoving clouds, and obscured in cold shadows the outlines of
distant buildings and the pinnacle tops of mighty palaces, fell
noiseless to the ground.  The sky had no wind; the earth no echoes--the
pervading desolation appalled the eye; the vast stillness weighed dull
on the ear--it was a scene as of the last-left city of an exhausted
world, decaying noiselessly into primeval chaos.

Through this atmosphere of darkness and death, along these paths of
pestilence and famine; unregarding and unregarded, the Pagan and his
prisoner passed slowly onward towards the quarter of the city opposite
the Pincian Mount.  No ray of thought, even yet, brightened the dull
faculties of Ulpius; still he walked forward vacantly, and still he was
followed wearily by the fast-failing girl.

Sunk in her mingled stupor of bodily weakness and mental despair, she
never spoke, never raised her head, never looked forth on the one side
or the other.  She had now ceased even to feel the strong, cold grasp
of the Pagan's hand.  Shadowy visions of spheres beyond the world,
arrayed in enchanting beauty, and people with happy spirits in their
old earthly forms, where a long deathless existence moved smoothly and
dreamily onward, without mark of time or taint of woe, were opening
before her mind.  She lost all memory of afflictions and wrongs, all
apprehension of danger from the madman at whose mercy she remained.
And thus she still moved feebly onward as the will of Ulpius guided
her, with no observation of her present peril, and no anxiety for her
impending fate.


They passed the grand circular structure of the Pantheon, entered the
long narrow streets leading to the banks of the river, and finally
gained the margin of the Tiber--hard by the little island that still
rises in the midst of its waters.  Here, for the first time, the Pagan
paused mechanically in his course, and vacantly directed his dull,
dreamy eyes on the prospect before him, where the walls, stretching
abruptly outward from their ordinary direction, enclosed the Janiculum
Hill, as it rose with its irregular mass of buildings on the opposite
bank of the river.

At this sudden change from action to repose, the overtasked energies
which had hitherto gifted the limbs of Antonina with an unnatural power
of endurance, abruptly relaxed.  She sank down helpless and silent; her
head drooped towards the hard ground, as towards a welcome pillow, but
found no support, for the Pagan's iron grasp of her hand remained
unyielding as ever.  Infirm though he was, he appeared at this moment
to be unconscious that his prisoner was now hanging at his side.  Every
association connected with her, every recollection of his position with
her in her father's house, had vanished from his memory.  A darker
blindness seemed to have sunk over his bodily perceptions; his eyes
rolled slowly to and fro over the prospect before him, but regarded
nothing; his panting breaths came thick and fast; his shrunk chest
heaved as if some deep, dread agony were pent within it--it was evident
that a new crisis in his insanity was at hand.

At this moment one of the bands of marauders--the desperate criminals
of famine and plague--who still prowled through the city, appeared in
the street.  Their trembling hands sought their weapons, and their
haggard faces brightened, when they first discerned the Pagan and the
girl; but as they approached nearer they saw enough in the figures of
the two, at a glance, to destroy their hopes of seizing on them either
plunder or food.  For an instant they stood by their intended victims,
as if debating whether to murder them only for murder's sake, when the
appearance of two women, stealthily quitting a house farther on in the
street, carrying a basket covered by some tattered garments, attracted
their attention.  They turned instantly to follow the bearers of the
basket, and again Ulpius and Antonina were left alone on the river's
bank.

The appearance of the assassins had been powerless, as every other
sight or event in the city, in arousing the faculties of Ulpius.  He
had neither looked on them nor fled from them when they surrounded him;
but now when they were gone he slowly turned his head in the direction
by which they had departed.  His gaze wandered over the wet flagstones
of the street, over two corpses stretched on them at a little distance,
over the figure of a female slave who lay forsaken near the wall of one
of the houses, exerting her last energies to drink from the turbid
rain-water which ran down the kennel by her side; and still his eyes
remained unregardful of all that they encountered. The next object
which by chance attracted his vacant attention was a deserted temple.
This solitary building fixed him immediately in contemplation--it was
destined to open a new and a warning scene in the dark tragedy of his
closing life.

In his course through the city he had passed unheeded many temples far
more prominent in situation, far more imposing in structure, than this.
It was a building of no remarkable extent or extraordinary beauty.  Its
narrow porticoes and dark doorway were more fitted to repel than to
invite the eye; but it had one attraction, powerful above all glories
of architecture and all grandeur of situation to arrest in him those
wandering faculties whose sterner and loftier aims were now suspended
for ever; it was dedicated to Serapis--to the idol which had been the
deity of his first worship, and the inspiration of his last struggle
for the restoration of his faith.  The image of the god, with the
three-headed monster encircled by a serpent, obedient beneath his hand,
was carved over the portico.


What flood of emotions rushed into the vacant mind of Ulpius at the
instant when he discerned the long-loved, well-known image of the
Egyptian god, there was nothing for some moments outwardly visible in
him to betray.  His moral insensibility appeared but to be deepened as
his gaze was now fixed with rigid intensity on the temple portico.
Thus he continued to remain motionless, as if what he saw had petrified
him where he stood, when the clouds, which had been closing in deeper
and deeper blackness as the morning advanced, and which, still charged
with electricity, were gathering to revive the storm of the past night,
burst abruptly into a loud peal of thunder over his head.

At that warning sound, as if it had been the supernatural signal
awaited to arouse him, as if in one brief moment it awakened every
recollection of all that he had resolutely attempted during the night
of thunder that was past, he started into instant animation.  His
countenance brightened, his form expanded, he dropped the hand of
Antonina, raised his arm aloft towards the wrathful heaven in frantic
triumph, then staggering forwards, fell on his knees at the base of the
temple steps.

Whatever the remembrances of his passage through the wall at the
Pincian Hill, and of the toil and peril succeeding it, which had
revived when the thunder first sounded in his ear, they now vanished as
rapidly as they had arisen, and left his wandering memory free to
revert to the scenes which the image of Serapis was most fitted to
recall. Recollections of his boyish enjoyments in the temple at
Alexandria, of his youth's enthusiasm, of the triumphs of his early
manhood--all disjointed and wayward, yet all bright, glorious,
intoxicating--flashed before his shattered mind.  Tears, the first that
he had shed since his happy youth, flowed quickly down his withered
cheeks.  He pressed his hot forehead, he beat his parched hand in
ecstasy on the cold, wet steps beneath him.  He muttered breathless
ejaculations, he breathed strange murmurs of endearment, he humbled
himself in his rapturous delight beneath the walls of the temple like a
dog that has discovered his lost master and fawns affectionately at his
feet.  Criminal as he was, his joy in his abasement, his glory in his
miserable isolation from humanity, was a doom of degradation pitiable
to behold.

After an interval his mood changed.  He rose to his feet, his trembling
limbs strengthened with a youthful vigour as he ascended the temple
steps and gained its doorway.  He turned for a moment, and looked forth
over the street, ere he entered the hallowed domain of his distempered
imagination.  To him the cloudy sky above was now shining with the
radiance of the sun-bright East.  The death-laden highways of Rome, as
they stretched before him, were beautiful with lofty trees, and
populous with happy figures; and along the dark flagstones beneath,
where still lay the corpses which he had no eye to see, he beheld
already the priests of Serapis with his revered guardian, his beloved
Macrinus of former days, at their head, advancing to meet and welcome
him in the hall of the Egyptian god.  Visions such as these passed
gloriously before the Pagan's eyes as he stood triumphant on the steps
of the temple, and brightened to him with a noonday light its dusky
recesses when, after his brief delay, he turned from the street and
disappeared through the doorway of the sacred place.

The rain poured down more thickly than before; the thunder, once
aroused, now sounded in deep and frequent peals as Antonina raised
herself from the ground and looked around her, in momentary expectation
that the dreaded form of Ulpius must meet her eyes.  No living creature
was visible in the street.  The forsaken slave still reclined near the
wall of the house where she had first appeared when the Pagan gained
the approaches to the temple; but she now lay there dead.  No fresh
bands of robbers appeared in sight.  An uninterrupted solitude
prevailed in all directions as far as the eye could reach.

At the moment when Ulpius had relinquished his grasp of her hand,
Antonina had sunk to the ground, helpless and resigned, but not
exhausted beyond all power of sensation or all capacity for thought.
While she lay on the cold pavement of the street, her mind still
pursued its visions of a speedy death, and a tranquil life-in-death to
succeed it in a future state.  But, as minute after minute elapsed, and
no harsh voice sounded in her ear, no pitiless hand dragged her from
the ground, no ominous footsteps were audible around her, a change
passed gradually over her thoughts; the instinct of self-preservation
slowly revived within her, and, as she raised herself to look forth on
the gloomy prospect, the chances of uninterrupted flight and present
safety presented by the solitude of the street, aroused her like a
voice of encouragement, like an unexpected promise of help.


Her perception of outer influences returned; she felt the rain that
drenched her garments; she shuddered at the thunder sounding over her
head; she marked with horror the dead bodies lying before her on the
stones.  An overpowering desire animated her to fly from the place, to
escape from the desolate scene around, even though she should sink
exhausted by the effort in the next street. Slowly she arose--her limbs
trembled with a premature infirmity; but she gained her feet.  She
tottered onward, turning her back on the river, passed bewildered
between long rows of deserted houses, and arrived opposite a public
garden surrounding a little summer-house, whose deserted portico
offered both concealment and shelter.  Here, therefore, she took
refuge, crouching in the darkest corner of the building, and hiding her
face in her hands, as if to shut out all view of the dreary though
altered scenes which spread before her eyes.

Woeful thoughts and recollections now moved within her in bewildering
confusion.  All that she had suffered since Ulpius had dragged her from
the farm-house in the suburbs--the night pilgrimage over the plain--the
fearful passage through the wall--revived in her memory, mingled with
vague ideas, now for the first time aroused, of the plague and famine
that were desolating the city; and, with sudden apprehensions that
Goisvintha might still be following her, knife in hand, through the
lonely streets; while passively prominent over all these varying
sources of anguish and dread, the scene of the young chieftain's death
lay like a cold weight on her heavy heart.  The damp turf of his grave
seemed still to press against her breast; his last kiss yet trembled on
her lips; she knew, though she dared not look down on them, that the
spots of his blood yet stained her garments.

Whether she strove to rise and continue her flight; whether she
crouched down again under the portico, resigned for one bitter moment
to perish by the knife of Goisvintha--if Goisvintha were near; to fall
once more into the hands of Ulpius--if Ulpius were tracking her to her
retreat,--the crushing sense that she was utterly bereaved of her
beloved protector--that the friend of her brief days of happiness was
lost to her for ever--that Hermanric, who had preserved her from death,
had been murdered in his youth and his strength by her side, never
deserted her. Since the assassination in the farm-house, she was now
for the first time alone; and now for the first time she felt the full
severity of her affliction, and knew how dark was the blank which was
spread before every aspiration of her future life.

Enduring, almost eternal, as the burden of her desolation seemed now to
have become, it was yet to be removed, ere long, by feelings of a
tenderer mournfulness and a more resigned woe.  The innate and innocent
fortitude of disposition, which had made her patient under the rigour
of her youthful education, and hopeful under the trials that assailed
her on her banishment from her father's house; which had never deserted
her until the awful scenes of the past night of assassination and death
rose in triumphant horror before her eyes; and which, even then, had
been suspended but not destroyed--was now destined to regain its
healing influence over her heart.  As she still cowered in her lonely
refuge, the final hope, the yearning dependence on a restoration to her
father's presence and her father's love, that had moved her over the
young chieftain's grave, and had prompted her last effort for freedom
when Ulpius had dragged her through the passage in the rifted wall,
suddenly revived.


Once more she arose, and looked forth on the desolate city and the
stormy sky, but now with mild and unshrinking eyes.  Her recollections
of the past grew tender in their youthful grief; her thoughts for the
future became patient, solemn, and serene.  Images of her first and her
last-left protector, of her old familiar home, of her garden solitude
on the Pincian Mount, spread beautiful before her imagination as
resting-places to her weary heart.  She descended the steps of the
summer-house with no apprehension of her enemies, no doubt of her
resolution; for she knew the beacon that was now to direct her onward
course.  The tears gathered full in her eyes as she passed into the
garden; but her step never faltered, her features never lost their
combined expression of tranquil sorrow and subdued hope.  So she once
more entered the perilous streets, and murmuring to herself, 'My
father! my father!' as if in those simple words lay the hand that was
to guide, and the providence that was to preserved her, she began to
trace her solitary way in the direction of the Pincian Mount.

It was a spectacle--touching, beautiful, even sublime--to see this
young girl, but a few hours freed, by perilous paths and by criminal
hands, from scenes which had begun in treachery, only to end in death,
now passing, resolute and alone, through the streets of a mighty city,
overwhelmed by all that is poignant in human anguish and hideous in
human crime.  It was a noble evidence of the strong power over the
world and the world's perils, with which the simplest affection may arm
the frailest being--to behold her thus pursuing her way, superior to
every horror of desolation and death that clogged her path,
unconsciously discovering in the softly murmured name of 'father',
which still fell at intervals from her lips, the pure purpose that
sustained her--the steady heroism that ever held her in her doubtful
course.  The storms of heaven poured over her head--the crimes and
sufferings of Rome darkened the paths of her pilgrimage; but she passed
firmly onward through all, like a ministering spirit, journeying along
earthly shores in the bright inviolability of its merciful mission and
its holy thoughts--like a ray of light living in the strength of its
own beauty, amid the tempest and obscurity of a stranger sphere.

Once more she entered the Campus Martius.  Again she passed the public
fountains, still unnaturally devoted to serve as beds for the dying and
as sepulchres for the dead; again she trod the dreary highways, where
the stronger among the famished populace yet paced hither and thither
in ferocious silence and unsocial separation.  No word was addressed,
hardly a look was directed to her, as she pursued her solitary course.
She was desolate among the desolate; forsaken among others abandoned
like herself.

The robber, when he passed her by, saw that she was worthless for the
interests of plunder as the poorest of the dying citizens around him.
The patrician, loitering feebly onward to the shelter of his palace
halls, avoided her as a new suppliant among the people for the charity
which he had not to bestow, and quickened his pace as she approached
him in the street.  Unprotected, yet unmolested, hurrying from her
loneliness and her bitter recollections to the refuge of her father's
love, as she would have hurried when a child from her first
apprehension of ill to the refuge of her father's arms, she gained at
length the foot of the Pincian Hill--at length ascended the streets so
often trodden in the tranquil days of old!

The portals and outer buildings of Vetranio's palace, as she passed
them, presented a striking and ominous spectacle.  Within the lofty
steel railings, which protected the building, the famine-wasted slaves
of the senator appeared reeling and tottering beneath full vases of
wine which they were feebly endeavouring to carry into the interior
apartments.  Gaudy hangings drooped from the balconies, garlands of ivy
were wreathed round the statues of the marble front.  In the midst of
the besieged city, and in impious mockery of the famine and pestilence
which were wasting it, hut and palace, to its remotest confines, were
proceeding in this devoted dwelling the preparations for a triumphant
feast!

Unheedful of the startling prospect presented by Vetranio's abode, her
eyes bent but in one absorbing direction, her steps hurrying faster and
faster with each succeeding instant, Antonina approached the home from
which she had been exiled in fear, and to which she was returning in
woe.  Yet a moment more of strong exertion, of overpowering
anticipation, and she reached the garden gate!

She dashed back the heavy hair matted over her brows by the rain; she
glanced rapidly around her; she beheld the window of her bed-chamber
with the old simple curtain still hanging at its accustomed place; she
saw the well-remembered trees, the carefully tended flower-beds, now
drooping mournfully beneath the gloomy sky.  Her heart swelled within
her, her breath seemed suddenly arrested in her bosom, as she trod the
garden path and ascended the steps beyond.  The door at the top was
ajar.  With a last effort she thrust it open, and stood once
more--unaided and unwelcomed, yet hopeful of consolation, of pardon, of
love--within her first and last sanctuary, the walls of her home!




CHAPTER 21.

FATHER AND CHILD.

Forsaken as it appears on an outward view, during the morning of which
we now write, the house of Numerian is yet not tenantless.  In one of
the sleeping apartments, stretched on his couch, with none to watch by
its side, lies the master of the little dwelling.  We last beheld him
on the scene mingled with the famishing congregation in the Basilica of
St. John Lateran, still searching for his child amid the confusion of
the public distribution of food during the earlier stages of the
misfortunes of besieged Rome.  Since that time he has toiled and
suffered much; and now the day of exhaustion, long deferred, the hours
of helpless solitude, constantly dreaded, have at length arrived.

From the first periods of the siege, while all around him in the city
moved gloomily onward through darker and darker changes, while famine
rapidly merged into pestilence and death, while human hopes and
purposes gradually diminished and declined with each succeeding day, he
alone remained ever devoted to the same labour, ever animated by the
same object--the only one among all his fellow-citizens whom no outward
event could influence for good or evil, for hope or fear.

In every street of Rome, at all hours, among all ranks of people, he
was still to be seen constantly pursuing the same hopeless search.
When the mob burst furiously into the public granaries to seize the
last supplies of corn hoarded for the rich, he was ready at the doors
watching them as they came out.  When rows of houses were deserted by
all but the dead, he was beheld within, passing from window to window,
as he sought through each room for the treasure that he had lost.  When
some few among the populace, in the first days of the pestilence,
united in the vain attempt to cast over the lofty walls the corpses
that strewed the street, he mingled with them to look on the rigid
faces of the dead.  In solitary places, where the parent, not yet lost
to affection, strove to carry his dying child from the desert roadway
to the shelter of a roof; where the wife, still faithful to her duties,
received her husband's last breath in silent despair--he was seen
gliding by their sides, and for one brief instant looking on them with
attentive and mournful eyes. Wherever he went, whatever he beheld, he
asked no sympathy and sought no aid.  He went his way, a pilgrim on a
solitary path, an unregarded expectant for a boon that no others would
care to partake.

When the famine first began to be felt in the city, he seemed
unconscious of its approach--he made no effort to procure beforehand
the provision of a few days' sustenance; if he attended the first
public distributions of food, it was only to prosecute his search for
his child amid the throng around him.  He must have perished with the
first feeble victims of starvation, had he not been met, during his
solitary wanderings, by some of the members of the congregation whom
his piety and eloquence had collected in former days.

By these persons, who entreaties that he would suspend his hopeless
search he always answered with the same firm and patient denial, his
course was carefully watched and his wants anxiously provided for.  Out
of every supply of food which they were enabled to collect, his share
was invariably carried to his abode.  They remembered their teacher in
the hour of his dejection, as they had formerly reverenced him in the
day of his vigour; they toiled to preserve his life as anxiously as
they had laboured to profit by his instructions; they listened as his
disciples once, they served him as his children now.

But over these, as over all other offices of human kindness, the famine
was destined gradually and surely to prevail.  The provision of food
garnered up by the congregation ominously lessened with each succeeding
day.  When the pestilence began darkly to appear, the numbers of those
who sought their afflicted teacher at his abode, or followed him
through the dreary streets, fatally decreased.


Then, as the nourishment which had supported, and the vigilance which
had watched him, thus diminished, so did the hard-tasked energies of
the unhappy father fail him faster and faster.  Each morning as he
arose, his steps were more feeble, his heart grew heavier within him,
his wanderings through the city were less and less resolute and
prolonged. At length his powers totally deserted him; the last-left
members of his congregation, as they approached his abode with the
last-left provision of food which they possessed, found him prostrate
with exhaustion at his garden gate.  They bore him to his couch, placed
their charitable offering by his side, and leaving one of their number
to protect him from the robber and the assassin, they quitted the house
in despair.

For some days the guardian remained faithful to his post, until his
sufferings from lack of food overpowered his vigilance.  Dreading that,
in his extremity, he might be tempted to take from the old man's small
store of provision what little remained, he fled from the house, to
seek sustenance, however loathsome, in the public streets; and
thenceforth Numerian was left defenceless in his solitary abode.

He was first beheld on the scenes which these pages present, a man of
austere purpose, of unwearied energy; a valiant reformer, who defied
all difficulties that beset him in his progress; a triumphant teacher,
leading at his will whoever listened to his words; a father, proudly
contemplating the future position which he destined for his child.  Far
different did he now appear.  Lost to his ambition, broken in spirit,
helpless in body, separated from his daughter by his own act, he lay on
his untended couch in a death-like lethargy.  The cold wind blowing
through his opened window awakened no sensations in his torpid frame;
the cup of water and the small relics of coarse food stood near his
hand, but he had no vigilance to discern them.  His open eyes looked
steadfastly upward, and yet he reposed as one in a deep sleep, or as
one already devoted to the tomb; save when, at intervals, his lips
moved slowly with a long and painfully drawn breath, or a fever flush
tinged his hollow cheek with changing and momentary hues.

While thus in outward aspect appearing to linger between life and
death, his faculties yet remained feebly vital within him.  Aroused by
no external influence, and governed by no mental restraint, they now
created before him a strange waking vision, palpable as an actual event.

It seemed to him that he was reposing, not in his own chamber, but in
some mysterious world, filled with a twilight atmosphere, inexpressibly
soothing and gentle to his aching sight.  Through this mild radiance he
could trace, at long intervals, shadowy representations of the scenes
through which he had passed in search of his lost child.  The gloomy
streets, the lonely houses abandoned to the unburied dead, which he had
explored, alternately appeared and vanished before him in solemn
succession; and ever and anon, as one vision disappeared ere another
rose, he heard afar off a sound as of gentle, womanly voices, murmuring
in solemn accents, 'The search has been made in penitence, in patience,
in prayer, and has not been pursued in vain.  The lost shall
return--the beloved shall yet be restored!'

Thus, as it had begun, the vision long continued.  Now the scenes
through which he had wandered passed slowly before his eyes, now the
soft voices murmured pityingly in his ear.  At length the first
disappeared, and the last became silent; then ensued a long vacant
interval, and then the grey, tranquil light brightened slowly at one
spot, out of which he beheld advancing towards him the form of his lost
child.

She came to his side, she bent lovingly over him; he saw her eyes, with
their old patient, childlike expression, looking sorrowfully down upon
him.  His heart revived to a sense of unspeakable awe and contrition,
to emotions of yearning love and mournful hope; his speech returned; he
whispered tremulously, 'Child! child! I repented in bitter woe the
wrong that I did to thee; I sought thee, in my loneliness on earth,
through the long day and the gloomy night!  And now the merciful God
has sent thee to pardon me!  I loved thee; I wept for thee.'


His voice died within him, for now his outward sensations quickened.
He felt warm tears falling on his cheeks; he felt embracing arms
clasped round him; he heard tenderly repeated, 'Father! speak to me as
you were wont; love me, father, and forgive me, as you loved and
forgave me when I was a little child!'

The sound of that well-remembered voice--which had ever spoken kindly
and reverently to him;  which had last addressed him in tones of
despairing supplication; which he had hardly hoped to hear again on
earth--penetrated his whole being, like awakening music in the dead
silence of night.  His eyes lost their vacant expression; he raised
himself suddenly on the couch; he saw that what had begun as a vision
had ended as a reality; that his dream had proved the immediate
fore-runner of its own fulfilment; that his daughter in her bodily
presence was indeed restored; and his head drooped forward, and he
trembled and wept upon her bosom, in the overpowering fulness of his
gratitude and delight.

For some moments Antonina, calming with the resolute heroism of
affection her own thronging emotions of awe and affright, endeavoured
to soothe and support her fast-failing parent.  Her horror almost
overwhelmed her, as she thought that now, when, through grief and
peril, she was at last restored to him, he might expire in her arms;
but even yet her resolution did not fail her.  The last hope of her
brief and bitter life was now the hope of reviving her father, and she
clung to it with the tenacity of despair.

She calmed her voice while she spoke to him; she entreated him to
remember that his daughter had returned to watch over him, to be his
obedient pupil as in days of old.  Vain effort!  Even while the words
passed her lips, his arms, which had been pressed over her, relaxed;
his head grew heavier on her bosom.  In the despair of the moment, she
tore herself from him, and looked round to seek the help that none were
near to afford.  The cup of water, the last provision of food,
attracted her eye. With quick instinct she caught them up.  Hope,
success, salvation, lay in those miserable relics.  She pressed the
food into his mouth; she moistened his parched lips, his dry brow, with
the water.  During one moment of horrible suspense she saw him still
insensible; then the vital functions revived; his eyes opened again and
fixed famine-struck on the wretched nourishment before him.  He
devoured it ravenously; he drained the cup of water to its last drop;
he sank back again on the couch. But now the torpid blood moved once
more in his veins; his heart beat less and less feebly:  he was saved.
She saw it as she bent over him--saved by the lost child in the hour of
her return!  It was a sensation of ecstatic triumph and gratitude which
no woeful remembrances had power to embitter in its bright, sudden
birth.  She knelt down by the side of the couch, almost crushed by her
own emotions.  Over the grave of the young warrior she had raised her
heart to Heaven in agony and grief, and now by her father's side she
poured forth her whole soul to her Creator in trembling ejaculations of
thankfulness and hope.

Thus--the one slowly recovering whatever of life and vigour yet
continued in his weakened frame, the other still filled with her
all-absorbing emotions of gratitude--the father and daughter long
remained. And now, as morning waned towards noon, the storm began to
subside. Gradually and solemnly the vast thunder-clouds rolled asunder,
and the bright blue heaven beyond appeared through their fantastic
rifts.  The lessening rain-drops fell light and silvery to the earth,
and breeze and sunshine were wafted at fitful intervals over the
plague-tainted atmosphere of Rome.  As yet, subdued by the shadows of
the floating clouds, the dawning sunbeams glittered softly through the
windows of Numerian's chamber.  They played, warm and reviving, over
his worn features, like messengers of resurrection and hope from their
native heaven.  Life seemed to expand within him under their fresh and
gentle ministering.  Once more he raised himself, and turned towards
his child; and now his heart throbbed with a healthful joy, and his
arms closed round her, not in the helplessness of infirmity, but in the
welcome of love.

His words, when he spoke to her, fell at first almost inarticulately
from his lips--they were mingled together in confused phrases of
tenderness, contrition, thanksgiving.  All the native enthusiasm of his
disposition, all the latent love for his child, which had for years
been suppressed by his austerity, or diverted by his ambition, now at
last burst forth.

Trembling and silent in his arms, Antonina vainly endeavoured to return
his caresses and to answer his words of welcome.  Now for the first
time she knew how deep was her father's affection for her; she felt how
foreign to his real nature had been his assumed severity in their
intercourse of former days; and in the quick flow of new feelings and
old recollections produced by the delighting surprise of the discovery,
she found herself speechless.  She could only listen eagerly,
breathlessly, while he spoke.  His words, faltering and confused though
they were, were words of endearment which she had never heard from him
before; they were words which no mother had ever pronounced beside her
infant bed, and they sank divinely consoling over her heart, as
messages of pardon from an angel's lips.

Gradually Numerian's voice grew calmer.  He raised his daughter in his
arms, and bent wistfully on her face his attentive and pitying eyes.
'Returned, returned!' he murmured, while he gazed on her, 'never again
to depart!  Returned, beautiful and patient, kinder and more tender
than ever!  Love me and pardon me, Antonina.  I sought for you in
bitter loneliness and despair.  Think not of me as what I was, but as
what I am!  There were days when you were an infant, when I had no
thought but how to cherish and delight you, and now those days have
come again.  You shall read no gloomy task-books; you shall never be
separated from me more; you shall play sweet music on the lute; you
shall be all garlanded with flowers which I will provide for you!  We
will find friends and glad companions; we will bring happiness with us
wherever we are seen. God's blessing goes forth from children like
you--it has fallen upon me--it has raised me from the dead!  My
Antonina shall teach me to worship, as I once taught her.  She shall
pray for me in the morning, and pray for me at night; and when she
thinks not of it, when she sleeps, I shall come softly to her bedside,
and wait and watch over her, so that when she opens her eyes they shall
open on me--they are the eyes of my child who has been restored to
me--there is nothing on earth that can speak to me like them of
happiness and peace!'

He paused for a moment, and looked rapturously on her face as it was
turned towards him.  His features partially saddened while he gazed,
and taking her long hair, still wet and dishevelled from the rain, in
his hands, he pressed it over his lips, over his face, over his neck.
Then, when he saw that she was endeavouring to speak, when he beheld
the tears that were now filling her eyes, he drew her closer to him,
and hurriedly continued in lower tones--

'Hush! hush!  No more grief, no more tears!  Tell me not whither you
have wandered--speak not of what you have suffered; for would not every
word be a reproach to me?  And you have come to pardon and not to
reproach!  Let not the recollection that it was I who cast you off be
forced on me from your lips; let us remember only that we are restored
to each other; let us think that God has accepted my penitence and
forgiven me my sin, in suffering my child to return!  Or, if we must
speak of the days of separation that are past, speak to me of the days
that found you tranquil and secure; rejoice me by telling me that it
was not all danger and woe in the bitter destiny which my guilty anger
prepared for my own child!  Say to me that you met protectors as well
as enemies in the hour of your flight--that all were not harsh to you
as I was--that those of whom you asked shelter and safety looked on
your face as on a petition for charity and kindness from friends whom
they loved! Tell me only of your protectors, Antonina, for in that
there will be consolation; and you have come to console!'

As he waited for her reply he felt her tremble on his bosom, he saw the
shudder that ran over her frame.  The despair in her voice, though she
only pronounced in answer to him the simple words, 'There was one'--and
then ceased, unable to proceed--penetrated coldly to his heart.

'Is he not at hand?' he hurriedly resumed.  'Why is he not here?  Let
us seek him without delay.  I must humble myself before him in my
gratitude.  I must show him that I was worthy that my Antonina should
be restored.'


'He is dead!' she gasped, sinking down in the arms that embraced her,
as the recollections of the past night again crowded in all their
horror on her memory.  'They murdered him by my side.  O father!
father! he loved me; he would have reverenced and protected you!'

'May the merciful God receive him among the blessed angels, and honour
him among the holy martyrs!' cried the father, raising his tearful eyes
in supplication.  'May his spirit, if it can still be observant of the
things of earth, know that his name shall be written on my heart with
the name of my child; that I will think on him as on a beloved
companion, and mourn for him as a son that has been taken from me!'

He ceased, and looked down on Antonina, whose features were still
hidden from him.  Each felt that a new bond of mutual affection had
been created between them by what each had spoken; but both now
remained silent.

During this interval the thoughts of Numerian wandered from the
reflections which had hitherto occupied him.  The few mournful words
which his daughter had spoken had been sufficient to banish its fulness
of joy from his heart, and to turn him from the happy contemplation of
the present to the dark recollections of the past.  Vague doubts and
fears now mingled with his gratitude and hope, and involuntarily his
thoughts reverted to what he would fain have forgotten for ever--to the
morning when he had driven Antonina from her home.

Baseless apprehensions of the return of the treacherous Pagan and his
profligate employer, with the return of their victim--despairing
convictions of his own helplessness and infirmity rose startlingly in
his mind.  His eyes wandered vacantly round the room, his hands closed
trembling over his daughter's form; then, suddenly releasing her, he
arose as one panic-stricken, and exclaiming, 'The doors must be
secured--Ulpius may be near--the senator may return!' endeavoured to
cross the room.  But his strength was unequal to the effort; he leaned
back for support against the wall, and breathlessly repeating, 'Secure
the doors--Ulpius, Ulpius!' he motioned to Antonina to descend.

She trembled as she obeyed him.  Remembering her passage through the
breach in the wall, and her fearful journey through the streets of
Rome, she more than shared her father's apprehensions as she descended
the stairs.

The door remained half open, as she had left it when she entered the
house.  Ere she hurriedly closed and barred it, she cast a momentary
glance on the street beyond.  The gaunt figures of the slaves still
moved wearily to and fro, amid the mockery of festal preparation in
Vetranio's palace; and here and there a few ghastly figures lay on the
ground contemplating them in languid amazement. Over all other parts of
the street the deadly tranquillity of plague and famine still prevailed.

Hurriedly ascending the steps, Antonina hastened to assure her father
that she had obeyed his commands, and that they were now secure from
all intrusion from without.  But, during her brief absence, a new and
more ominous prospect of calamity had presented itself before the old
man's mind.

As she entered the room, she saw that he had returned to his couch, and
that he was holding before him the little wooden bowl which had
contained his last supply of food, and which was now empty. He
addressed not a word to her when he heard her enter; his features were
rigid with horror and despair as he looked down on the empty bowl; he
muttered vacantly, 'It was the last provision that remained, and it was
I that exhausted it!  The beasts of the forest carry food to their
young, and I have taken the last morsel from my child!'


In an instant the utter desolateness of their situation--forgotten in
the first joy of their meeting--forced itself with appalling vividness
upon Antonina's mind.  She endeavoured to speak of comfort and hope to
her father; but the fearful realities of the famine in the city now
rose palpably before her, and suspended the vain words of solace on her
lips. In the midst of still populous Rome, within sight of those
surrounding plains where the creative sun ripened hour by hour the
vegetation of the teeming earth, where field and granary displayed
profusely their abundant stores, the father and daughter now looked on
each other, as helpless to replace their exhausted provision of food as
if they had been abandoned on the raft of the shipwrecked in an
unexplored sea, or banished to a lonely island whose inland products
were withered by infected winds, and around whose arid shores ran such
destroying waters as seethe over the 'Cities of the Plain'.

The silence which had long prevailed in the room, the bitter
reflections which still held the despairing father and the patient
daughter speechless alike, were at length interrupted by a hollow and
melancholy voice from the street, pronouncing, in the form of a public
notice, these words:--

'I, Publius Dalmatius, messenger of the Roman Senate, proclaim, that in
order to clear the streets from the dead, three thousand sestertii will
be given by the Prefect for every ten bodies that are cast over the
walls.  This is the true decree of the Senate.'

The voice ceased; but no sound of applause, no murmur of popular tumult
was heard in answer. Then, after an interval, it was once more faintly
audible as the messenger passed on and repeated the decree in another
street; and then the silence again sank down over all things more
awfully pervading than before.

Every word of the proclamation, when repeated in the distance as when
spoken under his window, had clearly reached Numerian's ears.  His
mind, already sinking in despair, was riveted on what he had heard from
the woe-boding voice of the herald, with a fascination as absorbing as
that which rivets the eye of the traveller, already giddy on the summit
of a precipice, upon the spectacle of the yawning gulfs beneath.  When
all sound of the proclamation had finally died away, the unhappy father
dropped the empty bowl which he had hitherto mechanically continued to
hold before him, and glancing affrightedly at his daughter, groaned to
himself:  'The corpses are to be cast over the walls--the dead are to
be flung forth to the winds of heaven--there is no help for us in the
city. O God, God!--she may die!--her body may be cast away like the
rest, and I may live to see it!'

He rose suddenly from the couch; his reason seemed for a moment to be
shaken as he tottered to the window, crying, 'Food! food!--I will give
my house and all it contains for a morsel of food.  I have nothing to
support my own child--she will starve before me by tomorrow if I have
no food!  I am a citizen of Rome--I demand help from the Senate!  Food!
food!'

In tones declining lower and lower he continued to cry thus from the
window, but no voice answered him either in sympathy or derision.  Of
all the people--now increased in numbers--collected in the street
before Vetranio's palace, no one turned even to look on him.  For days
and days past, such fruitless appeals as his had been heard, and heard
unconcernedly, at every hour and in every street of Rome--now ringing
through the heavy air in the shrieks of delirium; now faintly audible
in the last faltering murmurs of exhaustion and despair.

Thus vainly entreating help and pity from a populace who had ceased to
give the one or to feel the other, Numerian might long have remained;
but now his daughter approached his side, and drawing him gently
towards his couch, said in tender and solemn accents:  'Remember,
father, that God sent the ravens to feed Elijah, and replenished the
widow's cruse! He will not desert us, for He has restored us to each
other, and has sent me hither not to perish in the famine, but to watch
over you!'


'God has deserted the city and all that it contains!' he answered
distractedly.  'The angel of destruction has gone forth into our
streets, and death walks in his shadow!  On this day, when hope and
happiness seemed opening before us both; our little household has been
doomed!  The young and the old, the weary and the watchful, they strew
the streets alike--the famine has mastered them all--the famine will
master us--there is no help, no escape!  I, who would have died
patiently for my daughter's safety, must now die despairing, leaving
her friendless in the wide, dreary, perilous world; in the dismal city
of anguish, of horror, of death--where the enemy threatens without, and
hunger and pestilence waste within!  O Antonina! you have returned to
me but for a little time; the day of our second separation draws near!'

For a few moments his head drooped, and his sobs choked his utterance;
then he once more rose painfully to his feet.  Heedless of Antonina's
entreaties, he again endeavoured to cross the room, only again to find
his feeble powers unequal to sustain him.  As he fell back panting upon
a seat, his eyes assumed a wild, unnatural expression--despair of mind
and weakness of body had together partially unhinged his faculties.
When his daughter affrightedly approached to soothe and succour him, he
impatiently waved her back; and began to speak in a dull, hoarse,
monotonous voice, pressing his hand firmly over his brow, and directing
his eyes backwards and forwards incessantly, on object after object, in
every part of the room.

'Listen, child, listen!' he hastily began.  'I tell you there is no
food in the house, and no food in Rome!--we are besieged--they have
taken from us our granaries in the suburbs, and our fields on the
plains--there is a great famine in the city--those who still eat, eat
strange food which men sicken at when it is named.  I would seek even
this, but I have no strength to go forth into the byways and force it
from others at the point of the sword!  I am old and feeble, and
heart-broken--I shall die first, and leave fatherless my good, kind
daughter, whom I sought for so long, and whom I loved as my only child!'

He paused for an instant, not to listen to the words of encouragement
and hope which Antonina mechanically addressed to him while he spoke,
but to collect his wandering thoughts, to rally his failing strength.
His voice acquired a quicker tone, and his features presented a sudden
energy and earnestness of expression, as if some new project had
flashed across his mind, when, after an interval, he continued thus:--

'But though my child shall be bereaved of me, though I shall die in the
hour when I most longed to live for her, I must not leave her helpless;
I will send her among my congregation who have deserted me, but who
will repent when they hear that I am dead, and will receive Antonina
among them for my sake!  Listen to this--listen, listen!  You must tell
them to remember all that I once revealed to them of my brother, from
whom I parted in my boyhood--my brother, whom I have never seen since.
He may yet be alive, he may be found--they must search for him; for to
you he would be father to the fatherless, and guardian to the
unguarded--he may now be in Rome, he may be rich and powerful--he may
have food to spare, and shelter that is good against all enemies and
strangers!  Attend, child, to my words:  in these latter days I have
thought of him much; I have seen him in dreams as I saw him for the
last time in my father's house; he was happier and more beloved than I
was, and in envy and hatred I quitted my parents and parted from him.
You have heard nothing of this; but you must hear it now, that when I
am dead you may know you have a protector to seek!  So I received in
anger my brother's farewell, and fled from my home--(those days were
well remembered by me once, but all things grow dull on my memory now).
Long years of turmoil and change passed on, and I never met him; and
men of many nations were my companions, but he was not among them; then
much affliction fell upon me, and I repented and learnt the fear of
God, and went back to my father's house.  Since that, years have
passed--I know not how many.  I could have told them when I spoke of my
former life to him--to my friend, when we stood near St. Peter's, ere
the city was besieged, looking on the sunset, and speaking of the early
days of our companionship; but now my very remembrance fails me; the
famine that threatens us with separation and death casts darkness over
my thoughts; yet hear me, hear me patiently--for your sake I must
continue!'

'Not now, father--not now!  At another time, on a happier day!'
murmured Antonina, in tremulous, entreating tones.


'My home, when I arrived to look on it, was gone,' pursued the old man
sadly, neither heeding nor hearing her.  'Other houses were built where
my father's house had stood; no man could tell me of my parents and my
brother; then I returned, and my former companions grew hateful in my
eyes; I left them, and they followed me with persecution and
scorn.--Listen, listen!--I set forth secretly in the night, with you,
to escape them, and to make perfect my reformation where they should
not be near to hinder it; and we travelled onward many days until we
came to Rome, and I made my abode there.  But I feared that my
companions whom I abhorred might discover and persecute me again, and
in the new city of my dwelling I called myself by another name than the
name that I bore; thus I knew that all trace of me would be lost, and
that I should be kept secure from men whom I thought on only as enemies
now.  Go, child! go quickly!--bring your tablets and write down the
names that I shall tell you; for so you will discover your protector
when I am gone!  Say not to him that you are the child of Numerian--he
knows not the name; say that you are the daughter of Cleander, his
brother, who died longing to be restored to him.  Write--write
carefully, Cleander!--that was the name my father gave to me; that was
the name I bore until I fled from my evil companions and changed it,
dreading their pursuit!  Cleander! write and remember, Cleander!  I
have seen in visions that my brother shall be discovered:  he will not
be discovered to me, but he will be discovered to you!  Your
tablets--your tablets!--write his name with mine--it is--'

He stopped abruptly.  His mental powers, fluctuating between torpor and
animation--shaken, but not overpowered by the trials which had assailed
them--suddenly rallied, and resuming somewhat of their accustomed
balance, became awakened to a sense of their own aberration.  His vague
revelations of his past life (which the reader will recognise as
resembling his communications on the same subject to the fugitive
land-owner, previously related) now appeared before him in all their
incongruity and uselessness.  His countenance fell--he sighed bitterly
to himself:  'My reason begins to desert me!--my judgment, which should
guide my child--my resolution, which should uphold her, both fail me!
How should my brother, since childhood lost to me, be found by her?
Against the famine that threatens us I offer but vain words!  Already
her strength declines; her face, that I loved to look on grows wan
before my eyes!  God have mercy upon us!--God have mercy upon us!'

He returned feebly to his couch; his head declined on his bosom;
sometimes a low groan burst from his lips, but he spoke no more.

Deep as was the prostration under which he had now fallen, it was yet
less painful to Antonina to behold it than to listen to the incoherent
revelations which had fallen from his lips but the moment before, and
which, in her astonishment and affright, she had dreaded might be the
awful indications of the overthrow of her father's reason.  As she
again placed herself by his side, she trembled to feel that her own
weariness was fast overpowering her; but she still struggled with her
rising despair--still strove to think only of capacity for endurance
and chances of relief.

The silence in the room was deep and dismal while they now sat
together. The faint breezes, at long intervals, drowsily rose and fell
as they floated through the open window; the fitful sunbeams
alternately appeared and vanished as the clouds rolled upward in airy
succession over the face of heaven.  Time moved sternly in its destined
progress, and Nature varied tranquilly through its appointed limits of
change, and still no hopes, no saving projects, nothing but dark
recollections and woeful anticipations occupied Antonina's mind; when,
just as her weary head was drooping towards the ground, just as
sensation and fortitude and grief itself seemed declining into a
dreamless and deadly sleep, a last thought, void of discernible
connection or cause, rose suddenly within her--animating, awakening,
inspiring.  She started up.  'The garden, father--the garden!' she
cried breathlessly.  'Remember the food that grows in our garden below!
Be comforted, we have provision left yet--God has not deserted us!'

He raised his face while she spoke; his features assumed a deeper
mournfulness and hopelessness of expression; he looked upon her in
ominous silence, and laid his trembling fingers on her arm to detain
her, when she hurriedly attempted to quit the room.


'Do not forbid me to depart,' she anxiously pleaded.  'To me every
corner in the garden is known; for it was my possession in our happier
days--our last hopes rest in the garden, and I must search through it
without delay!  Bear with me,' she added, in low and melancholy
tones--'bear with me, dear father, in all that I would now do!  I have
suffered, since we parted, a bitter affliction, which clings dark and
heavy to all my thoughts--there is no consolation for me but the
privilege of caring for your welfare--my only hope of comfort is in the
employment of aiding you!'

The old man's hand had pressed heavier on her arm while she addressed
him; but when she ceased it dropped from her, and he bent his head in
speechless submission to her entreaty.

For one moment she lingered, looking on him silent as himself; the
next, she left the apartment with hasty and uncertain steps.

On reaching the garden, she unconsciously took the path leading to the
bank where she had once loved to play secretly upon her lute and to
look on the distant mountains reposing in the warm atmosphere which
summer evenings shed over their blue expanse.  How eloquent was this
little plot of ground of the quiet events now for ever gone by!--of the
joys, the hopes, the happy occupations, which rise with the day that
chronicles them, and pass like that day, never to return the
same!--which the memory alone can preserve as they were, and the heart
can never resume but in a changed form, divested of the presence of the
companion of the incident of the departed moment, which formed the
charm of the past and makes the imperfection of the present.

Tender and thronging were the remembrances which the surrounding
prospect called up, as the sad mistress of the garden looked again on
her little domain!  She saw the bank where she could never more sit to
sing with a renewal of the same feelings which had once inspired her
music; she saw the drooping flowers that she could never restore with
the same childlike enjoyment of the task which had animated her in
former hours!  Young though she still was, the emotions of the youthful
days that were gone could never be revived as they had once existed!
As waters they had welled up, and as waters they had flowed forth,
never to return to their source!  Thoughts of these former years--of
the young warrior who lay cold beneath the heavy earth--of the
desponding father who mourned hopeless in the room above--gathered
thick at her heart as she turned from her flower-beds--not, as in other
days, to pour forth her happiness to the music of her lute, but to
search laboriously for the sustenance of life.

At first, as she stooped over those places in the garden where she knew
that fruits and vegetables had been planted by her own hand, her tears
blinded her.  She hastily dashed them away, and looked eagerly around.

Alas! others had reaped the field from which she had hoped abundance!
In the early days of the famine Numerian's congregation had entered the
garden, and gathered for him whatever it contained; its choicest and
its homeliest products were alike exhausted; withered leaves lay on the
barren earth, and naked branches waved over them in the air.  She
wandered from path to path, searching amid the briars and thistles,
which already cast an aspect of ruin over the deserted place; she
explored its most hidden corners with the painful perseverance of
despair; but the same barrenness spread around her wherever she turned.
On this once fertile spot, which she had entered with such joyful faith
in its resources, there remained but a few poor decayed roots, dropped
and forgotten amid tangled weeds and faded flowers.

She saw that they were barely sufficient for one scanty meal as she
collected them and returned slowly to the house.  No words escaped her,
no tears flowed over her cheeks when she reascended the steps--hope,
fear, thought, sensation itself had been stunned within her from the
first moment when she had discovered that, in the garden as in the
house, the inexorable famine had anticipated the last chances of relief.

She entered the room, and, still holding the withered roots, advanced
mechanically to her father's side.  During her absence his mental and
bodily faculties had both yielded to wearied nature--he lay in a deep,
heavy sleep.


Her mind experienced a faint relief when she saw that the fatal
necessity of confessing the futility of the hopes she had herself
awakened was spared her for a while.  She knelt down by Numerian, and
gently smoothed the hair over his brow; then she drew the curtain
across the window, for she feared even that the breeze blowing through
it might arouse him.

A strange, secret satisfaction at the idea of devoting to her father
every moment of the time and every particle of the strength that might
yet be reserved for her; a ready resignation to death in dying for
him--overspread her heart, and took the place of all other aspirations
and all other thoughts.

She now moved to and fro through the room with a cautious tranquillity
which nothing could startle; she prepared her decayed roots for food
with a patient attention which nothing could divert.  Lost, through the
aggravated miseries of her position, to recent grief and present
apprehension, she could still instinctively perform the simple offices
of the woman and the daughter, as she might have performed them amid a
peaceful nation and a prosperous home.  Thus do the first-born
affections outlast the exhaustion of all the stormy emotions, all the
aspiring thoughts of after years, which may occupy, but which cannot
absorb, the spirit within us; thus does their friendly and familiar
voice, when the clamour of contending passions has died away in its own
fury, speak again, serene and sustaining as in the early time, when the
mind moved secure within the limits of its native simplicity, and the
heart yet lay happy in the pure tranquillity of its first repose!

The last scanty measure of food was soon prepared; it was bitter and
unpalatable when she tasted it--life could barely be preserved, even in
the most vigorous, by provision so wretched; but she set it aside as
carefully as if it had been the most precious luxury of the most
abundant feast.

Nothing had changed during the interval of her solitary employment--her
father yet slept; the gloomy silence yet prevailed in the street.  She
placed herself at the window, and partially drew aside the curtain to
let the warm breezes from without blow over her cold brow.  The same
ineffable resignation, the same unnatural quietude, which had sunk down
over her faculties since she had entered the room, overspread them
still.  Surrounding objects failed to impress her attention;
recollections and forebodings stagnated in her mind.  A marble
composure prevailed over her features.  Sometimes her eyes wandered
mechanically from the morsels of food by her side to her sleeping
father, as her one vacant idea of watching for his service, till the
feeble pulses of life had throbbed their last, alternately revived and
declined; but no other evidences of bodily existence or mental activity
appeared in her.  As she now sat in the half-darkened room, by the
couch on which her father reposed--her features pale, calm, and rigid,
her form enveloped in cold white drapery--there were moments when she
looked like one of the penitential devotees of the primitive Church,
appointed to watch in the house of mourning, and surprised in her
saintly vigil by the advent of Death.

Time flowed on--the monotonous hours of the day waned again towards
night; and plague and famine told their lapse in the fated highways of
Rome.  For father and child the sand in the glass was fast running out,
and neither marked it as it diminished.  The sleeper still reposed, and
the guardian by his side still watched; but now her weary gaze was
directed on the street, unconsciously attracted by the sound of voices
which at length rose from it at intervals, and by the light of the
torches and lamps which appeared in the great palace of the senator
Vetranio, as the sun gradually declined in the horizon, and the fiery
clouds around were quenched in the vapours of the advancing night.
Steadily she looked upon the sight beneath and before her; but even yet
her limbs never moved; no expression relieved the blank, solemn
peacefulness of her features.

Meanwhile, the soft, brief twilight glimmered over the earth, and
showed the cold moon, poised solitary in the starless heaven; then, the
stealthy darkness arose at her pale signal, and closed slowly round the
City of Death!



CHAPTER 22.

THE BANQUET OF FAMINE.

Of all prophecies, none are, perhaps, so frequently erroneous as those
on which we are most apt to venture in endeavouring to foretell the
effect of outward events on the characters of men.  In no form of our
anticipations are we more frequently baffled than in such attempts to
estimate beforehand the influence of circumstance over conduct, not
only in others, but also even in ourselves.  Let the event but happen,
and men, whom we view by the light of our previous observation of them,
act under it as the living contradictions of their own characters.  The
friend of our daily social intercourse, in the progress of life, and
the favourite hero of our historic studies, in the progress of the
page, astonish, exceed, or disappoint our expectations alike.  We find
it as vain to foresee a cause as to fix a limit for the arbitrary
inconsistencies in the dispositions of mankind.

But, though to speculate upon the future conduct of others under
impending circumstances be but too often to expose the fallacy of our
wisest anticipations, to contemplate the nature of that conduct after
it has been displayed is a useful subject of curiosity, and may perhaps
be made a fruitful source of instruction.  Similar events which succeed
each other at different periods are relieved from monotony, and derive
new importance from the ever-varying effects which they produce on the
human character.  Thus, in the great occurrence which forms the
foundation of our narrative, we may find little in the siege of Rome,
looking at it as a mere event, to distinguish it remarkably from any
former siege of the city--the same desire for glory and vengeance,
wealth and dominion, which brought Alaric to her walls, brought other
invaders before him.  But if we observed the effect of the Gothic
descent upon Italy on the inhabitants of her capital, we shall find
ample matter for novel contemplation and unbounded surprise.

We shall perceive, as an astonishing instance of the inconsistencies of
the human character, the spectacle of a whole people resolutely defying
an overwhelming foreign invasion at their very doors, just at the
period when they had fallen most irremediably from the highest position
of national glory to the lowest depths of national degradation;
resisting an all-powerful enemy with inflexible obstinacy, for the
honour of the Roman name, which they had basely dishonoured or
carelessly forgotten for ages past.  We shall behold men who have
hitherto laughed at the very name of patriotism, now starving
resolutely in their country's cause; who stopped at no villainy to
obtain wealth, now hesitating to employ their ill-gotten gains in the
purchase of the most important of all gratifications--their own
security and peace.  Instances of the unimaginable effect produced by
the event of the siege of Rome on the characters of her inhabitants
might be drawn from all classes, from the lowest to the highest, from
patrician to plebeian; but to produce them here would be to admit too
long an interruption in the progress of the present narrative.  If we
are to enter at all into detail on such a subject, it must be only in a
case clearly connected with the actual requirements of our story; and
such a case may be found, at this juncture, in the conduct of the
senator Vetranio, under the influence of the worst calamities attending
the blockade of Rome by the Goths.

Who, it may be asked, knowing the previous character of this man, his
frivolity of disposition, his voluptuous anxiety for unremitting
enjoyment and ease, his horror of the slightest approaches of
affliction or pain, would have imagined him capable of rejecting in
disdain all the minor chances of present security and future prosperity
which his unbounded power and wealth might have procured for him, even
in a famine-stricken city, and rising suddenly to the sublime of
criminal desperation, in the resolution to abandon life as worthless
the moment it had ceased to run in the easy current of all former
years?  Yet to this determination had he now arrived; and, still more
extraordinary, in this determination had he found others, of his own
patrician order, to join him.


The reader will remember his wild announcement of his intended orgie to
the Prefect Pompeianus during the earlier periods of the siege; that
announcement was now to be fulfilled.  Vetranio had bidden his guests
to the Banquet of Famine.  A chosen number of the senators of the great
city were to vindicate their daring by dying the revellers that they
had lived; by resigning in contempt all prospect of starving, like the
common herd, on a lessening daily pittance of loathsome food; by making
their triumphant exit from a fettered and ungrateful life, drowned in
floods of wine, and lighted by the fires of the wealthiest palace of
Rome!

It had been intended to keep this frantic determination a profound
secret, to let the mighty catastrophe burst upon the remaining
inhabitants of the city like a prodigy from heaven; but the slaves
intrusted with the organisation of the suicide banquet had been bribed
to their tasks with wine, and in the carelessness of intoxication had
revealed to others whatever they heard within the palace walls.  The
news passed from mouth to mouth.  There was enough in the prospect of
beholding the burning palace and the drunken suicide of its desperate
guests to animate even the stagnant curiosity of a famishing mob.

On the appointed evening the people dragged their weary limbs from all
quarters of the city towards the Pincian Hill.  Many of them died on
the way;  many lost their resolution to proceed to the end of their
journey, and took shelter sullenly in the empty houses on the road;
many found opportunities for plunder and crime as they proceeded, which
tempted them from their destination; but many persevered in their
purpose--the living dragging the dying along with them, the desperate
driving the cowardly before them in malignant sport, until they gained
the palace gates.  It was by their voices, as they reached her ear from
the street, that the fast-sinking faculties of Antonina had been
startled, though not revived; and there, on the broad pavement, lay
these citizens of a fallen city--a congregation of pestilence and
crime--a starving and an awful band!

The moon, brightened by the increasing darkness, now clearly
illuminated the street, and revealed, in a narrow space, a various and
impressive scene.

One side of the roadway in which stood Vetranio's palace was occupied,
along each extremity, as far as the eye could reach at night, by the
groves and outbuildings attached to the senator's mansion. The palace
grounds, at the higher and farther end of the street--looking from the
Pincian Gate--crossed it by a wide archway, and then stretched
backward, until they joined the trees of the little garden of
Numerian's abode. In a line with this house, but separated from it by a
short space, stood a long row of buildings, let out floor by floor to
separate occupants, and towering to an unwieldy altitude; for in
ancient Rome, as in modern London, in consequence of the high price of
land in an over-populated city, builders could only secure space in a
dwelling by adding inconveniently to its height.  Beyond these
habitations rose the trees surrounding another patrician abode; and
beyond that the houses took a sudden turn, and nothing more was visible
in a straight line but the dusky, indefinite objects of the distant
view.


The whole appearance of the street before Vetranio's mansion, had it
been unoccupied by the repulsive groups now formed in it, would have
been eminently beautiful at the hours of which we now write.  The nobly
symmetrical frontage of the palace itself, with its graceful succession
of long porticoes and colossal statues, contrasted by the picturesquely
irregular appearance of the opposite dwelling of Numerian and the lofty
houses by its side; the soft, indistinct masses of foliage running
parallel along the upper ends of the street, terminated and connected
by the archway garden across the road, on which was planted a group of
tall pine-trees, rising in gigantic relief against the transparent sky;
the brilliant light streaming across the pavement from Vetranio's
gaily-curtained windows, immediately opposed by the tranquil moonlight
which lit the more distant view--formed altogether a prospect in which
the natural and the artificial were mingled together in the most
exquisite proportions--a prospect whose ineffable poetry and beauty
might, on any other night, have charmed the most careless eye and
exalted the most frivolous mind.  But now, overspread as it was by
groups of people gaunt with famine and hideous with disease; startled
as it was, at gloomy intervals, by contending cries of supplication,
defiance, and despair--its brightest beauties of Nature and Art
appeared but to shine with an aspect of bitter mockery around the human
misery which their splendour disclosed.

Upwards of a hundred people--mostly of the lowest orders--were
congregated before the senator's devoted dwelling.  Some few among them
passed slowly to and fro in the street, their figures gliding shadowy
and solemn through the light around them; but the greater number lay on
the pavement before the wall of Numerian's dwelling and the doorways of
the lofty houses by its side.  Illuminated by the full glare of the
light from the palace windows, these groups, huddled together in the
distorted attitudes of suffering and despair, assumed a fearful and
unearthly appearance.  Their shrivelled faces, their tattered clothing,
their wan forms, here prostrate, there half-raised, were bathed in a
steady red glow.  High above them, at the windows of the tall houses,
now tenanted in every floor by the dead, appeared a few figures (the
mercenary guardians of the dying within)  bending forward to look out
upon the palace opposite--their haggard faces showing pale in the clear
moonlight.  Sometimes their voices were heard calling in mockery to the
mass of people below to break down the strong steel gates of the
palace, and tear the full wine-cup from its master's lips. Sometimes
those beneath replied with execrations, which rose wildly mingled with
the wailing of women and children, the moans of the plague-stricken,
and the supplications of the famished to the slaves passing backwards
and forwards behind the palace railings for charity and help.

In the intervals, when the tumult of weak voices was partially lulled,
there was heard a dull, regular, beating sound, produced by those who
had found dry bones on their road to the palace, and were pounding them
on the pavement, in sheltered places, for food.  The wind, which had
been refreshing during the day, had changed at sunset, and now swept up
slowly over the street in hot, faint gusts, plague-laden, from the
East. Particles of the ragged clothing on some prostrate forms lying
most exposed in its course waved slowly to and fro, as it passed, like
banners planted by Death on the yielding defences of the citadel of
Life.  It wound through the open windows of the palace, hot and
mephitic, as if tainted with the breath of the foul and furious words
which it bore onward into the banqueting-hall of the senator's reckless
guests.  Driven over such scenes as now spread beneath it, it derived
from them a portentous significance; it seemed to blow like an
atmosphere exuded from the furnace-depths of centre earth, breathing
sinister warnings of some deadly convulsion in the whole fabric of
Nature over the thronged and dismal street.

Such was the prospect before the palace, and such the spectators
assembled in ferocious anxiety to behold the destruction of the
senator's abode.  Meanwhile, within the walls of the building, the
beginning of the fatal orgie was at hand.

It had been covenanted by the slaves (who, during the calamities in the
besieged city, had relaxed in their accustomed implicit obedience to
their master with perfect impunity), that, as soon as the last labours
of preparation were completed, they should be free to consult their own
safety by quitting the devoted palace.  Already some of the weakest and
most timid of their numbers might be seen passing out hastily into the
gardens by the back gates, like engineers who had fired a train, and
were escaping ere the explosion burst forth.  Those among the menials
who still remained in the palace were for the greater part occupied in
drinking from the vases of wine which had been placed before them, to
preserve to the last moment their failing strength.


The mockery of festivity had been extended even to their dresses--green
liveries girt with cherry-coloured girdles arrayed their wasted forms.
They drank in utter silence.  Not the slightest appearance of revelry
or intoxication prevailed among their ranks.  Confusedly huddled
together, as if for mutual protection, they ever and anon cast quick
glances of suspicion and apprehension upon some six or eight of the
superior attendants of the palace, who walked backwards and forwards at
the outer extremity of the hall occupied by their comrades, and
occasionally advancing along the straight passages before them to the
front gates of the building, appeared to be exchanging furtive signals
with some of the people in the street.  Reports had been vaguely spread
of a secret conspiracy between some of the principal of the slaves and
certain chosen ruffians of the populace, to murder all the inmates of
the palace, seize on its treasures, and, opening the city gates to the
Goths, escape with their booty during the confusion of the pillage of
Rome.  Nothing had as yet been positively discovered; but the few
attendants who kept ominously apart from the rest were unanimously
suspected by their fellows, who now watched them over their wine-cups
with anxious eyes.  Different as was the scene among the slaves still
left in the palace from the scene among the people dispersed in the
street, the one was nevertheless in its own degree as gloomily
suggestive of some great impending calamity as the other.

The grand banqueting-hall of the palace, prepared though it now was for
festivity, wore a changed and melancholy aspect.

The massive tables still ran down the whole length of the noble room,
surrounded by luxurious couches, as in former days, but not a vestige
of food appeared upon their glittering surfaces.  Rich vases, flasks,
and drinking-cups, all filled with wine, alone occupied the festal
board. Above, hanging low from the ceiling, burnt ten large lamps,
corresponding to the number of guests assembled, as the only procurable
representatives of the hundreds of revellers who had feasted at
Vetranio's expense during the brilliant nights that were now passed for
ever.  At the lower end of the room, beyond the grand door of entrance,
hung a thick black curtain, apparently intended to conceal mysteriously
some object behind it.  Before the curtain burnt a small lamp of yellow
glass, raised upon a high gilt pole, and around and beneath it, heaped
against the side walls, and over part of the table, lay a various and
confused mass of rich objects, all of a nature more or less
inflammable, and all besprinkled with scented oils.  Hundreds of yards
of gorgeously variegated hangings, rolls upon rolls of manuscripts,
gaudy dresses of all colours, toys, utensils, innumerable articles of
furniture formed in rare and beautifully inlaid woods, were carelessly
flung together against the walls of the apartment, and rose high
towards its ceiling.

On every part of the tables not occupied by the vases of wine were laid
gold and jewelled ornaments which dazzled the eye by their brilliancy;
while, in extraordinary contrast to the magnificence thus profusely
displayed, there appeared in one of the upper corners of the hall an
old wooden stand covered by a coarse cloth, on which were placed one or
two common earthenware bowls, containing what my be termed a 'mash' of
boiled bran and salted horseflesh.  Any repulsive odour which might
have arisen from this strange compound was overpowered by the various
perfumes sprinkled about the room, which, mingling with the hot breezes
wafted through the windows from the street, produced an atmosphere as
oppressive and debilitating, in spite of its artificial allurements to
the sense of smell, as the air of a dungeon or the vapours of a marsh.

Remarkable as was the change in the present appearance of the
banqueting-hall, it was but the feeble reflection of the alteration for
the worse in the aspect of the host and his guests.  Vetranio reclined
at the head of the table, dressed in a scarlet mantle.  An embroidered
towel with purple tassels and fringes, connected with rings of gold,
fell over his breast, and silver and ivory bracelets were clasped round
his arms.  But of the former man the habiliments were all that
remained. His head was bent forward, as if with the weakness of age;
his emaciated arms seemed barely able to support the weight of the
ornaments which glittered on them; his eyes had contracted a wild,
unsettled expression; and a deadly paleness overspread the once plump
and jovial cheeks which so many mistresses had kissed in mercenary
rapture in other days.  Both in countenance and manner the elegant
voluptuary of our former acquaintance at the Court of Ravenna was
entirely and fatally changed. Of the other eight patricians who lay on
the couches around their altered host--some wild and reckless, some
gloomy and imbecile--all had suffered in the ordeal of the siege, the
famine, and the pestilence, like him.

Such were the members of the assemblage, represented from the ceiling
by nine of the burning lamps.  The tenth and last lamp indicated the
presence of one more guest who reclined a little apart from the rest.


This man was hump-backed; his gaunt, bony features were repulsively
disproportioned to his puny frame, which looked doubly contemptible,
enveloped as it was in an ample tawdry robe.  Sprung from the lowest
ranks of the populace, he had gradually forced himself into the favour
of his superiors by his skill in coarse mimicry, and his readiness in
ministering to the worst vices of all who would employ him.  Having
lost the greater part of his patrons during the siege, finding himself
abandoned to starvation on all sides, he had now, as a last resource,
obtained permission to participate in the Banquet of Famine, to enliven
it by a final exhibition of his buffoonery, and to die with his
masters, as he had lived with them--the slave, the parasite, and the
imitator of the lowest of their vices and the worst of their crimes.

At the commencement of the orgie, little was audible beyond the clash
of the wine-cups, the low occasional whispering of the revellers, and
the confused voices of the people without, floating through the window
from the street.  The desperate compact of the guests, now that its
execution had actually begun, awed them at first in spite of
themselves.  At length, when there was a lull of all sounds--when a
temporary calm prevailed over the noises outside--when the wine-cups
were emptied, and left for a moment ere they were filled
again--Vetranio feebly rose, and, announcing with a mocking smile that
he was about to speak a funeral oration over his friends and himself,
pointed to the wall immediately behind him as to an object fitted to
awaken the astonishment or the hilarity of his moody guests.

Against the upper part of the wall were fixed various small statues in
bronze and marble, all representing the owner of the palace, and all
hung with golden plates.  Beneath these appeared the rent-roll of his
estates, written in various colours on white vellum, and beneath that,
scratched on the marble in faint irregular characters, was no less an
object than his own epitaph, composed by himself.  It may be translated
thus:--

     Stop, Spectator!
     If thou has reverently cultivated the pleasures of the taste,
     pause amid these illustrious ruins of what was once
     a palace,
     and peruse with respect on this stone
     the epitaph of VETRANIO, a senator.
     He was the first man who invented a successful
     nightingale sauce;
     his bold and creative genius added much,
     and would have added more, to
     THE ART OF COOKERY;
     but, alas for the interests of science!
     he lived in the days when the Gothic barbarians besieged
     THE IMPERIAL CITY;
     famine left him no matter for gustatory experiment;
     and pestilence deprived him of cooks to enlighten!
     Opposed at all points by the force of adverse circumstances,
     finding his life of no further use to the culinary
     interests of Rome,
     he called his chosen friends together to assist him,
     conscientiously drank up every drop of wine remaining
     in his cellars,
     lit the funeral pile of himself and his guests,
     in the banqueting-hall of his own palace,
     and died, as he had lived,
     the patriotic CATO
     of his country's gastronomy!

'Behold!' cried Vetranio, pointing triumphantly to the epitaph--'behold
in every line of those eloquent letters at once the seal of my resolute
adherence to the engagement that unites us here, and the foundation of
my just claim to the reverence of posterity on the most useful of the
arts which I exercised for the benefit of my species!  Read, friends,
brethren, fellow-martyrs of glory, and, as you read, rejoice with me
over the hour of our departure from the desecrated arena, no longer
worthy the celebration of the Games of Life!  Yet, ere the feast
proceeds, hear me while I speak--I make my last oration as the arbiter
of our funeral sports, as the host of the Banquet of Famine!


'Who would sink ignobly beneath the slow superiority of starvation, or
perish under the quickly glancing steel of the barbarian conqueror's
sword, when such a death as ours is offered to the choice?--when wine
flows bright, to drown sensation in oblivion, and a palace and its
treasures furnish alike the scene of the revel and the radiant funeral
pile?  The mighty philosophers of India--the inspired
Gymnosophists--died as we shall die!  Calanus before Alexander, Zamarus
in the presence of Augustus, lit the fires that consumed them!  Let us
follow their glorious example!  No worms will prey upon our bodies, no
hired mourners will howl discordant at our funerals!  Purified in the
radiance of primeval fire, we shall vanish triumphant from enemies and
friends--a marvel to the earth, a vision of glory to the gods
themselves!

'Is it a day more or a day less of life that is now of importance to
us? No; it is only towards the easiest and the noblest death that our
aspirations can turn!  Among our number there is now not one whom the
care of existence can further occupy!

'Here, at my right hand, reclines my estimable comrade of a thousand
former feasts, Furius Balburius Placidus, who, when we sailed on the
Lucrine Lake, was wont to complain of intolerable hardship if a fly
settled on the gilded folds of his umbrella; who languished for a land
of Cimmerian darkness if a sunbeam penetrated the silken awnings of his
garden-terrace; and who now wrangles for a mouthful of horseflesh with
the meanest of his slaves, and would exchange the richest of his
country villas for a basket of dirty bread!  O Furius Balburius
Placidus, of what further use is life to thee?

'There, at my left, I discern the changed though still expressive
countenance of the resolute Thascius, he who chastised a slave with a
hundred lashes if his warm water was not brought immediately at his
command; he whose serene contempt for every member of the human species
by himself once ranked him among the greatest of human philosophers;
even he now wanders through his palace unserved, and fawns upon the
plebeian who will sell him a measure of wretched bran!  Oh, admired
friend, oh, rightly reasoning Thascius, say, is there anything in Rome
which should delay thee on thy journey to the Elysian Fields?

'Farther onward at the table, drinking largely while I speak, I behold,
O Marcus Moecius Moemmius, thy once plump and jovial form!--thou, in
former days accustomed to rejoice in the length of thy name, because it
enabled thy friends to drink the more in drinking a cup to each letter
of it, tell me what banqueting-hall is now open to thee but this?--and
thus desolate in the city of thy social triumphs, what should
disincline thee to make of our festal solemnity thy last revel on earth?

'Thou, too, facetious hunchback, prince of parasites, unscrupulous
Reburrus, where, but at this banquet of famine, will thy buffoonery now
procure for thee a draught of reviving wine?  Thy masters have
abandoned thee to thy native dunghill!  No more shalt thou wheedle for
them when they borrow, or bully for them when they pay!  No more
charges of poisoning or magic shalt thou forge to imprison their
troublesome creditors!  Oh, officious sycophant, thy occupations are no
more!  Drink while thou canst, and then resign thy carcass to congenial
mire!

'And you, my five remaining friends, whom--little desirous of further
delay--I will collectively address, think on the days when the
suspicion of an infectious malady in any one of your companions was
sufficient to separate you from the dearest of them; when the slaves
who came to you from their palaces underwent long ceremonies of
ablution before they approached your presence; and remembering this,
reflect that most, perhaps all of us, now meet here plague-tainted
already; and then say, of what advantage is it to languish for a life
which is yours no longer?

'No, my friends, my brethren of the banquet; feeling that when life is
worthless it is folly to live, you cannot shrink from the lofty
resolution by which we are bound, you cannot pause on our joyful
journey of departure from the scenes of earth--I wrong you even by a
doubt!  Let me now, rather, ask your attention for a worthier
subject--the enumeration of the festal ceremonies by which the progress
of the banquet will be marked.  That task concluded, that last ceremony
of my last welcome to you these halls duly performed, I join you once
more in your final homage to the deity of our social lives--the God of
Wine!


'It is not unknown to you--learned as you are in the jovial antiquities
of the table--that it was, among some of the ancients, a custom for a
master-spirit of philosophy to preside--the teacher as well as the
guest--at their feasts.  This usage it has been my care to revive, and,
as this four meeting is unparalleled in its heroic design, so it was my
ambition to bid to it one unparalleled, either as a teacher or a guest.
Fired by an original idea, unobserved of my slaves, aided only by my
singing-boy, the faithful Glyco, I have succeeded in placing behind
that black curtain such an associate of our revels as you have never
feasted with before, whose appearance at the fitting moment must strike
you irresistibly with astonishment, and whose discourse--not of human
wisdom only--will be inspired by the midnight secrets of the tomb.  By
my side, on this parchment, lies the formulary of questions to be
addressed by Reburrus, when the curtain is withdrawn, to the Oracle of
the Mysteries of other Spheres.

'Before you, behold in those vases all that remains of my once
well-stocked cellars, and all that is provided for the palates of my
guests! We sit at the Banquet of Famine, and no coarser sustenance than
inspiring wine finds admittance at the Bacchanalian board.  Yet, should
any among us, in his last moments, be feeble enough to pollute his lips
with nourishment alone worthy of the vermin of the earth, let him seek
the wretched and scanty table, type of the wretched and scanty food
that covers it, placed yonder in obscurity behind me.  There will he
find (in all barely sufficient for one man's poorest meal) the last
morsels of the vilest nourishment left in the palace.  For me, my
resolution is fixed--it is only the generous wine-cup that shall now
approach my lips!

'Above me are the ten lamps, answering to the number of my friends here
assembled.  One after another, as the wine overpowers us, those burning
images of life will be extinguished in succession by the guests who
remain proof against our draughts; and the last of these, lighting this
torch at the last lamp, will consummate the banquet, and celebrate its
glorious close, by firing the funeral pile of my treasures heaped
yonder against my palace walls!  If my powers fail me before yours,
swear to me that whoever among you is able to lift the cup to his lips
after it has dropped from the hands of the rest, will fire the pile!
Swear it by your lost mistresses, your lost friends, your lost
treasures!--by your own lives, devoted to the pleasures of wine and the
purification of fire!'

As, with flashing eyes and flushed countenance, Vetranio sank back on
his couch, his companions, inflamed with the wine they had already
drunk, arose cup in hand, and turned towards him.  Their voices,
discordantly mingled, pronounced the oath together; then, as they
resumed their former positions, their eyes all turned towards the black
curtain in ardent expectation.

They had observed the sinister and sarcastic expression of Vetranio's
eye as he spoke of his concealed guest; they knew that the hunchback
Reburrus possessed, among his other powers of buffoonery, the art of
ventriloquism; and they suspected the presence of some hideous or
grotesque image of a heathen god or demon in the hidden recess, which
the jugglery of the parasite was to gift with the capacity of speech.
Blasphemous comments upon life, death, and immortality were eagerly
awaited. The general impatience for the withdrawal of the curtain was
perceived by Vetranio, who, waving his hand for silence,
authoritatively exclaimed--

'The hour has not yet arrived.  More draughts must be drunk, more
libations poured out, ere the mystery of the curtain is revealed!  Ho,
Glyco!' he continued, turning towards the singing-boy, who had silently
entered the room, 'the moment is yours!  Tune your lyre, and recite my
last ode, which I have addressed to you!  Let the charms of Poetry
preside over the feast of Death!'

The boy advanced, trembling; his once ruddy face was colourless and
haggard; his eyes were fixed with a look of rigid terror on the black
curtain; his features palpably expressed the presence within him of
some secret and overwhelming recollection which had crushed all his
other faculties and perceptions.  Steadily, almost guiltily, averting
his face from his master's countenance, he stood by Vetranio's couch, a
frail and fallen being, a mournful spectacle of perverted docility and
degraded youth.

Still true, however, to the duties of his vocation, he ran his thin,
trembling fingers over the lyre, and mechanically preluded the
commencement of the ode.  But during the silence of attention which now
prevailed, the confused noises from the people in the street penetrated
more distinctly into the banqueting-room; and at this moment, high
above them all--hoarse, raving, terrible, rose the voice of one man.

'Tell me not,' it cried, 'of perfumes wafted from the palace!--foul
vapours flow from it!--see, they sink, suffocating over me!--they bathe
sky and earth, and men who move around us, in fierce, green light!'

Then other voices of men and women, shrill and savage, broke forth in
interruption together:--'Peace, Davus! you awake the dead about you!'
'Hide in the darkness; you are plague-struck; your skin is shrivelled;
your gums are toothless!'  'When the palace is fired you shall be flung
into the flames to purify your rotten carcass!'

'Sing!' cried Vetranio furiously, observing the shudders that ran over
the boy's frame and held him speechless.  'Strike the lyre, as
Timotheus struck it before Alexander!  Drown in melody the barking of
the curs who wait for our offal in the street!'

Feebly and interruptedly the terrified boy began; the wild continuous
noises of the moaning voices from without sounding their awful
accompaniment to the infidel philosophy of his song as he breathed it
forth in faint and faltering accents.  It ran thus:--

TO GLYCO

    Ah, Glyco! why in flow'rs array'd?
    Those festive wreaths less quickly fade
    Than briefly-blooming joy!
    Those high-prized friends who share your mirth
    Are counterfeits of brittle earth,
    False coin'd in Death's alloy!

    The bliss your notes could once inspire,
    When lightly o'er the god-like lyre
    Your nimble fingers pass'd,
    Shall spring the same from others' skill--
    When you're forgot, the music still
    The player shall outlast!

    The sun-touch'd cloud that mounts the sky,
    That brightly glows to warm the eye,
    Then fades we know not where,
    Is image of the little breath
    Of life--and then, the doom of Death
    That you and I must share!

    Helpless to make or mar our birth,
    We blindly grope the ways of earth,
    And live our paltry hour;
    Sure, that when life has ceased to please,
    To die at will, in Stoic ease,
    Is yielded to our pow'r!

    Who, timely wise, would meanly wait
    The dull delay of tardy Fate,
    When Life's delights are shorn?
    No!  When its outer gloss has flown,
    Let's fling the tarnish'd bauble down
    As lightly as 'twas worn.

'A health to Glyco!  A deep draught to a singer from heaven come down
upon earth!' cried the guests, seizing their wine-cups, as the ode was
concluded, and draining them to the last drop.  But their drunken
applause fell noiseless upon the ear to which it was addressed.  The
boy's voice, as he sang the final stanza of the ode, had suddenly
changed to a shrill, almost an unearthly tone, then suddenly sank again
as he breathed forth the last few notes; and now as his dissolute
audience turned towards him with approving glances, they saw him
standing before them cold, rigid, and voiceless.  The next instant his
fixed features were suddenly distorted, his whole frame collapsed as if
torn by an internal spasm--he fell back heavily to the floor.  Those
around approached him with unsteady feet, and raised him in their arms.
His soul had burst the bonds of vice in which others had entangled it;
the voice of Death had whispered to the slave of the great despot,
Crime--'Be free!'

'We have heard the note of the swan singing its own funeral hymn!' said
the patrician Placidus, looking in maudlin pity from the corpse of the
boy to the face of Vetranio, which presented for the moment an
involuntary expression of grief and remorse.


'Our miracle of beauty and boy-god of melody has departed before us to
the Elysian fields!' muttered the hunchback Reburrus, in harsh,
sarcastic accents.

Then, during the short silence that ensued, the voices from the street,
joined on this occasion to a noise of approaching footsteps on the
pavement, became again distinctly audible in the banqueting-hall.
'News! news!' cried these fresh auxiliaries of the horde already
assembled before the palace. 'Keep together, you who still care for
your lives!  Solitary citizens have been lured by strange men into
desolate streets, and never seen again!  Jars of newly salted flesh,
which there were no beasts left in the city to supply, have been found
in a butcher's shop!  Keep together!  Keep together!'

'No cannibals among the mob shall pollute the body of my poor boy!'
cried Vetranio, rousing himself from his short lethargy of grief.  'Ho!
Thascius! Marcus! you who can yet stand! let us bear him to the funeral
pile!  He has died first--his ashes shall be first consumed!'

The two patricians arose as the senator spoke, and aided him in
carrying the body to the lower end of the room, where it was laid
across the table, beneath the black curtain, and between the heaps of
drapery and furniture piled up against each of the walls.  Then, as his
guests reeled back to their places, Vetranio, remaining by the side of
the corpse, and seizing in his unsteady hands a small vase of wine,
exclaimed in tones of fierce exultation:  'The hour has come--the
Banquet of Famine has ended--the Banquet of Death has begun!  A health
to the guest behind the curtain!  Fill--drink--behold!'

He drank deeply from the vase as he ceased, and drew aside the black
drapery above him.  A cry of terror and astonishment burst from the
intoxicated guests as they beheld in the recess now disclosed to view
the corpse of an aged woman, clothed in white, and propped up on a
high, black throne, with the face turned towards them, and the arms
(artificially supported) stretched out as if in denunciation over the
banqueting-table.  The lamp of yellow glass, which burnt high above the
body, threw over it a lurid and flickering light; the eyes were open,
the jaw had fallen, the long grey tresses drooped heavily on either
side of the white hollow cheeks.

'Behold!' cried Vetranio, pointing to the corpse--'Behold my secret
guest!  Who so fit as the dead to preside at the Banquet of Death?
Compelling the aid of Glyco, shrouded by congenial night, seizing on
the first corpse exposed before me in the street, I have set up there,
unsuspected by all, the proper idol of our worship, and philosopher at
our feast!  Another health to the queen of the fatal revels--to the
teacher of the mysteries of worlds unseen--rescued from rotting
unburied, to perish in the consecrated flames with the senators of
Rome! A health!--a health to the mighty mother, ere she begin the
mystic revelations!  Fill--drink!'

Fired by their host's example, recovered from their momentary awe,
already inflamed by the mad recklessness of debauchery, the guests
started from their couches, and with Bacchanalian shouts answered
Vetranio's challenge.  The scene at this moment approached the
supernatural.  The wild disorder of the richly laden tables; the wine
flowing over the floor from overthrown vases; the great lamps burning
bright and steady over the confusion beneath; the fierce gestures, the
disordered countenances of the revellers, as they waved their jewelled
cups over their heads in frantic triumph; and then the gloomy and
terrific prospect at the lower end of the hall--the black curtain, the
light burning solitary on its high pole, the dead boy lying across the
festal table, the living master standing by his side, and, like an evil
spirit, pointing upward in mockery to the white-robed corpse of the
woman, as it towered above all in its unnatural position, with its
skinny arms stretched forth, with its ghastly features appearing to
move as the faint and flickering light played over them,--produced
together such a combination of scarce-earthly objects as might be
painted, but cannot be described. It was an embodiment of a sorcerer's
vision--an apocalypse of sin triumphing over the world's last relics of
mortality in the vaults of death.


'To your task, Reburrus!' cried Vetranio, when the tumult was lulled;
'to your questions without delay!  Behold the teacher with whom you are
to hold commune!  Peruse carefully the parchment in your hand;
question, and question loudly--you speak to the apathetic dead!'

For some time before the disclosure of the corpse, the hunchback had
been seated apart at the end of the banqueting-hall opposite the
black-curtained recess, conning over the manuscript containing the list
of questions and answers which formed the impious dialogue he was to
hold, by the aid of his powers of ventriloquism, with the violated
dead.  When the curtain was withdrawn he had looked up for a moment,
and had greeted the appearance of the sight behind it with a laugh of
brutal derision, returning immediately to the study of his blasphemous
formulary which had been confided to his care.  At the moment when
Vetranio's commands were addressed to him he arose, reeled down the
apartment towards the corpse, and, opening the dialogue as he
approached it, began in loud jeering tones:  'Speak, miserable relict
of decrepit mortality!'

He paused as he uttered the last word, and gaining a point of view from
which the light of the lamp fell full upon the solemn and stony
features of the corpse, looked up defiantly at it.  In an instant a
frightful change passed over him, the manuscript dropped from his hand,
his deformed frame shrank and tottered, a shrill cry of recognition
burst from his lips, more like the yell of a wild beast than the voice
of a man.

The next moment, when the guests started up to question or deride him,
he turned slowly and faced them.  Desperate and drunken as they were,
his look awed them into utter silence.  His face was deathlike in hue,
as the face of the corpse above him--thick drops of perspiration
trickled down it like rain--his dry glaring eyes wandered fiercely over
the startled countenances before him, and, as he extended towards them
his clenched hands, he muttered in a deep gasping whisper:  'Who has
done this?  MY MOTHER!  MY MOTHER!'

As these few words--of awful import though of simple form--fell upon
the ears of those whom he addressed, such of them as were not already
sunk in insensibility looked round on each other almost sobered for the
moment, and all speechless alike.  Not even the clash of the wine-cups
was now heard at the banqueting-table--nothing was audible but the
sound, still fitfully rising and falling, of the voices of terror,
ribaldry, and anguish from the street; and the hoarse convulsive
accents of the hunchback, still uttering at intervals his fearful
identification of the dead body above him:  'MY  MOTHER!  MY MOTHER!'

At length Vetranio, who was the first to recover himself, addressed the
terrified and degraded wretch before him, in tones which, in spite of
himself, betrayed, as he began, an unwonted tremulousness and
restraint. 'What, Reburrus!' he cried, 'are you already drunken to
insanity, that you call the first dead body which by chance I
encountered in the street, and by chance brought hither, your mother?
Was it to talk of your mother, whom dead or alive we neither know nor
care for, that you were admitted here? Son of obscurity and inheritor
of rags, what are your plebeian parents to us!' he continued, refilling
his cup, and lashing himself into assumed anger as he spoke. 'To your
dialogue without delay, or you shall be flung from the windows to
mingle with your rabble-equals in the street!'


Neither by word nor look did the hunchback answer the senator's
menaces. For him, the voice of the living was stifled in the presence
of the dead.  The retribution that had gone forth against him had
struck his moral, as a thunderbolt might have stricken his physical
being.  His soul strove in agony within him, as he thought on the awful
fatality which had set the dead mother in judgment on the degraded
son--which had directed the hand of the senator unwittingly to select
the corpse of the outraged parent as the object for the infidel
buffoonery of the reckless child, at the very close of his impious
career.  His past life rose before him, for the first time, like a foul
vision, like a nightmare of horror, impurity, and crime.  He staggered
up the room, groping his way along the wall, as if the darkness of
midnight had closed round his eyes, and crouched down by the open
window.  Beneath him rose the evil and ominous voices from the street;
around him spread the pitiless array of his masters; before him
appeared the denouncing vision of the corpse.

He would have remained but a short time unmolested in his place of
refuge, but for an event which now diverted from him the attention of
Vetranio and his guests.  Drinking furiously to drown all recollection
of the catastrophe they had just witnessed, three of the revellers had
already suffered the worst consequences of an excess, which their
weakened frames were ill-fitted to bear.  One after another, at short
intervals, they fell back senseless on their couches; and one after
another, as they succumbed, the three lamps burning nearest to them
were extinguished.  The same speedy termination to the debauch seemed
to be in reserve for the rest of their companions, with the exception
of Vetranio and the two patricians who reclined at his right hand and
his left.  These three still preserved the appearance of
self-possession, but an ominous change had already overspread their
countenances.  The expression of wild joviality, of fierce
recklessness, had departed from their wild features; they silently
watched each other with vigilant and suspicious eyes; each in turn, as
he filled his wine-cup, significantly handled the torch with which the
last drinker was to fire the funeral pile.  As the numbers of their
rivals decreased, and the flame of lamp after lamp was extinguished,
the fatal contest for a suicide supremacy assumed a present and
powerful interest, in which all other purposes and objects were
forgotten.  The corpse at the foot of the banqueting-table, and the
wretch cowering in his misery at the window, were now alike unheeded.
In the bewildered and brutalised minds of the guests, one sensation
alone remained--the intensity of expectation which precedes the result
of a deadly strife.

But ere long--awakening the attention which might otherwise never have
been aroused--the voice of the hunchback was heard, as the spirit of
repentance now moved within him, uttering, in wild, moaning tones, a
strange confession of degradation and sin--addressed to none;
proceeding, independent of consciousness or will, from the depths of
his stricken soul.  He half raised himself, and fixed his sunken eyes
upon the dead body, as these words dropped from his lips:  'It was the
last time that I beheld her alive, when she approached me--lonely, and
feeble, and poor--in the street, beseeching me to return to her in the
days of her old age and her solitude, and to remember how she had loved
me in my childhood for my very deformity, how she had watched me
throughout the highways of Rome, that none should oppress or deride me!
The tears ran down her cheeks, she knelt to me on the hard pavement,
and I, who had deserted her for her poverty, to make myself a slave in
palaces among the accursed rich, flung down money to her as to a beggar
who wearied me, and passed on!  She died desolate; her body lay
unburied, and I knew it not!  The son who had abandoned the mother
never saw her more, until she rose before him there--avenging,
horrible, lifeless--a sight of death never to leave him!  Woe, woe to
the accursed in his deformity, and the accursed of his mother's corpse!'

He paused, and fell back again to the ground, grovelling and
speechless. The tyrannic Thascius, regarding him with a scowl of
drunken wrath, seized an empty vase, and poising it in his unsteady
hand, prepared to hurl it at the hunchback's prostrate form, when again
a single cry--a woman's--rising above the increasing uproar in the
street, rang shrill and startling through the banqueting-hall. The
patrician suspended his purpose as he heard it, mechanically listening
with the half-stupid, half-cunning attention of intoxication.  'Help!
help!' shrieked the voice beneath the palace windows--'he follows me
still--he attacked my dead child in my arms!  As I flung myself down
upon it on the ground, I saw him watching his opportunity to drag it by
the limbs from under me--famine and madness were in his eyes--I drove
him back--I fled--he follows me still!--save us, save us!'


At this instant her voice was suddenly stifled in the sound of fierce
cries and rushing footsteps, followed by an appalling noise of heavy
blows, directed at several points, against the steel railings before
the palace doors.  Between the blows, which fell slowly and together at
regular intervals, the infuriated wretches, whose last exertions of
strength were strained to the utmost to deal them, could be heard
shouting breathlessly to each other:  'Strike harder, strike harder!
the back gates are guarded against us by our comrades admitted to the
pillage of the palace instead of us.  You who would share the booty,
strike firm! the stones are at your feet, the gates of entrance yield
before you.'

Meanwhile a confused sound of trampling footsteps and contending voices
became audible from the lower apartments of the palace.  Doors were
violently shut and opened--shouts and execrations echoed and re-echoed
along the lofty stone passages leading from the slaves' waiting-rooms
to the grand staircase; treachery betrayed itself as openly within the
building as violence still proclaimed itself in the assault on the
gates outside.  The chief slaves had not been suspected by their
fellows without a cause; the bands of pillage and murder had been
organised in the house of debauchery and death; the chosen adherents
from the street had been secretly admitted through the garden gates,
and had barred and guarded them against further intrusion--another doom
than the doom they had impiously prepared for themselves was
approaching the devoted senators, at the hands of the slaves whom they
had oppressed, and the plebeians whom they had despised.

At the first sound of the assault without and the first intimation of
the treachery within, Vetranio, Thascius, and Marcus started from their
couches; the remainder of the guests, incapable either of thought or
action, lay, in stupid insensibility, awaiting their fate.  These three
men alone comprehended the peril that threatened them, and, maddened
with drink, defied, in their ferocious desperation, the death that was
in store for them.  'Hark! they approach, the rabble revolted from our
rule,' cried Vetranio scornfully, 'to take the lives that we despise
and the treasures that we have resigned!  The hour has come; I go to
fire the pile that involves in one common destruction our assassins and
ourselves!'

'Hold!' exclaimed Thascius, snatching the torch from his hand; 'the
entrance must first be defended, or, ere the flames are kindled, the
slaves will be here!  Whatever is movable--couches, tables,
corpses--let us hurl them all against the door!'

As he spoke he rushed towards the black-curtained recess, to set the
example to his companions by seizing the corpse of the woman; but he
had not passed more than half the length of the apartment, when the
hunchback, who had followed him unheeded, sprang upon him from behind,
and, with a shrill cry, fastening his fingers on his throat, hurled him
torn and senseless to the floor.  'Who touches the body that is mine?'
shrieked the deformed wretch, rising from his victim, and threatening
with his blood-stained hands Vetranio and Marcus, as they stood
bewildered, and uncertain for the moment whether first to avenge their
comrade or to barricade the door--'The son shall rescue the mother!  I
go to bury her!  Atonement!  Atonement!'

He leaped upon the table as he spoke, tore asunder with resistless
strength the cords which fastened the corpse to the throne, seized it
in his arms, and the next instant gained the door.  Uttering fierce,
inarticulate cries, partly of anguish and partly of defiance, he threw
it open, and stepped forward to descend, when he was met at the head of
the stairs by the band of assassins hurrying up, with drawn swords and
blazing torches, to their work of pillage and death.  He stood before
them--his deformed limbs set as firmly on the ground as if he were
preparing to descend the stairs at one leap--with the corpse raised
high on his breast; its unearthly features were turned towards them,
its bare arms were still stretched forth as they had been extended over
the banqueting-table, its grey hair streamed back and mingled with his
own: under the fitful illumination of the torches, which played red and
wild over him and his fearful burden, the dead and the living looked
joined to each other in one monstrous form.


Huddled together, motionless, on the stairs, their shouts of vengeance
and fury frozen on their lips, the assassins stood for one moment,
staring mechanically, with fixed, spell-bound eyes, upon the hideous
bulwark opposing their advance on the victims whom they had expected so
easily to surprise.  The next instant a superstitious panic seized
them; as the hunchback suddenly moved towards them to descend, the
corpse seemed to their terror-stricken eyes to be on the eve of
bursting its way through their ranks.  Ignorant of its introduction
into the palace, imagining it, in the revival of their slavish fears,
to be the spectral offspring of the magic incantations of the senators
above, they turned with one accord and fled down the stairs.  The sound
of their cries of fear grew fainter and fainter in the direction of the
garden as they hurried through the secret gates at the back of the
building.  Then the heavy, regular tamp of the hunchback's footsteps,
as he paced the solitary corridors after them, bearing his burden of
death, became audible in awful distinctness; then that sound also died
away and was lost, and nothing more was heard in the banqueting-room
save the sharp clang of the blows still dealt against the steel
railings from the street.

But now these grew rare and more rare in their recurrence; the strong
metal resisted triumphantly the utmost efforts of the exhausted rabble
who assailed it.  As the minutes moved on, the blows grew rapidly
fainter and fewer; soon they diminished to three, struck at long
intervals; soon to one, followed by deep execrations of despair; and,
after that, a great silence sank down over the palace and the street,
where such strife and confusion had startled the night-echoes but a few
moments before.

In the banqueting-hall this rapid succession of events--the marvels of
a few minutes--passed before Vetranio and Marcus as visions beheld by
their eyes, but neither contained nor comprehended by their minds.
Stolid in their obstinate recklessness, stupefied by the spectacle of
the startling perils--menacing yet harmless, terrifying though
transitory--which surrounded them, neither of the senators moved a
muscle or uttered a word, from the period when Thascius had fallen
beneath the hunchback's attack, to the period when the last blow
against the palace railings, and the last sound of voices from the
street, had ceased in silence.  Then the wild current of drunken
exultation, suspended within them during this brief interval, flowed
once more, doubly fierce, in its old course. Insensible, the moment
after they had passed away, to the warning and terrific scenes they had
beheld, each now looked round on the other with a glance of triumphant
levity. 'Hark!' cried Vetranio, 'the mob without, feeble and cowardly
to the last, abandon their puny efforts to force my palace gates!
Behold our banqueting-tables still sacred from the intrusion of the
revolted menials, driven before my guest from the dead, like a flock of
sheep before a single dog!  Say, O Marcus! did I not well to set the
corpse at the foot of our banqueting-table?  What marvels has it not
effected, borne before us by the frantic Reburrus, as a banner of the
hosts of death, against the cowardly slaves whose fit inheritance is
oppression, and whose sole sensation is fear!  See, we are free to
continue and conclude the banquet as we had designed!  The gods
themselves have interfered to raise us in security above our
fellow-mortals, whom we despise!  Another health, in gratitude to our
departed guest, the instrument of our deliverance, under the auspices
of omnipotent Jove!'

As Vetranio spoke, Marcus alone, out of all the revellers, answered his
challenge.  These two--the last-remaining combatants of the
strife--having drained their cups to the health proposed, passed slowly
down each side of the room, looking contemptuously on their prostrate
companions, and extinguishing every lamp but the two which burnt over
their own couches.  Then returning to the upper end of the tables, they
resumed their places, not to leave them again until the fatal rivalry
was finally decided, and the moment of firing the pile had actually
arrived.

The torch lay between them; the last vases of wine stood at their
sides. Not a word escaped the lips of either, to break the deep
stillness prevailing over the palace.  Each fixed his eyes on the
other, in stern and searching scrutiny, and cup for cup, drank in slow
and regular alternation.  The debauch, which had hitherto presented a
spectacle of brutal degradation and violence, now that it was
restricted to two men only--each equally unimpressed by the scenes of
horror he had beheld, each vying with the other for the attainment of
the supreme of depravity--assumed an appearance of hardly human
iniquity; it became a contest for a satanic superiority of sin.

For some time little alteration appeared in the countenances of either
of the suicide-rivals; but they had now drunk to that final point of
excess at which wine either acts as its own antidote, or overwhelms in
fatal suffocation the pulses of life.  The crisis in the strife was
approaching for both, and the first to experience it was Marcus.
Vetranio, as he watched him, observed a dark purple flush overspreading
his face, hitherto pale, almost colourless.  His eyes suddenly dilated;
he panted for breath.  The vase of wine, when he strove with a last
effort to fill his cup from it, rolled from his hand to the floor.  The
stare of death was in his face as he half-raised himself and for one
instant looked steadily on his companion; the moment after, without
word or groan, he dropped backward over his couch.

The contest of the night was decided!  The host of the banquet and the
master of the palace had been reserved to end the one and to fire the
other!

A smile of malignant triumph parted Vetranio's lips as he now arose and
extinguished the last lamp burning besides his own.  That done, he
grasped the torch.  His eyes, as he raised it, wandered dreamily over
the array of his treasures, and the forms of his dead or insensible
fellow-patricians around him, to be consumed by his act in annihilating
fire.  The sensation of his solemn night-solitude in his fated palace
began to work in vivid and varying impressions on his mind, which was
partially recovering some portion of its wonted acuteness, under the
bodily reaction now produced in him by the very extravagance of the
night's excess.  His memory began to retrace confusedly the scenes with
which the dwelling that he was about to destroy had been connected at
distant or at recent periods.  At one moment the pomp of former
banquets, the jovial congregation of guests since departed or dead,
revived before him; at another, he seemed to be acting over again his
secret departure from his dwelling on the night before his last feast,
his stealthy return with the corpse that he had dragged from the
street, his toil in setting it up in mockery behind the black curtain,
and inventing the dialogue to be spoken before it by the hunchback.
Now his thoughts reverted to the minutest circumstances of the
confusion and dismay among the members of his household when the first
extremities of the famine began to be felt in the city; and now,
without visible connection or cause, they turned suddenly to the
morning when he had hurried through the most solitary paths in his
grounds to meet the betrayer Ulpius at Numerian's garden gate.  Once
more the image of Antonina--so often present to his imagination since
the original was lost to his eyes--grew palpable before him.  He
thought of her, as listening at his knees to the sound of his lute; as
awakening, bewildered and terrified, in his arms; as flying
distractedly before her father's wrath; as now too surely lying dead,
in her beauty and her innocence, amid the thousand victims of the
famine and the plague.

These and other reflections, while they crowded in whirlwind rapidity
on his mind, wrought no alteration in the deadly purpose which they
suspended.  His delay in lighting the torch was the unconscious delay
of the suicide, secure in his resolution ere he lifts the poison to his
lips--when life rises before him as a thing that is past, and he stands
for one tremendous moment in the dark gap between the present and the
future--no more the pilgrim of Time--not yet the inheritor of Eternity!

So, in the dimly lighted hall, surrounded by the victims whom he had
hurried before him to their doom, stood the lonely master of the great
palace; and so spoke within him the mysterious voices of his last
earthly thoughts.  Gradually they sank and ceased, and stillness and
vacancy closed like dark veils over his mind.  Starting like one
awakened from a trance he once more felt the torch in his hand, and
once more the expression of fierce desperation appeared in his eyes as
he lit it steadily at the lamp above him.

The dew was falling pure to the polluted earth; the light breezes sang
their low daybreak anthem among the leaves to the Power that bade them
forth; night had expired, and morning was already born of it, as
Vetranio, with the burning torch in his hand, advanced towards the
funeral pile.


He had already passed the greater part of the length of the room, when
a faint sound of footsteps ascending a private staircase which led to
the palace gardens, and communicated with the lower end of the
banqueting-hall by a small door of inlaid ivory, suddenly attracted his
attention. He hesitated in his deadly purpose, listening to the slow,
regular approaching sound, which, feeble though it was, struck
mysteriously impressive upon his ear in the dreary silence of all
things around him. Holding the torch high above his head, as the
footsteps came nearer, he fixed his eyes in intense expectation upon
the door.  It opened, and the figure of a young girl clothed in white
stood before him.  One moment he looked upon her with startled eyes;
the next the torch dropped from his hand, and smouldered unheeded on
the marble floor.  It was Antonina!

Her face was overspread with a strange transparent paleness; her once
soft, round cheeks had lost their girlish beauty of form; her
expression, ineffably mournful, hopeless, and subdued, threw a simple,
spiritual solemnity over her whole aspect.  She was changed, awfully
changed to the profligate senator from the being of his former
admiration; but still there remained in her despairing eyes enough of
the old look of gentleness and patience, surviving through all anguish
and dread, to connect her, even as she was now, with what she had been.
She stood in the chamber of debauchery and suicide between the funeral
pile and the desperate man who was vowed to fire it, a feeble, helpless
creature, yet powerful in the influence of her presence, at such a
moment and in such a form, as a saving and reproving spirit, armed with
the omnipotence of Heaven to mould the purposes of man.

Awed and astounded, as if he beheld an apparition from the tomb,
Vetranio looked upon this young girl--whom he had loved with the least
selfish passion that ever inspired him; whom he had lamented as long
since lost and dead with the sincerest grief he had ever felt; whom he
now saw standing before him at the very moment ere he doomed himself to
death, altered, desolate, supplicating--with emotions which held him
speechless in wonder, and even in dread.  While he still gazed upon her
in silence, he heard her speaking to him in low, melancholy, imploring
accents, which fell upon his ear, after the voices of terror and
desperation that had risen around him throughout the night, like tones
never addressed to it before.

'Numerian, my father, is sinking under the famine,' she began; 'if no
help is given to him, he may die even before sunrise!  You are rich and
powerful; I have come to you, having nothing now but his life to live
for, to beg sustenance for him!'  She paused, overpowered for the
moment, and bent her eyes wistfully on the senator's face.  Then seeing
that he vainly endeavoured to answer her, her head drooped upon her
breast, and her voice sank lower as she continued:--

'I have striven for patience under much sorrow and pain through the
long night that is past; my eyes were heavy and my spirit was faint; I
could have rendered up my soul willingly in my loneliness and
feebleness to God who gave it, but that it was my duty to struggle for
my life and my father's, now that I was restored to him after I had
lost all beside!  I could not think, or move, or weep, as, looking
forth upon your palace, I watched and waited through the hours of
darkness.  But, as morning dawned, the heaviness at my heart was
lightened; I remembered that the palace I saw before me was yours; and,
though the gates were closed, I knew that I could reach it through your
garden that joins to my father's land.  I had none in Rome to ask mercy
of but you; so I set forth hastily, ere my weakness should overpower
me, remembering that I had inherited much misery at your hands, but
hoping that you might pity me for what I had suffered when you saw me
again.  I came wearily through the garden; it was long before I found
my way hither; will you send me back as helpless as I came?  You first
taught me to disobey my father in giving me the lute; will you refuse
to aid me in succouring him now?  He is all that I have left in the
world!  Have mercy upon him!--have mercy upon me!'


Again she looked up in Vetranio's face.  His trembling lips moved, but
still no sound came from them.  The expression of confusion and awe yet
prevailed over his features as he pointed slowly towards the upper end
of the banqueting-table.  To her this simple action was eloquent beyond
all power of speech; she turned her feeble steps instantly in the
direction he had indicated.

He watched her, by the light of the single lamp that still burnt,
passing--strong in the shielding inspiration of her good purpose--amid
the bodies of his suicide companions without pausing on her way.
Having gained the upper end of the room, she took from the table a
flask of wine, and from the wooden stand behind it the bowl of offal
disdained by the guests at the fatal banquet, returning immediately to
the spot where Vetranio still stood.  Here she stopped for a moment, as
if about to speak once more; but her emotions overpowered her.  From
the sources which despair and suffering had dried up, the long-prisoned
tears once more flowed forth at the bidding of gratitude and hope. She
looked upon the senator, silent as himself, and her expression at that
instant was destined to remain on his memory while memory survived.
Then, with faltering and hasty steps, she departed by the way she had
come; and in the great palace, which his evil supremacy over the wills
of others had made a hideous charnel-house, he was once more left alone.

He made no effort to follow or detain her as she left him.  The torch
still smouldered beside him on the floor, but he never stooped to take
it up; he dropped down on a vacant couch, stupefied by what he had
beheld.  That which no entreaties, no threats, no fierce violence of
opposition could have effected in him, the appearance of Antonina had
produced--it had forced him to pause at the very moment of the
execution of his deadly design.

He remembered how, from the very first day when he had seen her, she
had mysteriously influenced the whole progress of his life; how his
ardour to possess her had altered his occupations, and even interrupted
his amusements; how all his energy and all his wealth had been baffled
in the attempt to discover her when she fled from her father's house;
how the first feeling of remorse that he had ever known had been
awakened within him by his knowledge of the share he had had in
producing her unhappy fate.  Recalling all this; reflecting that, had
she approached him at an earlier period, she would have been driven
back affrighted by the drunken clamour of his companions; and had she
arrived at a later, would have found his palace in flames; thinking at
the same time of her sudden presence in the banqueting-hall when he had
believed her to be dead, when her appearance at the moment before he
fired the pile was most irresistible in its supernatural influence over
his actions--that vague feeling of superstitious dread which exists
intuitively in all men's minds, which had never before been aroused in
his, thrilled through him.  His eyes were fixed on the door by which
she had departed, as if he expected her to return.  Her destiny seemed
to be portentously mingled with his own; his life seemed to move, his
death to wait at her bidding.  There was no repentance, no moral
purification in the emotions which now suspended his bodily faculties
in inaction; he was struck for the time with a mental paralysis.

The restless moments moved onward and onward, and still he delayed the
consummation of the ruin which the night's debauch had begun.  Slowly
the tender daylight grew and brightened in its beauty, warmed the cold
prostrate bodies in the silent hall, and dimmed the faint glow of the
wasting lamp; no black mist of smoke, no red glare of devouring fire
arose to quench its fair lustre; no roar of flames interrupted the
murmuring morning tranquillity of nature, or startled from their heavy
repose the exhausted outcasts stretched upon the pavement of the
street. Still the noble palace stood unshaken on its firm foundations;
still the adornments of its porticoes and its statues glittered as of
old in the rays of the rising sun; and still the hand of the master who
had sworn to destroy it, as he had sworn to destroy himself, hung idly
near the torch which lay already extinguished in harmless ashes at his
feet.



CHAPTER 23.

THE LAST EFFORTS OF THE BESIEGED.

We return to the street before the palace.  The calamities of the siege
had fallen fiercely on those who lay there during the night.  From the
turbulent and ferocious mob of a few hours since, not even the sound of
a voice was now heard.  Some, surprised in a paroxysm of hunger by
exhaustion and insensibility, lay with their hands half forced into
their mouths, as if in their ravenous madness they had endeavoured to
prey upon their own flesh.  Others now and then wearily opened their
languid eyes upon the street, no longer regardful, in the present
extremity of their sufferings, of the building whose destruction they
had assembled to behold, but watching for a fancied realisation of the
visions of richly spread tables and speedy relief called up before
them, as if in mockery, by the delirium of starvation and disease.

The sun had as yet but slightly risen above the horizon, when the
attention of the few among the populace who still preserved some
perception of outward events was suddenly attracted by the appearance
of an irregular procession--composed partly of citizens and partly of
officers of the Senate, and headed by two men--which slowly approached
from the end of the street leading into the interior of the city.  This
assembly of persons stopped opposite Vetranio's palace; and then such
members of the mob who watched them as were not yet entirely abandoned
by hope, heard the inspiring news that the procession they beheld was a
procession of peace, and that the two men who headed it were the
Spaniard, Basilius, a governor of a province, and Johannes, the chief
of the Imperial notaries--appointed ambassadors to conclude a treaty
with the Goths.

As this intelligence reached them, men who had before appeared
incapable of the slightest movement now rose painfully, yet resolutely,
to their feet, and crowded round the two ambassadors as round two
angels descended to deliver them from bondage and death.  Meanwhile,
some officers of the Senate, finding the front gates of the palace
closed against them, proceeded to the garden entrance at the back of
the building, to obtain admission to its owner.  The absence of
Vetranio and his friends from the deliberations of the government had
been attributed to their disgust at the obstinate and unavailing
resistance offered to the Goths.  Now, therefore, when submission had
been resolved upon, it had been thought both expedient and easy to
recall them peremptorily to their duties.  In addition to this motive
for seeking the interior of the palace, the servants of the Senate had
another errand to perform there.  The widely rumoured determination of
Vetranio and his associates to destroy themselves by fire, in the
frenzy of a last debauch--disbelieved or disregarded while the more
imminent perils of the city were under consideration--became a source
of some apprehension and anxiety to the acting members of the Roman
council, now that their minds were freed from part of the
responsibility which had weighed on them, by their resolution to treat
for peace.

Accordingly, the persons now sent into the palace were charged with the
duty of frustrating its destruction, if such an act had been really
contemplated, as well as the duty of recalling its inmates to their
appointed places in the Senate-house.  How far they were enabled, at
the time of their entrance into the banqueting-hall, to accomplish
their double mission, the reader is well able to calculate.  They found
Vetranio still in the place which he had occupied since Antonina had
quitted him.  Startled by their approach from the stupor which had
hitherto weighed on his faculties, the desperation of his purpose
returned; he made an effort to tear from its place the lamp which still
feebly burned, and to fire the pile in defiance of all opposition.  But
his strength, already taxed to the utmost, failed him.  Uttering
impotent threats of resistance and revenge, he fell, swooning and
helpless, into the arms of the officers of the Senate who held him
back. One of them was immediately dismissed, while his companions
remained in the palace, to communicate with the leaders of the assembly
outside. His report concluded, the two ambassadors moved slowly onward,
separating themselves from the procession which had accompanied them,
and followed only by a few chosen attendants--a mournful and a degraded
embassy, sent forth by the people who had once imposed their dominion,
their customs, and even their language, on the Eastern and Western
worlds, to bargain with the barbarians whom their fathers had enslaved
for the purchase of a disgraceful peace.


On the departure of the ambassadors, all the spectators still capable
of the effort repaired to the Forum to await their return, and were
joined there by members of the populace from other parts of the city.
It was known that the first intimation of the result of the embassy
would be given from this place; and in the eagerness of their anxiety
to hear it, in the painful intensity of their final hopes of
deliverance, even death itself seemed for a while to be arrested in its
fatal progress through the ranks of the besieged.

In silence and apprehension they counted the tardy moments of delay,
and watched with sickening gaze the shadows lessening and lessening, as
the sun gradually rose in the heavens to the meridian point.

At length, after an absence that appeared of endless duration, the two
ambassadors re-entered Rome. Neither of them spoke as they hurriedly
passed through the ranks of the people; but their looks of terror and
despair were all-eloquent to every beholder--their mission had failed.

For some time no member of the government appeared to have resolution
enough to come forward and harangue the people on the subject of the
unsuccessful embassy.  After a long interval, however, the Prefect
Pompeianus himself, urged partly by the selfish entreaties of his
friends, and partly by the childish love of display which still adhered
to him through all his present anxieties and apprehensions, stepped
into one of the lower balconies of the Senate-house to address the
citizens beneath him.

The chief magistrate of Rome was no longer the pompous and portly
personage whose intrusion on Vetranio's privacy during the commencement
of the siege has been described previously.  The little superfluous
flesh still remaining on his face hung about it like an ill-fitting
garment; his tones had become lachrymose; the oratorical gestures, with
which he was wont to embellish profusely his former speeches, were all
abandoned; nothing remained of the original man but the bombast of his
language and the impudent complacency of his self-applause, which now
appeared in contemptible contrast to his crestfallen demeanour and his
disheartening narrative of degradation and defeat.

'Men of Rome, let each of you exercise in his own person the heroic
virtues of a Regulus or a Cato!' the prefect began.  'A treaty with the
barbarians is out of our power.  It is the scourge of the empire,
Alaric himself, who commands the invading forces!  Vain were the
dignified remonstrances of the grave Basilius, futile was the
persuasive rhetoric of the astute Johannes, addressed to the
slaughtering and vainglorious Goth!  On their admission to his
presence, the ambassadors, anxious to awe him into a capitulation,
enlarged, with sagacious and commendable patriotism, on the expertness
of the Romans in the use of arms, their readiness for war, and their
vast numbers within the city walls.  I blush to repeat the barbarian's
reply.  Laughing immoderately, he answered, "The thicker the grass, the
easier it is to cut!"

'Still undismayed, the ambassadors, changing their tactics, talked
indulgently of their willingness to purchase a peace.  At this
proposal, his insolence burst beyond all bounds of barbarous arrogance.
"I will not relinquish the siege," he cried, "until I have delivered to
me all the gold and silver in the city, all the household goods in it,
and all the slaves from the northern countries."  "What then, O King,
will you leave us?" asked our amazed ambassadors.  "YOUR LIVES!"
answered the implacable Goth.  Hearing this, even the resolute Basilius
and the wise Johannes despaired.  They asked time to communicate with
the Senate, and left the camp of the enemy without further delay.  Such
was the end of the embassy; such the arrogant ferocity of the barbarian
foe!'

Here the Prefect paused, from sheer weakness and want of breath.  His
oration, however, was not concluded.  He had disheartened the people by
his narrative of what had occurred to the ambassadors; he now proceeded
to console them by his relation of what had occurred to himself, when,
after an interval, he thus resumed:--


'But even yet, O citizens of Rome, it is not time to despair!  There is
another chance of deliverance still left to us, and that chance has
been discovered by me.  It was my lot, during the absence of the
ambassadors, to meet with certain men of Tuscany, who had entered Rome
a few days before the beginning of the siege, and who spoke of a
project for relieving the city which they would communicate to the
Prefect alone. Ever anxious for the public welfare, daring all
treachery from strangers for advantage of my office, I accorded to
these men a secret interview. They told me of a startling and
miraculous event.  The town of Neveia, lying, as you well know, in the
direct road of the barbarians when they marched upon Rome, was
protected from their pillaging bands by a tempest of thunder and
lightning terrible to behold.  This tempest arose not, as you may
suppose, from an accidental convulsion of the elements, but was
launched over the heads of the invaders by the express interference of
the tutelary deities of the town, invocated by the inhabitants, who
returned in their danger to the practice of their ancient manner of
worship.  So said the men of Tuscany; and such pious resources as those
employed by the people of Neveia did they recommend to the people of
Rome!  For my part, I acknowledge to you that I have faith in their
project.  The antiquity of our former worship is still venerable in my
eyes.  The prayers of the priests of our new religion have wrought no
miraculous interference in our behalf:  let us therefore imitate the
example of the inhabitants of Neveia, and by the force of our
invocations hurl the thunders of Jupiter on the barbarian camp!  Let us
trust for deliverance to the potent interposition of the gods whom our
fathers worshipped--those gods who now, perhaps, avenge themselves for
our desertion of their temples by our present calamities.  I go without
delay to propose to the Bishop Innocentius and to the Senate, the
public performance of solemn ceremonies of sacrifice at the Capitol!  I
leave you in the joyful assurance that the gods, appeased by our
returning fidelity to our altars, will not refuse the supernatural
protection which they accorded to the people of a provincial town to
the citizens of Rome!'

No sounds either of applause or disapprobation followed the Prefect's
notable proposal for delivering the city from the besiegers by the
public apostasy of the besieged.  As he disappeared from their eyes,
the audience turned away speechless.  An universal despair now
overpowered in them even the last energies of discord and crime; they
resigned themselves to their doom with the gloomy indifference of
beings in whom all mortal sensations, all human passions, good or evil,
were extinguished.  The Prefect departed on his ill-omened expedition
to propose the practice of Paganism to the bishop of a Christian
church; but no profitable effort for relief was even suggested, either
by the government or the people.

And so this day drew in its turn towards a close--more mournful and
more disastrous, more fraught with peril, misery, and gloom, than the
days that had preceded it.

The next morning dawned, but no preparations for the ceremonies of the
ancient worship appeared at the Capitol.  The Senate and the bishop
hesitated to incur the responsibility of authorising a public
restoration of Paganism; the citizens, hopeless of succour, heavenly or
earthly, remained unheedful as the dead of all that passed around them.

There was one man in Rome who might have succeeded in rousing their
languid energies to apostasy; but where and how employed was he?

Now, when the opportunity for which he had laboured resolutely, though
in vain, through a long existence of suffering, degradation, and crime,
had gratuitously presented itself more tempting and more favourable
than even he in his wildest visions of success had ever dared to
hope--where was Ulpius?  Hidden from men's eyes, like a foul reptile,
in his lurking-place in the deserted temple--now raving round his idols
in the fury of madness, now prostrate before them in idiot
adoration--weaker for the interests of his worship, at the crisis of
its fate, than the weakest child crawling famished through the
streets--the victim of his own evil machinations at the very moment
when they might have led him to triumph--the object of that worst
earthly retribution, by which the wicked are at once thwarted, doomed,
and punished, here as hereafter, through the agency of their own sins.


Three more days passed.  The Senate, their numbers fast diminishing in
the pestilence, occupied the time in vain deliberations or in moody
silence.  Each morning the weary guards looked forth from the ramparts,
with the fruitless hope of discerning the long-promised legions from
Ravenna on their way to Rome; and each morning devastation and death
gained ground afresh among the hapless besieged.

At length, on the fourth day, the Senate abandoned all hope of further
resistance and determined on submission, whatever might be the result.
It was resolved that another embassy, composed of the whole acting
Senate, and followed by a considerable train, should proceed to Alaric;
that one more effort should be made to induce him to abate his ruinous
demands on the conquered; and that if this failed, the gates should be
thrown open, and the city and the people abandoned to his mercy in
despair.

As soon as the procession of this last Roman embassy was formed in the
Forum, its numbers were almost immediately swelled, in spite of
opposition, by those among the mass of the people who were still able
to move their languid and diseased bodies, and who, in the extremity of
their misery, had determined at all hazards to take advantage of the
opening of the gates, and fly from the city of pestilence in which they
were immured, careless whether they perished on the swords of the Goths
or languished unaided on the open plains.  All power of enforcing order
had long since been lost; the few soldiers gathered about the senators
made one abortive effort to drive the people back, and then resigned
any further resistance to their will.

Feebly and silently the spirit-broken assembly now moved along the
great highways, so often trodden, to the roar of martial music and the
shouts of applauding multitudes, by the triumphal processions of
victorious Rome; and from every street, as it passed on, the wasted
forms of the people stole out like spectres to join it.

Among these, as the embassy approached the Pincian Gate, were two,
hurrying forth to herd with their fellow-sufferers, on whose fortunes
in the fallen city our more particular attention has been fixed.  To
explain their presence on the scene (if such an explanation be
required) it is necessary to digress for a moment from the progress of
events during the last days of the siege to the morning when Antonina
departed from Vetranio's palace to return with her succour of food and
wine to her father's house.

The reader is already acquainted, from her own short and simple
narrative, with the history of the closing hours of her mournful night
vigil by the side of her sinking parent, and with the motives which
prompted her to seek the palace of the senator, and entreat assistance
in despair from one whom she only remembered as the profligate
destroyer of her tranquility under her father's roof. It is now,
therefore, most fitting to follow her on her way back through the
palace gardens.  No living creature but herself trod the grassy paths,
along which she hastened with faltering steps--those paths which she
dimly remembered to have first explored when in former days she
ventured forth to follow the distant sounds of Vetranio's lute.

In spite of her vague, heavy sensations of solitude and grief, this
recollection remained painfully present to her mind, unaccountably
mingled with the dark and dreary apprehension which filled her heart as
she hurried onward, until she once more entered her father's dwelling;
and then, as she again approached his couch, every other feeling became
absorbed in a faint, overpowering fear, lest, after all her
perseverance and success in her errand of filial devotion, she might
have returned too late.


The old man still lived--his weary eyes opened gladly on her, when she
aroused him to partake of the treasured gifts from the senator's
banqueting table.  The wretched food which the suicide-guests had
disdained, and the simple flask of wine which they would have
carelessly quaffed at one draught, were viewed both by parent and child
as the saving and invigorating sustenance of many days.  After having
consumed as much as they dared of their precarious supply, the
remainder was carefully husbanded.  It was the last sign and promise of
life to which they looked--the humble yet precious store in which alone
they beheld the earnest of their security, for a few days longer, from
the pangs of famine and the separation of death.

And now, with their small provision of food and wine set like a beacon
of safety before their sight, a deep, dream-like serenity--the sleep of
the oppressed and wearied faculties--arose over their minds. Under its
mysterious and tranquilising influence, all impressions of the gloom
and misery in the city, of the fatal evidences around them of the
duration of the siege, faded away before their perceptions as dim
retiring objects, which the eye loses in vacancy.

Gradually, as the day of the first unsuccessful embassy declined, their
thoughts began to flow back gently to the world of bygone events which
had crumbled into oblivion beneath the march of time. Her first
recollections of her earliest childhood revived in Antonina's memory,
and then mingled strangely with tearful remembrances of the last words
and looks of the young warrior who had expired by her side, and with
calm, solemn thoughts that the beloved spirit, emancipated from the
sphere of shadows, might now be hovering near the quiet garden-grave
where her bitterest tears of loneliness and affliction had been shed,
or moving around her--an invisible and blessed presence--as she sat at
her father's feet and mourned their earthly separation!

In the emotions thus awakened, there was nothing of bitterness or
agony--they calmed and purified the heart through which they moved.
She could now speak to the old man, for the first time, of her days of
absence from him, of the brief joys and long sorrows of her hours of
exile, without failing in her melancholy tale.  Sometimes her father
listened to her in sorrowful and speechless attention; or spoke, when
she paused, of consolation and hope, as she had heard him speak among
his congregation while he was yet strong in his resolution to sacrifice
all things for the reformation of the Church.  Sometimes resigning
himself to the influence of his thoughts, as they glided back to the
times that were gone, he again revealed to her the changing events of
his past life--not as before, with unsteady accents and wandering eyes;
but now with a calmness of voice and a coherence of language which
forbade her to doubt the strange and startling narrative that she heard.

Once more he spoke of the image of his lost brother (as he had parted
from him in his boyhood) still present to his mind; of the country that
he had quitted in after years; of the name that he had changed--from
Cleander to Numerian--to foil his former associates, if they still
pursued him; and of the ardent desire to behold again the companion of
his first home, which now, when his daughter was restored to him, when
no other earthly aspiration but this was unsatisfied, remained at the
close of his life, the last longing wish of his heart.

Such was the communion in which father and daughter passed the hours of
their short reprieve from the judgment of famine pronounced against the
city of their sojourn; so did they live, as it were, in a quiet
interval of existence, in a tranquil pause between the toil that is
over and the toil that is to come in the hard labour of life.

But the term to these short days of repose after long suffering and
grief was fast approaching.  The little hoard of provision diminished
as rapidly as the stores that had been anxiously collected before it;
and, on the morning of the second embassy to Alaric, the flask of wine
and the bowl of food were both emptied.  The brief dream of security
was over and gone; the terrible realities of the struggle for life had
begun again!

Where or to whom could they now turn for help?  The siege still
continued; the food just exhausted was the last food that had been left
on the senator's table; to seek the palace again would be to risk
refusal, perhaps insult, as the result of a second entreaty for aid,
where all power of conferring it might now but too surely be lost.
Such were the thoughts of Antonina as she returned the empty bowl to
its former place; but she gave them no expression in words.


She saw, with horror, that the same expression of despair, almost of
frenzy, which had distorted her father's features on the day of her
restoration to him, now marked them again.  Once more he tottered
towards the window, murmuring in his bitter despondency against the
delusive security and hope which had held him idle for the interests of
his child during the few days that were past.  But, as he now looked
out on the beleaguered city, he saw the populace hastening along the
gloomy street beneath, as rapidly as their wearied limbs would carry
them, to join the embassy.  He heard them encouraging each other to
proceed, to seize the last chance of escaping through the open gates
from the horrors of famine and plague; and caught the infection of the
recklessness and despair which had seized his fellow-sufferers from one
end of Rome to the other.

Turning instantly, he grasped his daughter's hand and drew her from the
room, commanding her to come forth with him and join the citizens in
their flight, ere it was too late.  Startled by his words and actions,
she vainly endeavoured, as she obeyed, to impress her father with the
dread of the Goths which her own bitter experience taught her to feel,
now that her only protector among them lay cold in the grave.  With
Numerian, as with the rest of the people, all apprehension, all doubt,
all exercise of reason, was overpowered by the one eager idea of
escaping from the fatal precincts of Rome.

So they mingled with the throng, herding affrightedly together in the
rear of the embassy, and followed in their ranks as best they might.

The sun shone down brightly from the pure blue sky; the wind bore into
the city the sharp threatening notes of the trumpets from the Gothic
camp, as the Pincian Gate was opened to the ambassadors and their
train. With one accord the crowd instantly endeavoured to force their
way out after them in a mass; but they now moved in a narrow space, and
were opposed by a large reinforcement of the city guard.  After a short
struggle they were overpowered, and the gates were closed.  Some few of
the strongest and the foremost of their numbers succeeded in following
the ambassadors; the greater part, however, remained on the inner side
of the gate, pressing closely up to it in their impatience and despair,
like prisoners awaiting their deliverance, or preparing to force their
escape.

Among these, feeblest amid the most feeble, were Numerian and Antonina,
hemmed in by the surrounding crowd, and shut out either from flight
from the city or a return to home.



CHAPTER 24.

THE GRAVE AND THE CAMP.

While the second and last embassy from the Senate proceeds towards the
tent of the Gothic king, while the streets of Rome are deserted by all
but the dead, and the living populace crowd together in speechless
expectation behind the barrier of the Pincian Gate, an opportunity is
at length afforded of turning our attention towards a scene from which
it has been long removed.  Let us now revisit the farm-house in the
suburbs, and look once more on the quiet garden and on Hermanric's
grave.

The tranquility of the bright warm day is purest around the retired
path leading to the little dwelling. Here the fragrance of wild flowers
rises pleasantly from the waving grass; the lulling, monotonous hum of
insect life pervades the light, steady air; the sunbeams, intercepted
here and there by the clustering trees, fall in irregular patches of
brightness on the shady ground; and, saving the birds which
occasionally pass overhead, singing in their flight, no living creature
appears on the quiet scene, until, gaining the wicket-gate which leads
into the farm-house garden, we look forth upon the prospect within.

There, following the small circular footpath which her own persevering
steps have day by day already traced, appears the form of a solitary
woman, pacing slowly about the mound of grassy earth which marks the
grave of the young Goth.


For some time she proceeds on her circumscribed round with as much
undeviating, mechanical regularity, as if beyond that narrow space rose
a barrier which caged her from ever setting foot on the earth beyond.
At length she pauses in her course when it brings her nearest to the
wicket, advances a few steps towards it, then recedes, and recommences
her monotonous progress, and then again breaking off on her round,
finally succeeds in withdrawing herself from the confines of the grave,
passes through the gate, and following the path to the high-road,
slowly proceeds towards the eastern limits of the Gothic camp.  The
fixed, ghastly, unfeminine expression on her features marks her as the
same woman whom we last beheld as the assassin at the farm-house, but
beyond this she is hardly recognisable again.  Her formerly powerful
and upright frame is bent and lean; her hair waves in wild, white locks
about her shrivelled face; all the rude majesty of her form has
departed; there is nothing to show that it is still Goisvintha haunting
the scene of her crime but the savage expression debasing her
countenance and betraying the evil heart within, unsubdued as ever in
its yearning for destruction and revenge.

Since the period when we last beheld her, removed in the custody of the
Huns from the dead body of her kinsman, the farm-house had been the
constant scene of her pilgrimage from the camp, the chosen refuge where
she brooded in solitude over her fierce desires.  Scorning to punish a
woman whom he regarded as insane for an absence from the tents of the
Goths which was of no moment wither to the army or to himself, Alaric
had impatiently dismissed her from his presence when she was brought
before him.  The soldiers who had returned to bury the body of their
chieftain in the garden of the farm-house, found means to inform her
secretly of the charitable act which they had performed at their own
peril, but beyond this no further intercourse was held with her by any
of her former associates.

All her actions favoured their hasty belief that her faculties were
disordered, and others shunned her as she shunned them.  Her daily
allowance of food was left for her to seek at a certain place in the
camp, as it might have been left for an animal too savage to be
cherished by the hand of man.  At certain periods she returned secretly
from her wanderings to take it.  Her shelter for the night was not the
shelter of her people before the walls of Rome; her thoughts were not
their thoughts.  Widowed, childless, friendless, the assassin of her
last kinsman, she moved apart in her own secret world of bereavement,
desolation, and crime.

Yet there was no madness, no remorse for her share in accomplishing the
fate of Hermanric, in the dark and solitary existence which she now
led. From the moment when the young warrior had expiated with his death
his disregard of the enmities of his nation and the wrongs of his
kindred, she thought of him only as of one more victim whose dishonour
and ruin she must live to requite on the Romans with Roman blood, and
matured her schemes of revenge with a stern resolution which time, and
solitude, and bodily infirmity were all powerless to disturb.


She would pace for hours and hours together, in the still night and in
the broad noonday, round and round the warrior's grave, nursing her
vengeful thoughts within her, until a ferocious anticipation of triumph
quickened her steps and brightened her watchful eyes.  Then she would
enter the farm-house, and, drawing the knife from its place of
concealment in her garments, would pass its point slowly backwards and
forwards over the hearth on which she had mutilated Hermanric with her
own hand, and from which he had advanced, without a tremor, to meet the
sword-points of the Huns. Sometimes, when darkness had gathered over
the earth, she would stand--a boding and menacing apparition--upon the
grave itself, and chaunt, moaning to the moaning wind, fragments of
obscure Northern legends, whose hideous burden was ever of anguish and
crime, of torture in prison vaults, and death by the annihilating
sword--mingling with them the gloomy story of the massacre at Aquileia,
and her fierce vows of vengeance against the households of Rome.  The
forager, on his late return past the farm-house to the camp, heard the
harsh, droning accents of her voice, and quickened his onward step.
The venturesome peasant from the country beyond, approaching under
cover of the night to look from afar on the Gothic camp, beheld her
form, shadowy and threatening, as he neared the garden, and fled
affrighted from the place.  Neither stranger nor friend intruded on her
dread solitude.  The foul presence of cruelty and crime violated
undisturbed the scenes once sacred to the interests of tenderness and
love, once hallowed by the sojourn of youth and beauty!

But now the farm-house garden is left solitary, the haunting spirit of
evil has departed from the grave, the footsteps of Goisvintha have
traced to their close the same paths from the suburbs over which the
young Goth once eagerly hastened on his night journey of love; and
already the walls of Rome rise--dark, near, and hateful--before her
eyes.  Along these now useless bulwarks of the fallen city she wanders,
as she has often wandered before, watching anxiously for the first
opening of the long-closed gates.  Let us follow her on her way.

Her attention was now fixed only on the broad ramparts, while she
passed slowly along the Gothic tents towards the encampment at the
Pincian Gate.  Arrived there, she was aroused for the first time from
her apathy by an unwonted stir and confusion prevailing around her.
She looked towards the tent of Alaric, and beheld before it the wasted
and crouching forms of the followers of the embassy awaiting their
sentence from the captain of the Northern hosts.  In a few moments she
gathered enough from the words of the Goths congregated about this part
of the camp to assure her that it was the Pincian Gate which had given
egress to the Roman suppliants, and which would therefore, in all
probability, be the entrance again thrown open to admit their return to
the city. Remembering this, she began to calculate the numbers of the
conquered enemy grouped together before the king's tent, and then
mentally added to them those who might be present at the interview
proceeding within--mechanically withdrawing herself, while thus
occupied, nearer and nearer to the waste ground before the city walls.

Gradually she turned her face towards Rome:  she was realising a daring
purpose, a fatal resolution, long cherished during the days and nights
of her solitary wanderings.  'The ranks of the embassy,' she muttered,
in a deep, thoughtful tone, 'are thickly filled.  Where there are many
there must be confusion and haste; they march together, and know not
their own numbers; they mark not one more or one less among them.'

She stopped.  Strange and dark changes of colour and expression passed
over her ghastly features. She drew from her bosom the bloody
helmet-crest of her husband, which had never quitted her since the day
of his death; her face grew livid under an awful expression of rage,
ferocity, and despair, as she gazed on it.  Suddenly she looked up at
the city--fierce and defiant, as if the great walls before her were
mortal enemies against whom she stood at bay in the death-struggle.

'The widowed and the childless shall drink of thy blood!' she cried,
stretching out her skinny hand towards Rome, 'though the armies of her
nation barter their wrongs with thy people for bags of silver and gold!
I have pondered on it in my solitude, and dreamed of it in my dreams!
I have sworn that I would enter Rome, and avenge my slaughtered
kindred, alone among thousands!  Now, now, I will hold to my oath!
Thou blood-stained city of the coward and the traitor, the enemy of the
defenceless, and the murderer of the weak! thou who didst send forth to
Aquileia the slayers of my husband and the assassins of my children, I
wait no longer before thy walls!  This day will I mingle, daring all
things, with thy returning citizens and penetrate, amid Romans, the
gates of Rome!  Through the day will I lurk, cunning and watchful, in
thy solitary haunts, to steal forth on thee at nights, a secret
minister of death!  I will watch for thy young and thy weak once in
unguarded places; I will prey, alone in the thick darkness, upon thy
unprotected lives; I will destroy thy children, as their fathers
destroyed at Aquileia the children of the Goths!  Thy rabble will
discover me and arise against me; they will tear me in pieces and
trample my mangled body on the pavement of the streets; but it will be
after I have seen the blood that I have sworn to shed flowing under my
knife!  My vengeance will be complete, and torments and death will be
to me as guests that I welcome, and as deliverers whom I await!'

Again she paused--the wild triumph of the fanatic on the burning pile
was flashing in her face--suddenly her eyes fell once more upon the
stained helmet-crest; then her expression changed again to despair, and
her voice grew low and moaning, when she thus resumed:--


'I am weary of my life; when the vengeance is done I shall be delivered
from this prison of the earth--in the world of shadows I shall see my
husband, and my little ones will gather round my knees again. The
living have no part in me; I yearn towards the spirits who wander in
the halls of the dead.'

For a few minutes more she continued to fix her tearless eyes on the
helmet-crest.  But soon the influence of the evil spirit revived in all
its strength; she raised her head suddenly, remained for an instant
absorbed in deep thought, then began to retrace her steps rapidly in
the direction by which she had come.

Sometimes she whispered softly, 'I must be doing ere the time fail me:
my face must be hidden and my garments changed.  Yonder, among the
houses, I must search, and search quickly!'  Sometimes she reiterated
her denunciations of vengeance, her ejaculations of triumph in her
frantic project.  At the recapitulation of these the remembrance of
Antonina was aroused; and then a bloodthirsty superstition darkened her
thoughts, and threw a vague and dreamy character over her speech.

When she spoke now, it was to murmur to herself that the victim who had
twice escaped her might yet be alive; that the supernatural influences
which had often guided the old Goths, on the day of retribution, might
still guide her; might still direct the stroke of her destroying
weapon--the last stroke ere she was discovered and slain--straight to
the girl's heart.

Thoughts such as these--wandering and obscure--arose in close, quick
succession within her; but whether she gave them expression in word and
action, or whether she suppressed them in silence, she never wavered or
halted in her rapid progress.  Her energies were braced to all
emergencies, and her strong will suffered them not for an instant to
relax.

She gained a retired street in the deserted suburbs, and looking round
to see that she was unobserved, entered on of the houses abandoned by
its inhabitants on the approach of the besiegers.  Passing quickly
through the outer halls, she stopped at length in one of the sleeping
apartments; and here she found, among other possessions left behind in
the flight, the store of wearing apparel belonging to the owner of the
room.

From this she selected a Roman robe, upper mantle, and sandals--the
most common in colour and texture that she could find--and folding them
up into the smallest compass, hid them under her own garments.  Then,
avoiding all those whom she met on her way, she returned in the
direction of the king's tent; but when she approached it, branched off
stealthily towards Rome, until she reached a ruined building half-way
between the city and the camp.  In this concealment she clothed herself
in her disguise, drawing the mantle closely round her head and face;
and from this point--calm, vigilant, determined, her hand on the knife
beneath her robe, her lips muttering the names of her murdered husband
and children--she watched the high-road to the Pincian Gate.

There for a short time let us leave her, and enter the tent of Alaric,
while the Senate yet plead before the Arbiter of the Empire for mercy
and peace.

At the moment of which we write, the embassy had already exhausted its
powers of intercession, apparently without moving the leader of the
Goths from his first pitiless resolution of fixing the ransom of Rome
at the price of every possession of value which the city contained.
There was a momentary silence now in the great tent.  At one extremity
of it, congregated in a close and irregular group, stood the wearied
and broken-spirited members of the Senate, supported by such of their
attendants as had been permitted to follow them; at the other appeared
the stately forms of Alaric and the warriors who surrounded him as his
council of war.  The vacant space in the middle of the tent was strewn
with martial weapons, separating the representatives of the two nations
one from the other; and thus accidentally, yet palpably, typifying the
fierce hostility which had sundered in years past, and was still to
sunder for years to come, the people of the North and the people of the
South.

The Gothic king stood a little in advance of his warriors, leaning on
his huge, heavy sword.  His steady eye wandered from man to man among
the broken-spirited senators, contemplating, with cold and cruel
penetration, all that suffering and despair had altered for the worse
in their outward appearance.  Their soiled robes, their wan cheeks,
their trembling limbs were each marked in turn by the cool, sarcastic
examination of the conqueror's gaze.  Debased and humiliated as they
were, there were some among the ambassadors who felt the insult thus
silently and deliberately inflicted on them the more keenly for their
very helplessness.  They moved uneasily in their places, and whispered
among each other in low and bitter accents.

At length one of their number raised his downcast eyes and broke the
silence.  The old Roman spirit, which long years of voluntary frivolity
and degradation had not yet entirely depraved, flushed his pale, wasted
face as he spoke thus:--

'We have entreated, we have offered, we have promised--men can do no
more!  Deserted by our Emperor and crushed by pestilence and famine,
nothing is now left to us but to perish in unavailing resistance
beneath the walls of Rome!  It was in the power of Alaric to win
everlasting renown by moderation to the unfortunate of an illustrious
nation; but he has preferred to attempt the spoiling of a glorious city
and the subjugation of a suffering people!  Yet let him remember,
though destruction may sate his vengeance, and pillage enrich his
hoards, the day of retribution will yet come.  There are still soldiers
in the empire, and heroes who will lead them confidently to battle,
though the bodies of their countrymen lie slaughtered around them in
the streets of pillaged Rome!'

A momentary expression of wrath and indignation appeared on Alaric's
features as he listened to this bold speech; but it was almost
immediately replaced by a scornful smile of derision.

'What! ye have still soldiers before whom the barbarian must tremble
for his conquests!' he cried. 'Where are they?  Are they on their
march, or in ambush, or hiding behind strong walls, or have they lost
their way on the road to the Gothic camp?  Ha! here is one of them!' he
exclaimed, advancing towards an enfeebled and disarmed guard of the
Senate, who quailed beneath his fierce glance. 'Fight, man!' he loudly
continued; 'fight while there is yet time, for imperial Rome!  Thy
sword is gone--take mine, and be a hero again!'

With a rough laugh, echoed by the warriors behind him, he flung his
ponderous weapon as he spoke towards the wretched object of his
sarcasm. The hilt struck heavily against the man's breast; he staggered
and fell helpless to the ground.  The laugh was redoubled among the
Goths; but now their leader did not join in it.  His eye glowed in
triumphant scorn as he pointed to the prostrate Roman, exclaiming--

'So does the South fall beneath the sword of the North!  So shall the
empire bow before the rule of the Goth!  Say, as ye look on these
Romans before us, are we not avenged of our wrongs?  They die not
fighting on our swords; they live to entreat our pity, as children that
are in terror of the whip!'


He paused.  His massive and noble countenance gradually assumed a
thoughtful expression.  The ambassadors moved forward a few
steps--perhaps to make a final entreaty, perhaps to depart in despair;
but he signed with his hand in command to them to be silent and remain
where they stood. The marauder's thirst for present plunder, and the
conqueror's lofty ambition of future glory, now stirred in strong
conflict within him.  He walked to the opening of the tent, and
thrusting aside its curtain of skins, looked out upon Rome in silence.
The dazzling majesty of the temples and palaces of the mighty city, as
they towered before him, gleaming in the rays of the unclouded
sunlight, fixed him long in contemplation.  Gradually, dreams of a
future dominion amid those unrivalled structures, which now waited but
his word to be pillaged and destroyed, filled his aspiring soul, and
saved the city from his wrath.  He turned again toward the shrinking
ambassadors--in a voice and look superior to them as a being of a
higher sphere--and spoke thus:--

'When the Gothic conqueror reigns in Italy, the palaces of her rulers
shall be found standing for the places of his sojourn.  I will ordain a
lower ransom; I will spare Rome.'

A murmur arose among the warriors behind him.  The rapine and
destruction which they had eagerly anticipated was denied them for the
first time by their chief.  As their muttered remonstrances caught his
ear, Alaric instantly and sternly fixed his eyes upon them; and,
repeating in accents of deliberate command, 'I will ordain a lower
ransom; I will spare Rome,' steadily scanned the countenances of his
ferocious followers.

Not a word of dissent fell from their lips; not a gesture of impatience
appeared in their ranks; they preserved perfect silence as the king
again advanced towards the ambassadors and continued--

'I fix the ransom of the city at five thousand pounds of gold; at
thirty thousand pounds of silver.'

Here he suddenly ceased, as if pondering further on the terms he should
exact.  The hearts of the Senate, lightened for a moment by Alaric's
unexpected announcement that he would moderate his demands, sank within
them again as they thought on the tribute required of them, and
remembered their exhausted treasury.  But it was no time now to
remonstrate or to delay; and they answered with one accord, ignorant
though they were of the means of performing their promise, 'The ransom
shall be paid.'

The king looked at them when they spoke, as if in astonishment that men
whom he had deprived of all freedom of choice ventured still to assert
it by intimating their acceptance of terms which they dared not
decline. The mocking spirit revived within him while he thus gazed on
the helpless and humiliated embassy; and he laughed once more as he
resumed, partly addressing himself to the silent array of the warriors
behind him--

'The gold and silver are but the first dues of the tribute; my army
shall be rewarded with more than the wealth of the enemy.  You men of
Rome have laughed at our rough bearskins and our heavy armour, you
shall clothe us with your robes of festivity!  I will add to the gold
and silver of your ransom, four thousand garments of silk, and three
thousand pieces of scarlet cloth.  My barbarians shall be barbarians no
longer!  I will make patricians, epicures, Romans of them!'

The members of the ill-fated embassy looked up as he paused, in mute
appeal to the mercy of the triumphant conqueror; but they were not yet
to be released from the crushing infliction of his rapacity and scorn.

'Hold!' he cried, 'I will have more--more still!  You are a nation of
feasters;--we will rival you in your banquets when we have stripped you
of your banqueting robes!  To the gold, the silver, the silk, and the
cloth, I will add yet more--three thousand pounds weight of pepper,
your precious merchandise, bought from far countries with your lavish
wealth!--see that you bring it hither, with the rest of the ransom, to
the last grain!  The flesh of our beasts shall be seasoned for us like
the flesh of yours!'

He turned abruptly from the senators as he pronounced the last words,
and began to speak in jesting tones and in the Gothic language to the
council of warriors around him.  Some of the ambassadors bowed their
heads in silent resignation; others, with the utter thoughtlessness of
men bewildered by all that they had seen and heard during the interview
that was now close, unhappily revived the recollection of the broken
treaties of former days, by mechanically inquiring, in the terms of
past formularies, what security the besiegers would require for the
payment of their demands.


'Security!' cried Alaric fiercely, instantly relapsing as they spoke
into his sterner mood.  'Behold yonder the future security of the Goths
for the faith of Rome!' and flinging aside the curtain of the tent, he
pointed proudly to the long lines of his camp, stretching round all
that was visible of the walls of the fallen city.

The ambassadors remembered the massacre of the hostages of Aquileia,
and the evasion of the payment of tribute-money promised in former
days, and were silent as they looked through the opening of the tent.

'Remember the conditions of the ransom,' pursued Alaric in warning
tones, 'remember my security that the ransom shall be quickly paid!  So
shall you live for a brief space in security, and feast and be merry
again while your territories yet remain to you.  Go!  I have spoken--it
is enough!'

He withdrew abruptly from the senators, and the curtain of the tent
fell behind them as they passed out.  The ordeal of the judgment was
over; the final sentence had been pronounced; the time had already
arrived to go forth and obey it.

The news that terms of peace had been at last settled filled the Romans
who were waiting before the tent with emotions of delight, equally
unalloyed by reflections on the past or forebodings for the future.
Barred from their reckless project of flying to the open country by the
Goths surrounding them in the camp, shut out from retreating to Rome by
the gates through which they had rashly forced their way, exposed in
their helplessness to the brutal jeers of the enemy while they waited
in a long agony of suspense for the close of the perilous interview
between Alaric and the Senate, they had undergone every extremity of
suffering, and had yielded unanimously to despair when the intelligence
of the concluded treaty sounded like a promise of salvation in their
ears.

None of the apprehensions aroused in the minds of their superiors by
the vastness of the exacted tribute now mingled with the unreflecting
ecstasy of their joy at the prospect of the removal of the blockade.
They arose to return to the city from which they had fled in dismay,
with cries of impatience and delight.  They fawned like dogs upon the
ambassadors, and even upon the ferocious Goths.  On their departure
from Rome they had mechanically preserved some regularity in their
progress, but now they hurried onward without distinction of place or
discipline of march--senators, guards, plebeians, all were huddled
together in the disorderly equality of a mob.

Not one of them, in their new-born security, marked the ruined building
on the high-road; not one of them observed the closely-robed figure
that stole out from it to join them in their rear; and then, with
stealthy footstep and shrouded face, soon mingled in the thickest of
their ranks. The attention of the ambassadors was still engrossed by
their forebodings of failure in collecting the ransom; the eyes of the
people were fixed only on the Pincian Gate; their ears were open to no
sounds but their own ejaculations of delight.  Not one disguised
stranger only, but many, might now have joined them in their tumultuous
progress, alike unquestioned and unobserved.

So they hastily re-entered the city, where thousands of heavy eyes were
strained to look on them, and thousands of attentive ears drank in
their joyful news from the Gothic camp.  Then were heard in all
directions the sounds of hysterical weeping and idiotic laughter, the
low groans of the weak who died victims of their sudden transport, and
the confused outbursts of the strong who had survived all extremities,
and at last beheld their deliverance in view.

Still silent and serious, the ambassadors now slowly penetrated the
throng on their way back to the Forum; and as they proceeded the crowd
gradually dispersed on either side of them.  Enemies, friends, and
strangers, all whom the ruthless famine had hitherto separated in
interests and sympathies, were now united together as one family, by
the expectation of speedy relief.


But there was one among the assembly that was now separating who stood
alone in her unrevealed emotions, amid the rejoicing thousands around
her.  The women and children in the throng, as, preoccupied by their
own feeling, they unheedfully passed her by, saw not the eager,
ferocious attention in her eyes, as she watched them steadily till they
were out of sight.  Within their gates the stranger and the enemy
waited for the treacherous darkness of night, and waited unobserved.
Where she had first stood when the thick crowd hemmed her in, there she
still continued to stand after they slowly moved past her and space
grew free.

Yet beneath this outward calm and silence lurked the wildest passions
that ever raged against the weak restraint of human will; even the firm
self-possession of Goisvintha was shaken when she found herself within
the walls of Rome.

No glance of suspicion had been cast upon her; not one of the crowd had
approached to thrust her back when she passed through the gates with
the heedless citizens around her.  Shielded from detection, as much by
the careless security of her enemies as by the stratagem of her
disguise, she stood on the pavement of Rome, as she had vowed to stand,
afar from the armies of her people--alone as an avenger of blood!

It was no dream; no fleeting, deceitful vision.  The knife was under
her hand; the streets stretched before her; the living beings who
thronged them were Romans; the hours of the day were already on the
wane; the approach of her vengeance was as sure as the approach of
darkness that was to let it loose.  A wild exultation quickened in her
the pulses of life, while she thought on the dread projects of secret
assassination and revenge which now opposed her, a solitary woman, in
deadly enmity against the defenceless population of a whole city.

As her eyes travelled slowly from side to side over the moving throng;
as she thought on the time that might still elapse ere the discovery
and death--the martyrdom in the cause of blood--which she expected and
defied, would overtake her, her hands trembled beneath her robe, and
she reiterated in whispers to herself:  'Husband, children,
brother--there are five deaths to avenge!  Remember Aquileia!  Remember
Aquileia!'

Suddenly, as she looked from group to group among the departing people,
her eyes became arrested by one object; she instantly stepped forwards,
then abruptly restrained herself and moved back where the crowd was
still thick, gazing fixedly ever in the same direction.  She saw the
victim twice snatched from her hands--at the camp and in the
farm-house--a third time offered to her grasp in the streets of Rome.

The chance of vengeance last expected was the chance that had first
arrived.  A vague, oppressing sensation of awe mingled with the triumph
at her heart--a supernatural guidance seemed to be directing her with
fell rapidity, through every mortal obstacle, to the climax of her
revenge!

She screened herself behind the people; she watched the girl from the
most distant point; but concealment was now vain--their eyes had met.
The robe had slipped aside when she suddenly stepped forward, and in
that moment Antonina had seen her.

Numerian, moving slowly with his daughter through the crowd, felt her
hand tighten round his, and saw her features stiffen into sudden
rigidity; but the change was only for an instant.  Ere he could speak,
she caught him by the arm, and drew him forward with convulsive energy.
Then, in accents hardly articulate, low, breathless, unlike her wonted
voice, he heard her exclaim, as she struggled on with him, 'She is
there--there behind us! to kill me, as she killed him!  Home! home!'

Exhausted already, through long weakness and natural infirmity, by the
rough contact of the crowd, bewildered by Antonina's looks and actions,
and by the startling intimation of unknown peril, conveyed to him in
her broken exclamations of affright, Numerian's first impulse, as he
hurried onward by her side, led him to entreat protection and help from
the surrounding populace.  But even could he have pointed out to them
the object of his dread amid that motley throng of all nations, the
appeal he now made would have remained unanswered.


Of all the results of the frightful severity of privation suffered by
the besieged, none were more common than those mental aberrations which
produced visions of danger, enemies, and death, so palpable as to make
the persons beholding them implore assistance against the hideous
creation of their own delirium.  Accordingly, most of those to whom the
entreaties of Numerian were addressed passed without noticing them.
Some few carelessly bid him remember that there were no enemies now;
that the days of peace were approaching; and that a meal of good food,
which he might soon expect to enjoy, was the only help for a famished
man.  No one, in that period of horror and suffering, which was now
drawing to a close, saw anything extraordinary in the confusion of the
father and the terror of the child.  So they pursued their feeble
flight unprotected, and the footsteps of Goisvintha followed them as
they went.

They had already commenced the ascent of the Pincian Hill, when
Antonina stopped abruptly, and turned to look behind her.  Many people
yet thronged the street below; but her eyes penetrated among them,
sharpened by peril, and instantly discerned the ample robe and the tall
form, still at the same distance from them, and pausing as they had
paused. For one moment, the girl's eyes fixed in the wild, helpless
stare of terror on her father's face; but the next, that mysterious
instinct of preservation, which is co-existent with the instinct of
fear--which gifts the weakest animal with cunning to improve its
flight, and takes the place of reason, reflection, and resolve, when
all are banished from the mind--warned her against the fatal error of
permitting the pursuer to track her to her home.

'Not there! not there!' she gasped faintly as Numerian endeavoured to
lead her up the ascent.  'She will see us as we enter the
doors!--through the streets!  Oh, father, if you would save me! we may
lose her in the streets!--the guards, the people are there!  Back!
back!'

Numerian trembled as he marked the terror in her looks and gestures;
but it was vain to question or oppose her.  Nothing short of force
could restrain her,--no commands or entreaties could draw from her more
than the same breathless exclamation:  'Onward, father; onward, if you
would save me!'  She was insensible to every sensation but fear,
incapable of any other exertion than flight.

Turning and winding, hurrying forward ever at the same rapid pace, they
passed unconsciously along the intricate streets that led to the river
side; and still the avenger tracked the victim, constant as the shadow
to the substance; steady, vigilant, unwearied, as a bloodhound on a hot
scent.

And now, even the sound of the father's voice ceased to be audible in
the daughter's ears; she no longer felt the pressure of his hand, no
longer perceived his very presence at her side.  At length, frail and
shrinking, she again paused, and looked back.  The street they had
reached was very tranquil and desolate:  two slaves were walking at its
further extremity.  While they were in sight, no living creature
appeared in the roadway behind; but as soon as they had passed away, a
shadow stole slowly forward over the pavement of a portico in the
distance, and the next moment Goisvintha appeared in the street.

The sun glared down fiercely over her dark figure as she stopped and
for an instant looked stealthily around her.  She moved to advance, and
Antonina saw no more.  Again she turned to renew her hopeless flight;
and again her father--perceiving only as the mysterious cause of her
dread a solitary woman, who, though she followed, attempted not to
arrest, or even to address them--prepared to accompany her to the last,
in despair of all other chances of securing her safety.

More and more completely did her terror now enchain her faculties, as
she still unconsciously traced her rapid way through the streets that
led to the Tiber.  It was not Numerian, not Rome, not daylight in a
great city, that was before her eyes:  it was the storm, the
assassination, the night at the farm-house, that she now lived through
over again.


Still the quick flight and the ceaseless pursuit were continued, as if
neither were ever to have an end; but the close of the scene was,
nevertheless, already at hand.  During the interval of the passage
through the streets, Numerian's mind had gradually recovered from its
first astonishment and alarm; at length he perceived the necessity of
instant and decisive action, while there was yet time to save Antonina
from sinking under the excess of her own fears.  Though a vague, awful
foreboding of disaster and death filled his heart, his resolution to
penetrate at once, at all hazards, the dark mystery of impending danger
indicated by his daughter's words and actions, did not fail him; for it
was aroused by the only motive powerful enough to revive all that
suffering and infirmity had not yet destroyed of the energy of his
former days--the preservation of his child.  There was something of the
old firmness and vigour of the intrepid reformer of the Church, in his
dim eyes, as he now stopped, and enclosing Antonina in his arms,
arrested her instantly in her flight.

She struggled to escape; but it was faintly, and only for a moment.
Her strength and consciousness were beginning to abandon her.  She
never attempted to look back; she felt in her heart that Goisvintha was
still behind, and dared not to verify the frightful conviction with her
eyes. Her lips moved; but they expressed an altered and a vain
petition: 'Hermanric!  O Hermanric!' was all they murmured now.

They had arrived at the long street that ran by the banks of the Tiber.
The people had either retired to their homes or repaired to the Forum
to be informed of the period when the ransom would be paid.  No one but
Goisvintha was in sight as Numerian looked around him; and she, after
having carefully viewed the empty street, was advancing towards them at
a quickened pace.

For an instant the father looked on her steadily as she approached, and
in that instant his determination was formed.  A flight of steps at his
feet led to the narrow doorway of a small temple, the nearest building
to him.

Ignorant whether Goisvintha might not be secretly supported by
companions in her ceaseless pursuit, he resolved to secure this place
for Antonina, as a temporary refuge at least; while standing before it,
he should oblige the woman to declare her purpose, if she followed them
even there.  In a moment he had begun the ascent of the steps, with the
exhausted girl by his side.  Arrived at the summit, he guided her
before him into the doorway, and stopped on the threshold to look round
again. Goisvintha was nowhere to be seen.

Not duped by the woman's sudden disappearance into the belief that she
had departed from the street--persisting in his resolution to lead his
daughter to a place of repose, where she might most immediately feel
herself secure, and might therefore most readily recover her
self-possession, Numerian drew Antonina with him into the temple.  He
lingered there for a moment, ere he departed to watch the street from
the portico outside.

The light in the building was dim,--it was admitted only from a small
aperture in the roof, and through the narrow doorway, where it was
intercepted by the overhanging bulk of the outer portico. A crooked
pile of dark heavy-looking substances on the floor, rose high towards
the ceiling in the obscure interior.  Irregular in form, flung together
one over the other in strange disorder, for the most part dusky in hue,
yet here and there gleaming at points with a metallic brightness, these
objects presented a mysterious, indefinite, and startling appearance.
It was impossible, on a first view of their confused arrangement, to
discover what they were, or to guess for what purpose they could have
been pile together on the floor of a deserted temple.  From the moment
when they had first attracted Numerian's observation, his attention was
fixed on them, and as he looked a faint thrill of suspicion--vague,
inexplicable, without apparent cause or object--struck chill to his
heart.


He had moved a step forward to examine the hidden space at the back of
the pile, when his further advance was instantly stopped by the
appearance of a man who walked forth from it dressed in the floating,
purple-edged robe and white fillet of the Pagan priests.  Before either
father or daughter could speak, even before they could move to depart,
he stepped up to them, and, placing his hand on the shoulder of each,
confronted them in silence.

At the moment when the stranger approached, Numerian raised his hand to
thrust him back, and, in so doing, fixed his eyes on the man's
countenance, as a ray of light from the doorway floated over it.
Instantly his arm remained outstretched and rigid, then it dropped to
his side, and the expression of horror on the face of the child became
reflected, as it were, on the face of the parent.  Neither moved under
the hand of the dweller in the temple when he laid it heavily on each,
and both stood before him speechless as himself.



CHAPTER 25.

THE TEMPLE AND THE CHURCH.

It was Ulpius.  The Pagan was changed in bearing and countenance as
well as in apparel.  He stood more firm and upright; a dull, tawny hue
overspread his face; his eyes, so sunken and lustreless in other days,
were now distended and bright with the glare of insanity.  It seemed as
if his bodily powers had renewed their vigour, while his mental
faculties had declined towards their ruin.

No human eye had ever beheld by what foul and secret means he had
survived through the famine, on what unnatural sustenance he had
satisfied the cravings of inexorable hunger; but there, in his gloomy
shelter, the madman and the outcast had lived and moved, and suddenly
and strangely strengthened, after the people of the city had exhausted
all their united responses, lavished in vain all their united wealth,
and drooped and died by thousands around him!

His grasp still lay heavy on the father and daughter, and still both
confronted him--silent, as if death-struck by his gaze; motionless, as
if frozen at his touch.  His presence was exerting over them a fatal
fascination.  The power of action, suspended in Antonina as she entered
their ill-chosen refuge, was now arrested in Numerian also; but with
him no thought of the enemy in the street had any part, at this moment,
in the resistless influence which held him helpless before the enemy in
the temple.

It was a feeling of deeper awe and darker horror.  For now, as he
looked upon the hideous features of Ulpius, as he saw the forbidden
robe of priesthood in which the Pagan was arrayed, he beheld not only
the traitor who had successfully plotted against the prosperity of his
household, but the madman as well,--the moral leper of the whole human
family--the living Body and the dead Soul--the disinherited of that
Divine Light of Life which it is the awful privilege of mortal man to
share with the angels of God.

He still clasped Antonina to his side, but it was unconsciously.  To
all outward appearance he was helpless as his helpless child, when
Ulpius slowly removed his grasp from their shoulders, separated them,
and locking the hand of each in his cold, bony fingers, began to speak.

His voice was deep and solemn, but his accents, in their hard,
unvarying tone, seemed to express no human emotion.  His eyes, far from
brightening as he spoke, relapsed into a dull, vacant insensibility.
The connection between the action of speech and the accompanying and
explaining action of look which is observable in all men, seemed lost
in him.  It was fearful to behold the death-like face, and to listen at
the same moment to the living voice.

'Lo! the votaries come to the temple!' murmured the Pagan.  'The good
servants of the mighty worship gather at the voice of the priest!  In
the far provinces, where the enemies of the gods approach to profane
the sacred groves, behold the scattered people congregating by night to
journey to the shrine of Serapis!  Adoring thousands kneel beneath the
lofty porticoes, while within, in the secret hall where the light is
dim, where the air quivers round the breathing deities on their
pedestals of gold, the high priest Ulpius reads the destinies of the
future, that are unrolled before his eyes like a book!'


As he ceased, and, still holding the hands of his captives, looked on
them fixedly as ever, his eyes brightened and dilated again; but they
expressed not the slightest recognition either of father or daughter.
The delirium of his imagination had transported him to the temple at
Alexandria; the days were revived when his glory had risen to its
culminating point, when the Christians trembled before him as their
fiercest enemy, and the Pagans surrounded him as their last hope.  The
victims of his former and forgotten treachery were but as two among the
throng of votaries allured by the fame of his eloquence, by the
triumphant notoriety of his power to protect the adherents of the
ancient creed.

But it was not always thus that his madness declared itself:  there
were moments when it rose to appalling frenzy.  Then he imagined
himself to be again hurling the Christian assailants from the topmost
walls of the besieged temple, in that past time when the image of
Serapis was doomed by the Bishop of Alexandria to be destroyed.  His
yells of fury, his frantic execrations of defiance were heard afar, in
the solemn silence of pestilence-stricken Rome.  Those who, during the
most fatal days of the Gothic blockade, dropped famished on the
pavement before the little temple, as they endeavoured to pass it on
their onward way, presented a dread reality of death, to embody the
madman's visions of battle and slaughter.  As these victims of famine
lay expiring in the street, they heard above them his raving voice
cursing them for Christians, triumphing over them as defeated enemies
destroyed by his hand, exhorting his imaginary adherents to fling the
slain above on the dead below, until the bodies of the besiegers of the
temple were piled, as barriers against their living comrades, round its
walls.  Sometimes his frenzy gloried in the fancied revival of the foul
and sanguinary ceremonies of Pagan superstition.  Then he bared his
arms, and shouted aloud for the sacrifice; he committed dark and
nameless atrocities--for now again the dead and the dying lay before
him, to give substance to the shadow of his evil thoughts; and Plague
and Hunger were as creatures of his will, and slew the victim for the
altar ready to his hands.

At other times, when the raving fit had passed away, and he lay panting
in the darkest corner of the interior of the temple, his insanity
assumed another and a mournful form.  His voice grew low and moaning;
the wreck of his memory--wandering and uncontrollable--floated back,
far back, on the dark waters of the past; and his tongue uttered
fragments of words and phrases that he had murmured at his father's
knees--farewell, childish wishes that he had breathed in his mother's
ear--innocent, anxious questions which he had addressed to Macrinus,
the high priest, when he first entered the service of the gods at
Alexandria. His boyish reveries--the gentleness of speech and poetry of
thought of his first youthful days, were now, by the unsearchable and
arbitrary influences of his disease, revived in his broken words,
renewed in his desolate old age of madness and crime, breathed out in
unconscious mockery by his lips, while the foam still gathered about
them, and the last flashes of frenzy yet lightened in his eyes.

This unnatural calmness of language and vividness of memory, this
treacherous appearance of thoughtful, melancholy self-possession, would
often continue through long periods, uninterrupted; but, sooner or
later, the sudden change came; the deceitful chain of thought snapped
asunder in an instant; the word was left half uttered; the wearied
limbs started convulsively into renewed action; and as the dream of
violence returned and the dream of peace vanished, the madman rioted
afresh in his fury; and journeyed as his visions led him, round and
round his temple sanctuary, and hither and thither, when the night was
dark and death was busiest in Rome, among the expiring in deserted
houses, and the lifeless in the silent streets.


But there were other later events in his existence that never revived
within him.  The old familiar image of the idol Serapis, which had
drawn him into the temple when he re-entered Rome, absorbed in itself
and in its associated remembrances all that remained active of his
paralysed faculties.  His betrayal of his trust in the house of
Numerian, his passage through the rifted wall, his crushing repulse in
the tent of Alaric, never for a moment occupied his wandering thoughts.
The clouds that hung over his mind might open to him parting glimpses
of the toils and triumphs of his early career; but they descended in
impenetrable darkness on all the after-days of his dreary life.

Such was the being to whose will, by a mysterious fatality, the father
and child were now submitted; such the existence--solitary, hopeless,
loathsome--of their stern and wily betrayer of other days!

Since he had ceased speaking, the cold, death-like grasp of his hand
had gradually strengthened, and he had begun to look slowly and
inquiringly round him from side to side.  Had this change marked the
approaching return of his raving paroxysm, the lives of Numerian and
Antonina would have been sacrificed the next moment; but all that it
now denoted was the quickening of the lofty and obscure ideas of
celebrity and success, of priestly honour and influence, of the
splendour and glory of the gods, which had prompted his last words.

He moved suddenly, and drew the victims of his dangerous caprice a few
steps farther into the interior of the temple; then led them close up
to the lofty pile of objects which had first attracted Numerian's eyes
on entering the building.  'Kneel and adore!' cried the madman
fiercely, replacing his hands on their shoulders and pressing them to
the ground--'You stand before the gods, in the presence of their high
priest!'

The girl's head sank forward, and she hid her face in her hands; but
her father looked up tremblingly at the pile.  His eyes had insensibly
become more accustomed to the dim light of the temple, and he now saw
more distinctly the objects composing the mass that rose above him.

Hundreds of images of the gods, in gold, silver, and wood--many in the
latter material being larger than life; canopies, vestments, furniture,
utensils, all of ancient Pagan form, were heaped together, without
order or arrangement, on the floor, to a height of full fifteen feet.

There was something at once hideous and grotesque in the appearance of
the pile.  The monstrous figures of the idols, with their rude carved
draperies and symbolic weapons, lay in every wild variety of position,
and presented every startling eccentricity of line, more especially
towards the higher portions of the mass, where they had evidently been
flung up from the ground by the hand that had raised the structure.

The draperies mixed among the images and the furniture were here coiled
serpent-like around them, and there hung down towards the ground,
waving slow and solemn in the breezes that wound through the temple
doorway. The smaller objects of gold and silver, scattered irregularly
over the mass, shone out from it like gleaming eyes; while the pile
itself, seen in such a place under a dusky light, looked like some
vast, misshapen monster--the gloomy embodiment of the bloodiest
superstitions of Paganism, the growth of damp airs and teeming ruin, of
shadow and darkness, of accursed and infected solitude!

Even in its position, as well as in the objects of which it was
composed, the pile wore an ominous and startling aspect; its crooked
outline, expanding towards the top, was bent over fearfully in the
direction of the doorway; it seemed as if a single hand might sway it
in its uncertain balance, and hurl it instantly in one solid mass to
the floor.

Many toilsome hours had passed away, long secret labour had been
expended in the erection of this weird and tottering structure; but it
was all the work of one hand.  Night after night had the Pagan entered
the deserted temples in the surrounding streets, and pillaged them of
their contents to enrich his favoured shrine:  the removal of the idols
from their appointed places, which would have been sacrilege in any
meaner man, was in his eyes the dread privilege of the high priest
alone.


He had borne heavy burdens, and torn asunder strong fastenings, and
journeyed and journeyed again for hours together over the same gloomy
streets, without loitering in his task; he had raised treasures and
images one above another; he had strengthened the base and heightened
the summit of this precious and sacred heap;  he had repaired and
rebuilt, whenever it crumbled and fell, this new Babel that he longed
to rear to the Olympus of the temple roof, with a resolute patience and
perseverance that no failure or fatigue could overcome.

It was the dearest purpose of his dreamy superstition to surround
himself with innumerable deities, as well as to assemble innumerable
worshippers; to make the sacred place of his habitation a mighty
Pantheon, as well as a point of juncture for the scattered
congregations of the Pagan world.  This was the ambition in which his
madness expanded to the fiercest fanaticism; and as he now stood erect
with his captives beneath him, his glaring eyes looked awe-struck when
he fixed them on his idols; he uplifted his arms in solemn, ecstatic
triumph, and in low tones poured forth his invocations, wild,
intermingled, and fragmentary, as the barbarous altar which his
solitary exertions had reared.

Whatever was the effect on Numerian of his savage and confused
ejaculations, they were unnoticed, even unheard, by Antonina; for now,
while the madman's voice softened to an undertone, and while she hid
all surrounding objects from her eyes, her senses were awakened to
sounds in the temple which she had never remarked before.

The rapid current of the Tiber washed the foundation walls of one side
of the building, within which the clear, lulling bubble of the water
was audible with singular distinctness.  But besides this another and a
shriller sound caught the ear.  On the summit of the temple roof still
remained several rows of little gilt bells, originally placed there,
partly with the intention of ornamenting this portion of the outer
structure, partly in order that the noise they produced, when agitated
by the wind, might scare birds from settling in their flight on the
consecrated edifice.  The sounds produced by these bells were silvery
and high pitched; now, when the breeze was strong, they rang together
merrily and continuously; now, when it fell, their notes were faint,
separate, and irregular, almost plaintive in their pure metallic
softness.  But, however their tone might vary under the capricious
influences of the wind, it seemed always wonderfully mingled within the
temple with the low, eternal bubbling of the river, which filled up the
slightest pauses in the pleasant chiming of the bells, and ever
preserved its gentle and monotonous harmony just audible beneath them.

There was something in this quaint, unwonted combination of sounds, as
they were heard in the vaulted interior of the little building,
strangely simple, attractive, and spiritual; the longer they were
listened to, the more completely did the mind lose the recollection of
their real origin, and gradually shape out of them wilder and wilder
fancies, until the bells as they rang their small peal seemed like
happy voices of a heavenly stream, borne lightly onward on its airy
bubbles, and ever rejoicing over the gliding current that murmured to
them as it ran.

Spite of the peril of her position, and of the terror which still fixed
her speechless and crouching on the ground, the effect on Antonina of
the strange mingled music of the running water and the bells was
powerful enough, when she first heard it, to suspend all her other
emotions in a momentary wonder and doubt.  She withdrew her hands from
her face, and glanced round mechanically to the doorway, as if she
imagined that the sounds proceeded from the street.

When she looked, the declining sun, gliding between two of the outer
pillars which surrounded the temple, covered with a bright glow the
smooth pavement before the entrance.  A swarm of insects flew drowsily
round and round in the warm mellow light; their faint monotonous
humming deepened, rather than interrupted, the perfect silence
prevailing over all things without.


But a change was soon destined to appear in the repose of the quiet,
vacant scene; hardly a minute had elapsed while Antonina still looked
on it before she saw stealing over the sunny pavement a dark shadow,
the same shadow that she had last beheld when she stopped in her flight
to look behind her in the empty street.  At first it slowly grew and
lengthened, then it remained stationary, then it receded and vanished
as gradually as it had advanced, and then the girl heard, or fancied
that she heard, a faint sound of footsteps, retiring along the lateral
colonnades towards the river side of the building.

A low cry of horror burst from her lips as she sank back towards her
father; but it was unheeded.  The voice of Ulpius had resumed in the
interval its hollow loudness of tone; he had raised Numerian from the
ground; his strong, cold grasp, which seemed to penetrate to the old
man's heart, which held him motionless and helpless as if by a fatal
spell, was on his arm.

'Hear it! hear it!' cried the Pagan, waving his disengaged hand as if
he were addressing a vast concourse of people--'I advance this man to
be one of the servants of the high priest!  He has travelled from a far
country to the sacred shrine; he is docile and obedient before the
altar of the gods; the lot is cast for his future life; his dwelling
shall be in the temple to the day of his death!  He shall minister
before me in white robes, and swing the smoking censer, and slay the
sacrifice at my feet!'

He stopped.  A dark and sinister expression appeared in his eyes as the
word 'sacrifice' passed his lips; he muttered doubtingly to
himself--'The sacrifice!--is it yet the hour of the sacrifice?'--and
looked round towards the doorway.

The sun still shone gaily on the outer pavement; the insects still
circled slowly in the mellow light; no shadow was now visible; no
distant footsteps were heard; there was nothing audible but the happy
music of the bubbling water, and the chiming, silvery bells.

For a few moments the madman looked out anxiously towards the street,
without uttering a word or moving a muscle.  The raving fit was nearly
possessing him again, as the thought of the sacrifice flashed over his
darkened mind; but once more its approach was delayed.

He slowly turned his head in the direction of the interior of the
temple.  'The sun is still bright in the outer courts,' he murmured in
an undertone, 'the hour of the sacrifice is not yet!  Come!' he
continued in a louder voice, shaking Numerian by the arm.  'It is time
that the servant of the temple should behold the place of the
sacrifice, and sharpen the knife for the victim before sunset!  Arouse
thee, bondman, and follow me!'

As yet, Numerian had neither spoken, nor attempted to escape.  The
preceding events, though some space has been occupied in describing
them, passed in so short a period of time, that he had not hitherto
recovered from the first overwhelming shock of the meeting with Ulpius.
But now, awed though he still was, he felt that the moment of the
struggle for freedom had arrived.

'Leave me, and let us depart!--there can be no fellowship between us
again!' he exclaimed with the reckless courage of despair, taking the
hand of Antonina, and striving to free himself from the madman's grasp.
But the effort was vain; Ulpius tightened his hold and laughed in
triumph.  'What! the servant of the temple is in terror of the high
priest, and shrinks from walking in the place of the sacrifice!' he
cried.  'Fear not, bondman!  The mighty one, who rules over life and
death, and time and futurity, deals kindly with the servant of his
choice!  Onward! onward! to the place of darkness and doom, where I
alone am omnipotent, and all others are creatures who tremble and obey!
To thy lesson, learner! by sunset the victim must be crowned!'

He looked round on Numerian for an instant, as he prepared to drag him
forward, and their eyes met.  In the fierce command of his action, and
the savage exultation of his glance, the father saw repeated in a
wilder form the very attitude and expression which he had beheld in the
Pagan on the morning of the loss of his child.  All the circumstances
of that miserable hour--the vacant bed-chamber--the banished
daughter--the triumph of the betrayer--the anguish of the
betrayed--rushed over his mind, and rose up before it vivid as a
pictured scene before his eyes.


He struggled no more; the powers of resistance in mind and body were
crushed alike.  He made an effort to remove Antonina from his side, as
if, in forgetfulness of the hidden enemy without, he designed to urge
her flight through the open door, while the madman's attention was yet
distracted from her.  But, beyond this last exertion of the strong
instinct of paternal love, every other active emotion seemed dead
within him.

Vainly had he striven to disentangle the child from the fate that might
be in store for the parent.  To her the dread of the dark shadow on the
pavement was superior to all other apprehensions.  She now clung more
closely to her father, and tightened her clasp round his hand.  So,
when the Pagan advanced into the interior of the temple, it was not
Numerian alone who followed him to the place of sacrifice, but Antonina
as well.

They moved to the back of the pile of idols.  Behind it appeared a high
partition of gilt and inlaid wood reaching to the ceiling, and
separating the outer from the inner part of the temple.  A low archway
passage, protected by carved gates similar to those at the front of the
building, had been formed in the partition, and through this Ulpius and
his prisoners now passed into the recess beyond.

This apartment was considerably smaller than the first hall of the
temple which they had just left.  The ceiling and the floor both sloped
downwards together, and here the rippling of the waters of the Tiber
was more distinctly audible to them than in the outer division of the
building.  At the moment when they entered it the place was very dark;
the pile of idols intercepted even the little light that could have
been admitted through its narrow entrance; but the dense obscurity was
soon dissipated. Dragging Numerian after him to the left side of the
recess, Ulpius drew back a sort of wooden shutter, and a vivid ray of
sunlight immediately streamed in through a small circular opening
pierced in this part of the temple.

Then there became apparent, at the lower end of the apartment, a vast
yawning cavity in the wall, high enough to admit a man without
stooping, but running downwards almost perpendicularly to some lower
region which it was impossible to see, for no light shot upwards from
this precipitous artificial abyss, in the darkness of which the eye was
lost after it had penetrated to the distance of a few feet only from
the opening.  At the base of the confined space thus visible appeared
the commencement of a flight of steps, evidently leading far downwards
into the cavity.  On the abruptly sloping walls, which bounded it on
all sides, were painted, in the brilliant hues of ancient fresco,
representations of the deities of the mythology--all in the attitude of
descending into the vault, and all followed by figures of nymphs
bearing wreaths of flowers, beautiful birds, and other similar adjuncts
of the votive ceremonies of Paganism.  The repulsive contrast between
the bright colours and graceful forms presented by the frescoes, and
the perilous and gloomy appearance of the cavity which they decorated,
increased remarkably the startling significance in the character of the
whole structure.  Its past evil uses seemed ineradicably written over
every part of it, as past crime and torment remain ineradicably written
on the human face; the mind imbibed from it terrifying ideas of deadly
treachery, of secret atrocities, of frightful refinements of torture,
which no uninitiated eye had ever beheld, and no human resolution had
ever been powerful enough to resist.

But the impressions thus received were not produced only by what was
seen in and around this strange vault, but by what was heard there
besides.  The wind penetrated the cavity at some distance, and through
some opening that could not be beheld, and was apparently intercepted
in its passage, for it whistled upwards towards the entrance in shrill,
winding notes, sometimes producing another and nearer sound, resembling
the clashing of many small metallic substances violently shaken
together.  The noise of the wind, as well as the bubbling of the
current of the Tiber, seemed to proceed from a greater distance than
appeared compatible with the narrow extent of the back part of the
temple, and the proximity of the river to its low foundation walls.


It was evident that the vault only reached its outlet after it had
wound backwards, underneath the building, in some strange complication
of passages or labyrinth of artificial caverns, which might have been
built long since as dungeons for the living, or as sepulchres for the
dead.

'The place of the sacrifice--aha! the place of the sacrifice!' cried
the Pagan exultingly, as he drew Numerian to the entrance of the
cavity, and solemnly pointed into the darkness beneath.

The father gazed steadily into the chasm, never turning now to look on
Antonina, never moving to renew the struggle for freedom.  Earthly
loves and earthly hopes began to fade away from his heart--he was
praying. The solemn words of Christian supplication fell in low,
murmuring sounds from his lips, in the place of idolatry and bloodshed,
and mingled with the incoherent ejaculations of the madman who kept him
captive, and who now bent his glaring eyes on the darkness of the
vault, half forgetful, in the gloomy fascination which it exercised
even over him, of the prisoners whom he held at its mouth.

The single ray of light, admitted from the circular aperture of the
wall, fell wild and fantastic over the widely-differing figures of the
three, as they stood so strangely united together before the abyss that
opened beneath them.  The shadows were above and the shadows were
around; there was no light in the ill-omened place but the one vivid
ray that streamed over the gaunt figure of Ulpius, as he still pointed
into the darkness; over the rigid features of Numerian, praying in the
bitterness of expected death; and over the frail youthful form of
Antonina as she nestled trembling at her father's side.  It was an
unearthly and a solemn scene!

Meanwhile the shadow which the girl had observed on the pavement before
the doorway of the temple now appeared there again, but not to retire
as before;  for, the instant after, Goisvintha stealthily entered the
outer apartment of the building left vacant by its first occupants.
She passed softly around the pile of idols, looked into the inner
recess of the temple, and saw the three figures standing together in
the ray of light, gloomy and motionless, before the mouth of the
cavity.  Her first glance fixed on the Pagan, whom she instinctively
doubted and dreaded, whose purpose in keeping captive the father and
daughter she could not divine; her next was directed on Antonina.

The girl's position was a guarded one; still holding her father's hand,
she was partly protected by his body; and stood unconsciously beneath
the arm of Ulpius, as it was raised while he grasped Numerian's
shoulder.  Marking this, and remembering that Antonina had twice
escaped her already, Goisvintha hesitated for a moment, and then, with
cautious step and lowering brow, began to retire again towards the
doorway of the building.  'Not yet--not yet the time!' she muttered, as
she resumed her former lurking-place; 'they stand where the light is
over them--the girl is watched and shielded--the two men are still on
either side of her! Not yet the moment of the blow; the stroke of the
knife must be sure and safe!  Sure, for this time she must die by my
hand!  Safe, for I have other vengeance to wreak besides the vengeance
on her!  I, who have been patient and cunning since the night when I
escaped from Aquileia, will be patient and cunning still!  If she
passes the door, I slay her as she goes out; if she remains in the
temple--'

At the last word, Goisvintha paused and gazed upward; the setting sun
threw its fiery glow over her haggard face; her eye brightened fiercely
in the full light as she looked.  'The darkness is at hand!' she
continued; 'the night will be thick and black in the dim halls of the
temple; I shall see her when she shall not see me!--the darkness is
coming; the vengeance is sure!'

She closed her lips, and with fatal perseverance continued to watch and
wait, as she had resolutely watched and waited already.  The Roman and
the Goth; the opposite in sex, nation, and fate; the madman who dreamed
of the sanguinary superstitions of Paganism before the temple altar,
and the assassin who brooded over the chances of bloodshed beneath the
temple portico, were now united in a mysterious identity of
expectation, uncommunicated and unsuspected by either--the hour when
the sun vanished from the heaven was the hour of the sacrifice for both!

      *      *      *      *      *

There is now a momentary pause in the progress of events.  Occurrences
to be hereafter related render it necessary to take advantage of this
interval to inform the reader of the real nature and use of the vault
in the temple wall, the external appearance of which we have already
described.

The marking peculiarity in the construction of the Pagan religion may
be most aptly compared to the marking peculiarity in the construction
of the pagan temples.  Both were designed to attract the general eye by
the outward effect only, which was in both the false delusive
reflection of the inward substance.

In the temple, the people, as they worshipped beneath the long
colonnades, or beheld the lofty porticoes from the street, were left to
imagine the corresponding majesty and symmetry of the interior of the
structure, and were not admitted to discover how grievously it
disappointed the brilliant expectations which the exterior was so well
calculated to inspire; how little the dark, narrow halls of the idols,
the secret vaults and gloomy recesses within, fulfilled the promise of
the long flights of steps, the broad extent of pavement, the massive
sun-brightened pillars without.  So in the religion, the votary was
allured by the splendour of processions; by the pomp of auguries; by
the poetry of the superstition which peopled his native woods with the
sportive Dryads, and the fountains from which he drank with their
guardian Naiads; which gave to mountain and lake, to sun and moon and
stars, to all things around and above him, their fantastic allegory, or
their gracious legend of beauty and love:  but beyond this, his first
acquaintance with his worship was not permitted to extend, here his
initiation concluded.  He was kept in ignorance of the dark and
dangerous depths which lurked beneath this smooth and attractive
surface; he was left to imagine that what was displayed was but the
prelude to the future discovery of what was hidden of beauty in the
rites of Paganism; he was not admitted to behold the wretched
impostures, the loathsome orgies, the hideous incantations, the bloody
human sacrifices perpetrated in secret, which made the foul, real
substance of the fair exterior form.  His first sight of the temple was
not less successful in deceiving his eye than his first impression of
the religion in deluding his mind.

With these hidden and guilty mysteries of the Pagan worship, the vault
before which Ulpius now stood with his captives was intimately
connected.

The human sacrifices offered among the Romans were of two kinds; those
publicly and those privately performed.  The first were of annual
recurrence in the early years of the Republic; were prohibited at a
later date; were revived by Augustus, who sacrificed his prisoners of
war at the altar of Julius Caesar; and were afterwards--though
occasionally renewed for particular purposes under some subsequent
reigns--wholly abandoned as part of the ceremonies of Paganism during
the later periods of the empire.

The sacrifices perpetrated in private were much longer practised.  They
were connected with the most secret mysteries of the mythology; were
concealed from the supervision of government; and lasted probably until
the general extinction of heathen superstition in Italy and the
provinces.

Many and various were the receptacles constructed for the private
immolation of human victims in different parts of the empire--in its
crowded cities as well as in its solitary woods--and among all, one of
the most remarkable and the longest preserved was the great cavity
pierced in the wall of the temple which Ulpius had chosen for his
solitary lurking-place in Rome.


It was not merely as a place of concealment for the act of immolation,
and for the corpse of the victim, that the vault had been built.  A
sanguinary artifice had complicated the manner of its construction, by
placing in the cavity itself the instrument of the sacrifice; by making
it, as it were, not merely the receptacle, but the devourer also of its
human prey.  At the bottom of the flight of steps leading down into it
(the top of which, as we have already observed, was alone visible from
the entrance in the temple recess) was fixed the image of a dragon
formed in brass.

The body of the monster, protruding opposite the steps almost at a
right angle from the wall, was moved in all directions by steel
springs, which communicated with one of the lower stairs, and also with
a sword placed in the throat of the image to represent the dragon's
tongue.  The walls around the steps narrowed so as barely to admit the
passage of the human body when they approached the dragon.  At the
slightest pressure on the stair with which the spring communicated, the
body of the monster bent forward, and the sword instantly protruded
from its throat, at such a height from the steps as ensure that it
should transfix in a vital part the person who descended.  The corpse,
then dropping by its own weight off the sword, fell through a tunnelled
opening beneath the dragon, running downward in an opposite direction
to that taken by the steps above, and was deposited on an iron grating
washed by the waters of the Tiber, which ran under the arched
foundations of the temple.  The grating was approached by a secret
subterranean passage leading from the front of the building, by which
the sacrificing priests were enabled to reach the dead body, to fasten
weights to it, and opening the grating, to drop it into the river,
never to be beheld again by mortal eyes.

In the days when this engine of destruction was permitted to serve the
purpose for which the horrible ingenuity of its inventors had
constructed it, its principal victims were young girls.  Crowned with
flowers, and clad in white garments, they were lured into immolating
themselves by being furnished with rich offerings, and told that the
sole object of their fatal expedition down the steps of the vault was
to realise the pictures adorning its walls (which we have described a
few pages back), by presenting their gifts at the shrine of the idol
below.

At the period of which we write, the dragon had for many years--since
the first prohibitions of Paganism--ceased to be fed with its wonted
prey.  The scales forming its body grew gradually corroded and loosened
by the damp; and when moved by the wind which penetrated to them from
beneath, whistling up in its tortuous course through the tunnel that
ran in one direction below, and the vault of the steps that ascended in
another above, produced the clashing sound which has been mentioned as
audible at intervals from the mouth of the cavity.  But the springs
which moved the deadly apparatus of the whole machine being placed
within it, under cover, continued to resist the slow progress of time
and of neglect, and still remained as completely fitted as ever to
execute the fatal purpose for which they had been designed.

The ultimate destiny of the dragon of brass was the destiny of the
religion whose bloodiest superstitions it embodied:  it fell beneath
the resistless advance of Christianity.  Shortly after the date of our
narrative, the interior of the building beneath which it was placed
having suffered from an accident, which will be related farther on, the
exterior was dismantled, in order that its pillars might furnish
materials for a church.  The vault in the wall was explored by a monk
who had been present at the destruction of other Pagan temples, and who
volunteered to discover its contents.  With a torch in one hand, and an
iron bar in the other, he descended into the cavity, sounding the walls
and the steps before him as he proceeded.  For the first and the last
time the sword protruded harmless from the monster's throat when the
monk pressed the fatal stair, before stepping on it, with his iron bar.
The same day the machine was destroyed and cast into the Tiber, where
its victims had been thrown before it in former years.

      *      *      *      *      *


Some minutes have elapsed since we left the father and daughter
standing by the Pagan's side before the mouth of the vault; and as yet
there appears no change in the several positions of the three.  But
already, while Ulpius still looks down steadfastly into the cavity at
his feet, his voice, as he continues to speak, grows louder, and his
words become more distinct.  Fearful recollections associated with the
place are beginning to stir his weary memory, to lift the darkness of
oblivion from his idle thoughts.

'They go down, far down there!' he abruptly exclaimed, pointing into
the black depths of the vault, 'and never arise again to the light of
the upper earth!  The great Destroyer is watchful in his solitude
beneath, and looks through the darkness for their approach!  Hark! the
hissing of his breath is like to the clash of weapons in a deadly
strife!'

At this moment the wind moved the loose scales of the dragon.  During
an instant Ulpius remained silent, listening to the noise they
produced. For the first time an expression of dread appeared on his
face.  His memory was obscurely reviving the incidents of his discovery
of the deadly machinery in the vault when he first made his sojourn in
the temple, when--filled with the confused remembrance of the
mysterious rites and incantations, the secret sacrifices which he had
witnessed and performed at Alexandria--he had found and followed the
subterranean passage which led to the iron grating beneath the dragon.
As the wind lulled again, and the clashing of the metal ceased with it,
he began to give these recollections expression in words, uttering them
in slow, solemn accents to himself.

'I have seen the Destroyer; the Invisible has revealed himself to me!'
he murmured.  'I stood on the iron bars; the restless waters toiled and
struggled beneath my feet as I looked up into the place of darkness.  A
voice called to me, "Get light, and behold me from above!  Get light!
get light!"  Sun, and moon, and stars gave no light there! but lamps
burnt in the city, in the houses of the dead, when I walked by them in
the night-time; and the lamp gave light when sun, and moon, and stars
gave none! From the top steps I looked down, and saw the Powerful One
in his golden brightness; and approached not, but watched and listened
in fear.  The voice again!--the voice was heard again!--"Sacrifice to
me in secret, as thy brethren sacrifice!  Give me the living where the
living are, and the dead where the dead!"  The air came up cold, and
the voice ceased, and the lamp was like sun, and moon, and stars--it
gave no light in the place of darkness!'

While he spoke, the loose metal again clashed in the vault, for the
wind was strengthening as the evening advanced.  'Hark! the signal to
prepare the sacrifice!' cried the Pagan, turning abruptly to Numerian.
'Listen, bondman! the living and the dead are within our reach.  The
breath of the Invisible strikes them in the street and in the house;
they stagger in the highways, and drop at the temple steps.  When the
hour comes we shall go forth and find them.  Under my hand they go down
into the cavern beneath.  Whether they are hurled dead, or whether they
go down living, they fall through to the iron bars, where the water
leaps and rejoices to receive them!  It is mine to sacrifice them
above, and thine to wait for them below, to lift the bars and give them
to the river to be swallowed up!  The dead drop down first, the living
that are slain by the Destroyer follow after!'

Here he paused suddenly.  Now, for the first time, his eye rested on
Antonina, whose very existence he seemed hitherto to have forgotten.  A
revolting smile of mingled cunning and satisfaction instantly changed
the whole character of his countenance as he gazed on her and then
looked round significantly to the vault.  'Here is one,' he whispered
to Numerian, taking her by the arm.  'Keep her captive--the hour is
near!'

Numerian had hitherto stood unheedful while he spoke; but when he
touched Antonina the bare action was enough to arouse the father to
resistance--hopeless though it was--once more.  He shook off the grasp
of Ulpius from the girl's arm, and drew back with her--breathless,
vigilant, desperate--to the side-wall behind him.

The madman laughed in proud approval.  'My bondman obeys me and seizes
the captive!' he cried. 'He remembers that the hour is near and loosens
not his hold!  Come,' he continued, 'come out into the hall beyond!--it
is time that we watch for more victims for the sacrifice till the sun
goes down.  The Destroyer is mighty and must be obeyed!'


He walked to the entrance leading into the first apartment of the
temple, and then waited to be followed by Numerian, who, now for the
first time separated from Ulpius, remained stationary in the position
he had last occupied, and looked eagerly around him.  No chance of
escape presented itself; the mouth of the vault on one side, and the
passage through the partition on the other, were the only outlets to
the place. There was no hope but to follow the Pagan into the great
hall of the temple, to keep carefully at a distance from him, and to
watch the opportunity of flight through the doorway. The street, so
desolate when last beheld, might now afford more evidence that it was
inhabited. Citizens, guards might be passing by, and might be summoned
into the temple--help might be at hand.

As he moved forward with Antonina, such thoughts passed rapidly through
the father's mind, unaccompanied at the moment by the recollection of
the stranger who had followed them from the Pincian Gate, or of the
apathy of the famished populace in aiding each other in any emergency.
Seeing that he was followed as he had commanded, Ulpius passed on
before them to the pile of idols; but a strange and sudden alteration
appeared in his gait.  He had hitherto walked with the step of a
man--young, strong, and resolute of purpose; now he dragged one limb
after the other as slowly and painfully as if he had received a mortal
hurt.  He tottered with more than the infirmity of his age, his head
dropped upon his breast, and he moaned and murmured inarticulately in
low, long-drawn cries.

He had advanced to the side of the pile, half-way towards the doorway
of the temple, when Numerian, who had watched with searching eyes the
abrupt change in his demeanour, forgetting the dissimulation which
might still be all-important, abandoned himself to his first impulse,
and hurriedly pressing forward with Antonina, attempted to pass the
Pagan and escape.  But at the moment Ulpius stopped in his slow
progress, reeled, threw out his hands convulsively, and seizing
Numerian by the arm, staggered back with him against the side-wall of
the temple.  The fingers of the tortured wretch closed as if they were
never to be unlocked again--closed as if with the clutch of death, with
the last frantic grasp of a drowning man.

For days and nights past he had toiled incessantly under the relentless
tyranny of his frenzy, building up higher and higher his altar of
idols, and pouring forth his invocations before his gods in the place
of the sacrifice; and now, at the moment when he was most triumphant in
his ferocious activity of purpose, when his fancied bondman and his
fancied victim were most helpless at his command--now, when his
strained faculties were strung to their highest pitch, the
long-deferred paroxysm had seized him, which was the precursor of his
repose, of the only repose granted by his awful fate--a change (the
mournful change already described) in the form of his insanity.  For at
those rare periods when he slept, his sleep was not unconsciousness,
not rest:  it was a trance of hideous dreams--his tongue spoke, his
limbs moved, when he slumbered as when he woke.  It was only when his
visions of the pride, the power, the fierce conflicts, and daring
resolutions of his maturer years gave place to his dim, quiet, waking
dreams of his boyish days, that his wasted faculties reposed, and his
body rested with them in the motionless languor of perfect fatigue.
Then, if words were still uttered by his lips, they were as murmurs of
an infant--happy sleep; for the innocent phrases of his childhood which
they then revived, seemed for a time to bring with them the innocent
tranquillity of his childhood as well.

'Go! go!--fly while you are yet free!' cried Numerian, dropping the
hand of Antonina, and pointing to the door.  But for the second time
the girl refused to move forward a step.  No horror, no peril in the
temple could banish for an instant her remembrance of the night at the
farm-house in the suburbs. She kept her head turned towards the vacant
entrance, fixed her eyes on it in the unintermitting watchfulness of
terror, and whispered affrightedly, 'Goisvintha!  Goisvintha!' when her
father spoke.


The clasp of the Pagan's fingers remained fixed and deathlike as at
first; he leaned back against the wall, as still as if life and action
had for ever departed from him.  The paroxysm had passed away; his
face, distorted but the moment before, was now in repose, but it was a
repose that was awful to look on.  Tears rolled slowly from his
half-closed eyes over his seamed and wrinkled cheeks--tears which were
not the impressive expression of mental anguish (for a vacant and
unchanging smile was on his lips), but the mere mechanical outburst of
the physical weakness that the past crisis of agony had left behind it.
Not the slightest appearance of thought or observation was perceptible
in his features: his face was the face of an idiot.

Numerian, who had looked on him for an instant, shuddered and averted
his eyes, recoiling from the sight before him.  But a more overpowering
trial of his resolution was approaching, which he could not avoid.  Ere
long the voice of Ulpius grew audible once more; but now its tones were
weak, piteous, almost childish, and the words they uttered were quiet
words of love and gentleness, which dropping from such lips, and
pronounced in such a place, were fearful to hear.  The temple and all
that was in it vanished from his sight as from his memory.  Swayed by
the dread and supernatural influences of his disease, the madman passed
back in an instant over the dark valley of life's evil pilgrimage to
the long-quitted precincts of his boyish home.  While in bodily
presence he stood in the place of his last crimes, the outcast of
reason and humanity, in mental consciousness he lay in his mother's
arms, as he had lain there ere yet he had departed to the temple at
Alexandria; and his heart communed with her heart, and his eyes looked
on her as they had looked before his father's fatal ambition had
separated for ever parent and child!

'Mother!--come back, mother!' he whispered.  'I was not asleep:  I saw
you when you came in, and sat by my bedside, and wept over me when you
kissed me!  Come back, and sit by me still!  I am going away, far away,
and may never hear your voice again!  How happy we should be, mother,
if I stayed with you always!  But it is my father's will that I should
go to the temple in another country, and live there to be a priest; and
his will must be obeyed.  I may never return; but we shall not forget
one another!  I shall remember your words when we used to talk together
happily, and you shall still remember mine!'

Hardly had the first sentence been uttered by Ulpius when Antonina felt
her father's whole frame suddenly tremble at her side.  She turned her
eyes from the doorway, on which they had hitherto been fixed, and
looked on him.  The Pagan's hand had fallen from his arm:  he was free
to depart, to fly as he had longed to fly but a few minutes before, and
yet he never stirred.  His daughter touched him, spoke to him, but he
neither moved nor answered.  It was not merely the shock of the abrupt
transition in the language of Ulpius from the ravings of crime to the
murmurs of love--it was not merely astonishment at hearing from him, in
his madness, revelations of his early life which had never passed his
lips during his days of treacherous servitude in the house on the
Pincian Hill, that thus filled Numerian's inmost soul with awe, and
struck his limbs motionless.  There was more in all that he heard than
this.  The words seemed as words that had doomed him at once and for
ever.  His eyes, directed full on the face of the madman, were dilated
with horror, and his deep, gasping, convulsive breathings mingled
heavily, during the moment of silence that ensued, with the chiming of
the bells above and the bubbling of the water below--the lulling music
of the temple, playing its happy evening hymn at the pleasant close of
day.

'We shall remember, mother!--we shall remember!' continued the Pagan
softly, 'and be happy in our remembrances!  My brother, who loves me
not, will love you when I am gone!  You will walk in my little garden,
and think on me as you look at the flowers that we have planted and
watered together in the evening hours, when the sky was glorious to
behold, and the earth was all quiet around us! Listen, mother, and kiss
me!  When I go to the far country, I will make a garden there like my
garden here, and plant the same flowers that we have planted here, and
in the evening I will go out and give them water at the hour when you
go out to give my flowers water at home; and so, though we see each
other no more, it will yet be as if we laboured together in the garden
as we labour now!'


The girl still fixed her eager gaze on her father.  His eyes presented
the same rigid expression of horror; but he was now wiping off with his
own hand, mechanically, as if he knew it not, the foam which the
paroxysms had left round the madman's lips, and, amid the groans that
burst from him, she could hear such words as, 'Lord God!--mercy, Lord
God!  Thou, who hast thus restored him to me--thus, worse than
dead!--mercy! mercy!'

The light on the pavement beneath the portico of the temple was fading
visibly--the sun had gone down.

For the third time the madman spoke, but his tones were losing their
softness; they were complaining, plaintive, unutterably mournful; his
dreams of the past were already changing.  'Farewell, brother--farewell
for years and years!' he cried.  'You have not given me the love that I
gave you.  The fault was not mine that our father loved me the best,
and chose me to be sent to the temple to be a priest at the altar of
the gods!  The fault was not mine that I partook not in your favoured
sports, and joined not the companions whom you sought; it was our
father's will that I should not live as you lived, and I obeyed it!
You have spoken to me in anger, and turned from me in disdain; but
farewell again, Cleander--farewell in forgiveness and in love!'

He might have spoken more, but his voice was drowned in one long shriek
of agony which burst from Numerian's lips, and echoed discordantly
through the hall of the temple, and he sank down with his face to the
ground at the Pagan's feet.  The dark and terrible destiny was
fulfilled.  The enthusiast for the right and the fanatic for the wrong;
the man who had toiled to reform the Church, and the man who had toiled
to restore the Temple; the master who had received and trusted the
servant in his home, and the servant who in that home had betrayed the
master's trust--the two characters, separated hitherto in the sublime
disunion of good and bad, now struck together in tremendous contact, as
brethren who had drawn their life from one source, who as children had
been sheltered under the same roof!

Not in the hours when the good Christian succoured the then forsaken
Pagan, wandering homeless in Rome, was the secret disclosed; no chance
word of it was uttered when the deceiver told the feigned relation of
his life to the benefactor whom he was plotting to deceive, or when, on
the first morning of the siege, the machinations of the servant
triumphed over the confidence of the master: it was reserved to be
revealed in the words of delirium, at the closing years of madness,
when he who discovered it was unconscious of all that he spoke, and his
eyes were blinded to the true nature of all that he saw; when earthly
voices that might once have called him back to repentance, to
recognition, and to love, were become to him as sounds that have no
meaning; when, by a ruthless and startling fatality, it was on the
brother who had wrought for the true faith that the whole crushing
weight of the terrible disclosure fell, unpartaken by the brother who
had wrought for the false!  But the judgments pronounced in Time go
forth from the tribunal of that Eternity to which the mysteries of life
tend, and in which they shall be revealed--neither waiting on human
seasons nor abiding by human justice, but speaking to the soul in the
language of immortality, which is heard in the world that is now, and
interpreted in the world that is to come.

Lost, for an instant, even the recollection that Goisvintha might still
be watching her opportunity from without, calling despairingly on her
father, and vainly striving to raise him from the ground, Antonina
remembered not, in the overwhelming trial of the moment, the
revelations of Numerian's past life that had been disclosed to her in
the days when the famine was at its worst in Rome.  The name of
'Cleander', which she had then heard her father pronounce, as the name
that he had abandoned when he separated himself from the companions of
his sinful choice, passed unheeded by her when the Pagan unconsciously
uttered it.  She saw the whole scene but as a fresh menace of danger,
as a new vision of terror, more ominous of ill than all that had
preceded it.


Thick as was the darkness in which the lulling and involuntary memories
of the past had enveloped the perceptions of Ulpius, the father's
piercing cry of anguish seemed to have penetrated it with a sudden ray
of light.  The madman's half-closed eyes opened instantly and fixed,
dreamily at first, on the altar of idols.  He waved his hands to and
fro before him, as if he were parting back the folds of a heavy veil
that obscured his sight; but his wayward thoughts did not resume as yet
their old bias towards ferocity and crime.  When he spoke again, his
speech was still inspired by the visions of his early life--but now of
his early life in the temple at Alexandria.  His expressions were more
abrupt, more disjointed than before; yet they continued to display the
same evidence of the mysterious, instinctive vividness of recollection,
which was the result of the sudden change in the nature of his
insanity. His language wandered (still as if the words came from him
undesignedly and unconsciously) over the events of his boyish
introduction to the service of the gods, and, though confusing them in
order, still preserved them in substance, as they have been already
related in the history of his 'apprenticeship to the temple'.

Now he was in imagination looking down once more from the summit of the
Temple of Serapis on the glittering expanse of the Nile and the wide
country around it; and now he was walking proudly through the streets
of Alexandria by the side of his uncle, Macrinus, the high priest.  Now
he was wandering at night, in curiosity and awe, through the gloomy
vaults and subterranean corridors of the sacred place; and now he was
listening, well pleased, to the kindly greeting, the inspiring praises
of Macrinus during their first interview.  But at this point, and while
dwelling on this occasion, his memory became darkened again; it vainly
endeavoured to retrace the circumstances attending the crowning
evidence of the high priest's interest in his pupil, and anxiety to
identify him completely with his new protector and his new duties,
which had been displayed when he conferred on the trembling boy the
future distinction of one of his own names.

And here, let it be remembered, as a chief link in the mysterious chain
of fatalities which had united to keep the brothers apart as brethren
after they had met as men, that both had, from widely different causes,
abandoned in after-life the names which they bore in their father's
house; that while one, by his own act and for his own purpose,
transformed himself from Cleander, the associate of the careless and
the criminal, to Numerian, the preacher of the Gospel and reformer of
the Church, the other had (to quote the words of the fourth chapter),
'become from the boy Emilius the student Ulpius,' by the express and
encouraging command of his master, Macrinus, the high priest.

While the Pagan still fruitlessly endeavoured to revive the events
connected with the change in his designation on his arrival in
Alexandria, and, chafing under the burden of oblivion that weighed upon
his thoughts, attempted for the first time to move from the wall
against which he had hitherto leaned; while Antonina still strove in
vain to recall her father to the recollection of the terrible
exigencies of the moment as he crouched prostrate at the madman's
feet--the doorway of the temple was darkened once more by the figure of
Goisvintha.  She stood on the threshold, a gloomy and indistinct form
in the fading light, looking intently into the deeply shadowed interior
of the building. As she marked the altered positions of the father and
daughter, she uttered a suppressed ejaculation of triumph; but, while
the sound passed her lips, she heard, or thought she heard, a noise in
the street behind.  Even now her vigilance and cunning, her deadly,
calculating resolution to await in immovable patience the fitting time
for striking the blow deliberately and with impunity, did not fail her.
Turning instantly, she walked to the top step of the temple, and stood
there for a few moments, watchfully surveying the open space before her.


But in those few moments the scene in the building changed once more.
The madman, while he still wavered between relapsing into the raving
fit and continuing under the influence of the tranquil mood in which he
had been prematurely disturbed, caught sight of Goisvintha when her
approach suddenly shadowed the entrance to the temple.  Her presence,
momentary though it was, was for him the presence of a figure that had
not appeared before; that had stood in a strange position between the
shade within and the faint light without; it was a new object,
presented to his eyes while they were straining to recover such
imperfect faculties of observation as had been their wont, and it
ascendancy over him was instantaneous and all-powerful.

He started, bewildered like a deep sleeper suddenly awoke; violent
shudderings ran for a moment over his frame; then it strengthened again
with its former unnatural strength; the demon raged within him in
renewed fury as he tore his robe which Numerian held as he lay at his
feet from the feeble grasp that confined it, and, striding up to the
pile of idols, stretched out his hands in solemn deprecation.  'The
high priest has slept before the altar of the gods!' he cried loudly,
'but they have been patient with their well-beloved; their thunder has
not struck him for his crime!  Now the servant returns to his
service--the rites of Serapis begin!'

Numerian still remained prostrate, spirit-broken; he slowly clasped his
hands together on the floor, and his voice was now to be heard, still
supplicating in low and stifled accents, as if in unceasing prayer lay
his last hope of preserving his own reason.  'God!  Thou art the God of
Mercy; be merciful to him!' he murmured.  'Thou acceptest of
repentance; grant repentance to him!  If at any time I have served Thee
without blame, let the service be counted to him; let the vials of Thy
wrath be poured out on me!'

'Hark! the trumpet blows for the sacrifice!' interrupted the raving
voice of the Pagan, as he turned from the altar, and extended his arms
in frenzied inspiration.  'The roar of music and the voice of
exultation soar upward from the highest mountain-tops!  The incense
smokes, and in and out, and round and round, the dancers whirl about
the pillars of the temple!  The ox for the sacrifice is without spot;
his horns are gilt; the crown and fillet adorn his head.  The priest
stands before him naked from the waist upwards; he heaves the libation
out of the cup; the blood flows over the altar! Up! up! tear forth with
reeking hands the heart while it is yet warm, futurity is before you in
the quivering entrails, look on them and read! read!'

While he spoke, Goisvintha had entered the temple.  The street was
still desolate; no help was at hand.

Not advancing at once, she concealed herself near the door behind a
projection in the pile of idols, watching from it until Ulpius, in the
progress of his frenzy, should turn away from Antonina, whom he stood
fronting at this instant.  But she had not entered unperceived;
Antonina had seen her again. And now the bitterness of death, when the
young die unprotected in their youth, came over the girl, and she cried
in a low wailing voice, as she knelt by Numerian's side:  'I must die,
father, I must die, as Hermanric died!  Look up at me, and speak to me
before I die!'

Her father was still praying; he heard nothing, for his heart was
bleeding in atonement at the shrine of his boyish home, and his soul
still communed with its Maker.  The voice that followed hers was the
voice of Ulpius.

'Oh, beautiful are the gardens round the sacred altars, and lofty the
trees that embower the glittering shrines!' he exclaimed, rapt and
ecstatic in his new visions.  'Lo, the morning breaks, and the spirits
of light are welcomed by a sacrifice!  The sun goes down behind the
mountain, and the beams of evening tremble on the victim beneath the
knife of the adoring priest!  The moon and stars shine high in the
firmament, and the Genii of Nights are saluted in the still hours with
blood!'

As he paused, the lament of Antonina was continued in lower and lower
tones:  'I must die, father, I must die!'  And with it murmured the
supplicating accents of Numerian:  'God of Mercy! deliver the helpless
and forgive the afflicted!  Lord of Judgment! deal gently with Thy
servants who have sinned!' While, mingling with both in discordant
combination, the strange music of the temple still poured on its
lulling sound--the rippling of the running waters and the airy chiming
of the bells!


'Worship!--emperors, armies, nations, glorify and worship me!' shouted
the madman, in thunder-tones of triumph and command, as his eye for the
first time encountered the figure of Numerian prostrate at his feet.
'Worship the demi-god who moves with the deities through spheres
unknown to man!  I have heard the moans of the unburied who wander on
the shores of the Lake of the Dead--worship!  I have looked on the
river whose black current roars and howls in its course through the
caves of everlasting night--worship!  I have seen the furies lashed by
serpents on their wrinkled necks, and followed them as they hurled
their torches over the pining ghosts!  I have stood unmoved in the
hurricane-tumult of hell--worship! worship! worship!'

He turned round again towards the altar of idols, calling upon his gods
to proclaim his deification, and at the moment when he moved,
Goisvintha sprang forward.  Antonina was kneeling with her face turned
from the door, as the assassin seized her by her long hair and drove
the knife into her neck. The moaning accents of the girl, bewailing her
approaching fate, closed in one faint groan; she stretched out her
arms, and fell forward over her father's body.

In the ferocious triumph of the moment, Goisvintha raised her arm to
repeat the stroke; but at that instant the madman looked round.  'The
sacrifice--the sacrifice!' he shouted, leaping at one spring like a
wild beast at her throat.  She struck ineffectually at him with the
knife, as he fastened his long nails in her flesh and hurled her
backwards to the floor.  Then he yelled and gibbered in frantic
exultation, set his foot on her breast, and spat on her as she lay
beneath him.

The contact of the girl's body when she fell--the short but terrible
tumult of the attack that passed almost over him--the shrill, deafening
cries of the madman, awoke Numerian from his trance of despairing
remembrance, aroused him in his agony of supplicating prayer.  He
looked up.

The scene that met his eyes was one of those scenes which crush every
faculty but the faculty of mechanical action--before which, thought
vanishes from men's minds, utterance is suspended on their lips,
expression is paralysed on their faces.  The coldness of the tomb
seemed breathed over Numerian's aspect by the contemplation of the
terrible catastrophe:  his eyes were glassy and vacant, his lips parted
and rigid; even the remembrance of the discovery of his brother seemed
lost to him as he stooped over his daughter and bound a fragment of her
robe round her neck.  The mute, soulless, ghastly stillness of death
looked settled on his features, as, unconscious now of weakness or age,
he rose with her in his arms, stood motionless for one moment before
the doorway, and looked slowly round on Ulpius; then he moved forward
with heavy regular steps.  The Pagan's foot was still on Goisvintha's
breast as the father passed him; his gaze was still fixed on her; but
his cries of triumph were calmed; he laughed and muttered incoherently
to himself.

The moon was rising, soft, faint, and tranquil, over the quiet street
as Numerian descended the temple steps with his daughter in his arms,
and, after an instant's pause of bewilderment and doubt, instinctively
pursued his slow, funereal course along the deserted roadway in the
direction of home. Soon, as he advanced, he beheld in the moonlight,
down the long vista of the street at its termination, a little
assemblage of people walking towards him with calm and regular
progress. As they came nearer, he saw that one of them held an open
book, that another carried a crucifix, and that others followed these
two with clasped hands and drooping heads.  And then, after an
interval, the fresh breezes that blew towards him bore onward these
words, slowly and reverently pronounced:--

'Know, therefore, that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity
deserveth.

'Canst thou, by searching, find out God?  Canst thou find out the
Almighty to perfection?'

Then the breeze fell, the words grew indistinct, but the procession
still moved forward.  As it came nearer and nearer, the voice of the
reader was again plainly heard:--

'If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles.

'For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be
steadfast, and shalt not fear;

'Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that
pass away:

And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine
forth, thou shalt be as the morning.'

The reader stopped and closed the book; for now Numerian had met the
members of the little procession, and they looked on him standing
voiceless before them in the clear moonlight, with his daughter's head
drooping over his shoulder as he carried her in his arms.

There were some among those who gathered round him whose features he
would have recognised at another time as the features of the surviving
adherents of his former congregation.  The assembly he had met was
composed of the few sincere Christians in Rome, who had collected, on
the promulgation of the news that Alaric had ratified terms of peace,
to make a pilgrimage through the city, in the hopeless endeavour, by
reading from the Bible and passing exhortation, to awaken the reckless
populace to a feeling of contrition for their sins, and of devout
gratitude for their approaching deliverance from the horrors of the
siege.

But now, when Numerian confronted them, neither by word nor look did he
express the slightest recognition of any who surrounded him.  To all
the questions addressed to him, he replied by hurried gestures that
none could comprehend.  To all the promises of help and protection
heaped upon him in the first outbreak of the grief and pity of his
adherents of other days, he answered but by the same dull, vacant
glance.  It was only when they relieved him of his burden, and gently
prepared to carry the senseless girl among them back to her father's
house, that he spoke; and then, in faint entreating tones, he besought
them to let him hold her hand as they went, so that he might be the
first to feel her pulse beat--if it yet moved.

They turned back by the way they had come--a sorrowful and slow-moving
procession!  As they passed on, the reader again opened the Sacred
Book; and then these words rose through the soothing and heavenly
tranquillity of the first hours of night:--

'Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth:  therefore despise not
thou the chastening of the Almighty:

'For he maketh sore, and bindeth up:  he woundeth, and his hands make
whole.'



CHAPTER 26.

RETRIBUTION.

As, in the progress of Life, each man pursues his course with the
passions, good and evil, set, as it were, on either side of him; and
viewing their results in the actions of his fellow-men, finds his
attention, while still attracted by the spectacle of what is noble and
virtuous, suddenly challenged by the opposite display of what is mean
and criminal--so, in the progress of this narrative, which aims to be
the reflection of Life, the reader who has journeyed with us thus far,
and who may now be inclined to follow the little procession of
Christian devotees, to walk by the side of the afflicted father, and to
hold with him the hand of his ill-fated child, is yet, in obedience to
the conditions of the story, required to turn back for awhile to the
contemplation of its darker passages of guilt and terror--he must enter
the temple again; but he will enter it for the last time.

The scene before the altar of idols was fast proceeding to its fatal
climax.


The Pagan's frenzy had exhausted itself in its own fury--his insanity
was assuming a quieter and a more dangerous form; his eye grew cunning
and suspicious; a stealthy deliberation and watchfulness appeared in
all his actions.  He now slowly lifted his foot from Goisvintha's
breast, and raised his hands at the same time to strike her back if she
should attempt to escape.  Seeing that she lay senseless from her fall,
he left her; retired to one of the corners of the temple, took from it
a rope that lay there, and returning, bound her arms behind her at the
hands and wrists.  The rope cut deep through the skin--the pain
restored her to her senses; she suffered the sharp agony in her own
body, in the same place where she had inflicted it on the young
chieftain at the farm-house beyond the suburbs.

The minute after, she felt herself dragged along the ground, farther
into the interior of the building. The madman drew her up to the iron
gates of the passage through the partition, and fastening the end of
the rope to them, left her there.  This part of the temple was
enveloped in total darkness--her assailant addressed not a word to
her--she could not obtain even a glimpse of his form, but she could
hear him still laughing to himself in hoarse, monotonous tones, that
sounded now near, and now distant again.

She abandoned herself as lost--prematurely devoted to the torment and
death that she had anticipated; but, as yet, her masculine resolution
and energy did not decline.  The very intensity of the anguish she
suffered from the bindings at her wrists, producing a fierce bodily
effort to resist it, strengthened her iron-strung nerves.  She neither
cried for help nor appealed to the Pagan for pity. The gloomy fatalism
which she had inherited from her savage ancestors sustained her in a
suicide-pride.

Ere long the laughter of Ulpius, while he moved slowly hither and
thither in the darkness of the temple, was overpowered by the sound of
her voice--deep, groaning, but yet steady--as she uttered her last
words--words poured forth like the wild dirges, the fierce death-songs
of the old Goths when they died deserted on the bloody battle-field, or
were cast bound into deep dungeons, a prey to the viper and the asp.
Thus she spoke:--  'I swore to be avenged! while I went forth from
Aquileia with the child that was killed and the child that was wounded;
while I climbed the high wall in the night-time, and heard the tumult
of the beating waves near the bank where I buried the dead; while I
wandered in the darkness over the naked heath and through the lonely
forest; while I climbed the pathless sides of the mountains, and made
my refuge in the cavern by the waters of the dark lake.

'I swore to be avenged! while the warriors approached me on their
march, and the roaring of the trumpets and the clash of the armour
sounded in my ears; while I greeted my kinsman, Hermanric, a mighty
chieftain, at the king's side, among the invading hosts; while I looked
on my last child, dead like the rest, and knew that he was buried afar
from the land of his people, and from the others that the Romans had
slain before him.

'I swore to be avenged! while the army encamped before Rome, and I
stood with Hermanric, looking on the great walls in the misty evening;
while the daughter of the Roman was a prisoner in our tent, and I eyed
her as she lay on my knees; while for her sake my kinsman turned
traitor, and withheld my hand from the blow; while I passed unseen into
the lonely farm-house to deal judgment on him with my knife; while I
saw him die the death of a deserter at my feet, and knew that it was a
Roman who had lured him from his people, and blinded him to the
righteousness of revenge.

'I swore to be avenged! while I walked round the grave of the chieftain
who was the last of my race; while I stood alone out of the army of my
people in the city of the slayers of my babes; while I  tracked the
footsteps of the Roman who had twice escaped me, as she fled through
the street; while I watched and was patient among the pillars of the
temple, and waited till the sun went down, and the victim was
unshielded for the moment to strike.


'I swore to be avenged! and my oath has been fulfilled--the knife that
still bleeds drops with her blood; the chief vengeance has been
wreaked! The rest that were to be slain remain for others, and not for
me!  For now I go to my husband and my children; now the hour is near
at hand when I shall herd with their spirits in the Twilight World of
Shadows, and make my long-abiding place with them in the Valley of
Eternal Repose!  The Destinies have willed it--it is enough!'

Her voice trembled and grew faint as she pronounced the last words.
The anguish of the fastenings at her wrists was at last overpowering
her senses--conquering, in spite of all resistance, her stubborn
endurance. For a little while yet she spoke at intervals, but her
speech was fragmentary and incoherent.  At one moment she still gloried
in her revenge, at another she exulted in the fancied contemplation of
the girl's body still lying before her, and her hands writhed beneath
their bonds in the effort to repossess themselves of the knife and
strike again.  But soon all sounds ceased to proceed from her lips,
save the loud, thick, irregular breathings, which showed that she was
yet conscious and yet lived.

Meanwhile the madman had passed into the inner recess of the temple,
and had drawn the shutter over the opening in the wall, through which
light had been admitted into the place when Numerian and Antonina first
entered it.  Even the black chasm formed by the mouth of the vault of
the dragon now disappeared, with all other objects, in the thick
darkness.  But no obscurity could confuse the senses of Ulpius in the
temple, whose every corner he visited in his restless wanderings by
night and by day alike.  Led as if by a mysterious penetration of
sight, he traced his way unerringly to the entrance of the vault, knelt
down before it, and placing his hands on the first of the steps by
which it was descended, listened, breathless and attentive, to the
sounds that rose from the abyss--listened, rapt and unmoving, a
formidable and unearthly figure--like a magician waiting for a voice
from the oracles of Hell--like a spirit of Night looking down into the
mid-caverns of the earth, and watching the mysteries of subterranean
creation, the giant pulses of Action and Heat, which are the
life-springs of the rolling world.

The fitful wind whistled up, wild and plaintive; the river chafed and
bubbled through the iron grating below; the loose scales of the dragon
clashed as the night breezes reached them:  and these sounds were still
to him as the language of his gods, which filled him with a fearful
rapture, and inspired him, in the terrible degradation of his being, as
with a new soul.  He listened and listened yet. Fragments of wild
fancies--the vain yearnings of the disinherited mind to recover its
divine birthright of boundless thought--now thrilled through him, and
held him still and speechless where he knelt.

But at length, through the gloomy silence of the recess, he heard the
voice of Goisvintha raised once more, and in hoarse, wild tones calling
aloud for light and help.  The agony of pain and suspense, the awful
sense of darkness and stillness, of solitary bondage and slow torment,
had at last effected that which no open peril, no common menace of
violent death could have produced.  She yielded to fear and
despair--sank prostrate under a paralysing, superstitious dread.  The
misery that she had inflicted on others recoiled in retribution on
herself, as she now shuddered under the consciousness of the first
emotions of helpless terror that she had ever felt.

Ulpius instantly rose from the vault, and advanced straight through the
darkness to the gates of the partition; but he passed his prisoner
without stopping for an instant, and hastening into the outer apartment
of the temple, began to grope over the floor for the knife which the
woman had dropped when he bound her.  He was laughing to himself once
more, for the evil spirit was prompting him to a new project, tempting
him to a pitiless refinement of cruelty and deceit.

He found the knife, and returning with it to Goisvintha, cut the rope
that confined her wrists.  Then she became silent when the first
sharpness of her suffering was assuaged; he whispered softly in her
ear, 'Follow me, and escape!'


Bewildered and daunted by the darkness and mystery around her, she
vainly strained her eyes to look through the obscurity as Ulpius drew
her on into the recess.  He placed her at the mouth of the vault, and
here she strove to speak; but low, inarticulate sounds alone proceeded
from her powerless utterance.  Still there was no light; still the
burning, gnawing agony at her wrists (relieved but for an instant when
the rope was cut) continued and increased; and still she felt the
presence of the unseen being at her side, whom no darkness could blind,
and who bound and loosed at his arbitrary will.

By nature fierce, resolute, and vindictive under injury, she was a
terrible evidence of the debasing power of crime, as she now stood,
enfeebled by the weight of her own avenging guilt, upraised to crush
her in the hour of her pride; by the agency of Darkness, whose perils
the innocent and the weak have been known to brave; by Suspense, whose
agony they have resisted; by Pain, whose infliction they have endured
in patience.

'Go down, far down the steep steps, and escape!' whispered the madman,
in soft, beguiling tones. 'The darkness above leads to the light below!
Go down, far down!'

He quitted his hold of her as he spoke.  She hesitated, shuddered, and
drew back; but again she was urged forward, and again she heard the
whisper, 'The darkness above leads to the light below!  Go down, far
down!'

Despair gave the firmness to proceed, and dread the hope to escape.
Her wounded arms trembled as she now stretched them out and felt for
the walls of the vault on either side of her.  The horror of death in
utter darkness, from unseen hands, and the last longing aspiration to
behold the light of heaven once more, were at their strongest within
her as she began slowly and cautiously to tread the fatal stairs.

While she descended, the Pagan dropped into his former attitude at the
month of the vault, and listened breathlessly.  Minutes seemed to
elapse between each step as she went lower and lower down.  Suddenly he
heard her pause, as if panic-stricken in the darkness, and her voice
ascended to him, groaning, 'Light! light! oh, where is the light!'  He
rose up, and stretched out his hands to hurl her back if she should
attempt to return; but she descended again.  Twice he heard her heavy
footfall on the steps--then there was an interval of deep silence--then
a sharp, grinding clash of metal echoed piercingly through the vault,
followed by the noise of a dull, heavy fall, faintly audible far
beneath--and then the old familiar sounds of the place were heard
again, and were not interrupted more.  The sacrifice to the Dragon was
achieved!

      *      *      *      *      *

The madman stood on the steps of the sacred building, and looked out on
the street shining before him in the bright Italian moonlight.  No
remembrance of Numerian and Antonina, and of the earlier events in the
temple, remained within him.  He was pondering imperfectly, in vague
pride and triumph, over the sacrifice that he had offered up at the
shrine of the Dragon of brass.  Thus secretly exulting, he now remained
inactive.  Absorbed in his wandering meditations, he delayed to trace
the subterranean passages leading to the iron grating where the corpse
of Goisvintha lay washed by the waters, as they struggled onward
through the bars, and waiting but his hand to be cast into the river,
where all past sacrifices had been engulphed before it.

His tall solitary figure was lit by the moonlight streaming through the
pillars of the portico; his loose robes waved slowly about him in the
wind, as he stood firm and erect before the door of the temple: he
looked more like the spectral genius of departed Paganism than a living
man.  But, lifeless though he seemed, his quick eye was still on the
watch, still directed by the restless suspicion of insanity. Minute
after minute quietly elapsed, and as yet nothing was presented to his
rapid observation but the desolate roadway, and the high, gloomy houses
that bounded it on either side.  It was soon, however, destined to be
attracted by objects which startled the repose of the tranquil street
with the tumult of action and life.


He was still gazing earnestly on the narrow view before him, vaguely
imagining to himself, the while, Goisvintha's fatal descent into the
vault, and thinking triumphantly of her dead body that now lay on the
grating beneath it, when a red glare of torchlight, thrown wildly on
the moon-brightened pavement, whose purity it seemed to stain, caught
his eye.

The light appeared at the end of the street leading from the more
central portion of the city, and ere long displayed clearly a body of
forty or fifty people advancing towards the temple.  The Pagan looked
eagerly on them as they came nearer and nearer.  The assembly was
composed of priests, soldiers, and citizens--the priests bearing
torches, the soldiers carrying hammers, crowbars, and other similar
tools, or bending under the weight of large chests secured with iron
fastenings, close to which the populace walked, as if guarding them
with jealous care.  This strange procession was preceded by two men,
who were considerably in advance of it--a priest and soldier.  An
expression of impatience and exultation appeared on their pale,
famine-wasted countenances, as they approached the temple with rapid
steps.

Ulpius never moved from his position, but fixed his piercing eyes on
them as they advanced.  Not vainly did he now stand, watchful and
menacing, before the entrance of his gloomy shrine.  He had seen the
first degradations heaped on fallen Paganism, and he was now to see the
last.  He had immolated all his affections and all his hopes, all his
faculties of body and mind, his happiness in boyhood, his enthusiasm in
youth, his courage in manhood, his reason in old age, at the altar of
his gods; and now they were to exact from him, in their defence, lonely
criminal, maddened, as he already was in their cause, more than all
this!  The decree had gone forth from the Senate which devoted to
legalised pillage the treasures in the temples of Rome.

Rulers of a people impoverished by former exactions, and comptrollers
only of an exhausted treasury, the government of the city had searched
vainly among all ordinary resources for the means of paying the heavy
ransom exacted by Alaric as the price of peace.  The one chance of
meeting the emergency that remained was to strip the Pagan temples of
the mass of jewelled ornaments and utensils, the costly robes, the
idols of gold and silver which they were known to contain, and which,
under that mysterious hereditary influence of superstition, whose power
it is the longest labour of truth to destroy, had remained untouched
and respected, alike by the people and the senate, after the worship
that they represented had been interdicted by the laws, and abandoned
by the nation.

This last expedient for freeing Rome from the blockade was adopted
almost as soon as imagined.  The impatience of the starved populace for
the immediate collection of the ransom allowed the government little
time for the tedious preliminaries of deliberation.  The soldiers were
provided at once with the necessary implements for the task imposed on
them; certain chosen members of the senate and the people followed
them, to see that they honestly gathered in the public spoil; and the
priests of the Christian churches volunteered to hallow the expedition
by their presence, and led the way with their torches into every secret
apartment of the temples where treasure might be contained. At the
close of the day, immediately after it had been authorised, this
strange search for the ransom was hurriedly commenced.  Already much
had been collected; votive offerings of price had been snatched from
the altars, where they had so long hung undisturbed; hidden
treasure-chests of sacred utensils had been discovered and broken open;
idols had been stripped of their precious ornaments and torn from their
massive pedestals; and now the procession of gold-seekers, proceeding
along the banks of the Tiber, had come in sight of the little temple of
Serapis, and were hastening forward to empty it, in its turn, of every
valuable that it contained.

The priest and the soldier, calling to their companions behind to hurry
on, had now arrived opposite the temple steps, and saw confronting them
in the pale moonlight, from the eminence on which he stood, the weird
and solitary figure of Ulpius--the apparition of a Pagan in the
gorgeous robes of his priesthood, bidden back from the tombs to stay
the hand of the spoiler before the shrine of his gods.

The soldier dropped his weapon to the ground, and, trembling in every
limb, refused to proceed. But the priest, a tall, stern, emaciated man,
went on defenceless and undaunted.  He signed himself solemnly with the
cross as he slowly ascended the steps; fixed his unflinching eyes on
the madman, who glared back on him in return; and called aloud in a
harsh, steady voice:  'Man or demon! in the name of Christ, whom thou
deniest, stand back!'

For an instant, as the priest approached him, the Pagan averted his
eyes and looked on the concourse of people and the armed soldiers
rapidly advancing.  His fingers closed round the hilt of Goisvintha's
knife, which he had hitherto held loosely in his hand, as he exclaimed
in low, concentrated tones, 'Aha! the siege--the siege of Serapis!'
The priest, now standing on the same step with him, stretched out his
arm to thrust him back, and at that moment received the stroke of the
knife.  He staggered, lifted his hand again to sign his forehead with
the cross, and, as he raised it, rolled back dead on the pavement of
the street.

The soldier, standing motionless with superstitious terror a few feet
from the corpse, called to his companions for help.  Hurling his bloody
weapon at them in defiance, as they ran in confusion to the base of the
temple steps, Ulpius entered the building, and locked and chained the
gates.

Then the assembled people thronging round the corpse of the priest,
heard the madman shouting in his frenzy, as if to a great body of
adherents round him, to pour down the molten lead and the scorching
sand; to hurl back every scaling ladder planted against the walls; to
massacre each prisoner who was seized mounting the ramparts to the
assault; and as they looked up to the building from the street, they
saw at intervals, through the bars of the closed gates, the figure of
Ulpius passing swift and shadowy, his arms extended, his long grey hair
and white robes streaming behind him, as he rushed round and round the
temple reiterating his wild Pagan war-cries as he went.  The enfeebled,
superstitious populace trembled while they gazed--a spectre driven on a
whirlwind would not have been more terrible to their eyes.

But the priest among the crowd, roused to fury by the murder of one of
their own body, revived the courage of those around them.  Even the
shouts of Ulpius were now overpowered by the sound of their voices,
raised to the highest pitch, promising heavenly and earthly
rewards--salvation, money, absolution, promotion--to all who would
follow them up the steps and burst their way into the temple.  Animated
by the words of the priests, and growing gradually confident in their
own numbers, the boldest in the throng seized a piece of timber lying
by the river side, and using it as a battering-ram, assailed the gate.
But they were weakened with famine; they could gain little impetus,
from the necessity of ascending the temple steps to the attack; the
iron quivered as they struck it, but hinge and lock remained firm
alike.  They were preparing to renew the attempt, when a tremendous
shock--a crash as if the whole heavy roof of the building had fallen
in--drove them back in terror to the street.

Recalled by the sight of the armed men, the priests and the attendant
crowd of people who were advancing to invade his sanctuary, to the days
when he had defended the great Temple of Serapis at Alexandria, against
enemies similar in appearance, though far superior in numbers;
persuaded in the revival of these, the most sanguinary visions of his
insanity, that he was still resisting the Christian fanatics, supported
by his adherents in his sacred fortress of former years, the Pagan
displayed none of his accustomed cunning and care in moving through the
darkness around him.  He hurried hither and thither, encouraging his
imaginary followers, and glorying in his dreams of slaughter and
success, forgetful in his frenzy of all that the temple contained.


As he pursued his wild course round and round the altar of idols, his
robe became entangled, and was torn by the projecting substances at one
corner of it.  The whole overhanging mass tottered at the moment, but
did not yet fall.  A few of the smaller idols, however, at the outside
dropped to the ground, and with them an image of Serapis, which they
happened partially to support--a heavy monstrous figure, carved
life-size in wood, and studded with gold, silver, and precious
stones--fell at the Pagan's feet.  But this was all--the outer
materials of the perilous structure had been detached only at one
point; the pile itself still remained in its place.

The madman seized the image of Serapis in his arms, and passed blindly
onward with it through the passage in the partition into the recess
beyond.  At that instant the shock of the first attack on the gates
resounded through the building.  Shouting, as he heard it, 'A sally! a
sally! men of the Temple, the gods and the high priest lead you on!'
and still holding the idol before him, he rushed straight forward to
the entrance, and struck in violent collision against the backward part
of the pile.

The ill-balanced, top-heavy mass of images and furniture of many
temples swayed, parted, and fell over against the gates and the wall on
either side of them.  Maimed and bleeding, struck down by the lower
part of the pile, as it was forced back against the partition when the
upper part fell, the fury of Ulpius was but increased by the crashing
ruin around him.  He struggled up again into an erect position; mounted
on the top of the fallen mass--now spread out at the sides over the
floor of the building, but confined at one end by the partition, and at
the other by the opposite wall and the gates--and still clasping the
image of Serapis in his arms, called louder and louder to 'the men of
the Temple' to mount with him the highest ramparts and pour down on the
besiegers the molten lead!

The priests were again the first men to approach the gates of the
building after the shock that had been heard within it.  The struggle
for the possession of the temple had assumed to them the character of a
holy warfare against heathenism and magic--a sacred conflict to be
sustained by the Church, for the sake of her servant who had fallen a
martyr at the outset of the strife.  Strong in their fanatical
boldness, they advanced with one accord close to the gates.  Some of
the smaller images of the fallen pile had been forced through the bars,
behind which appeared the great idols, the broken masses of furniture,
the long robes and costly hangings, all locked together in every wild
variety of position--a chaos of distorted objects heaped up by an
earthquake! Above and further inward, the lower part of the Pagan's
robe was faintly discernible through the upper interstices in the gate,
as he stood, commanding, on the summit of his prostrate altar, with his
idol in his arms.

The priests felt an instant conviction of certain triumph when they
discerned the cause of the shock that had been heard within the temple.
One of their number snatched up a small image that had fallen through
to the pavement where he stood, and holding it before the people below,
exclaimed exultingly--

'Children of the Church! the mystery is revealed!  Idols more precious
than this lie by hundreds on the floor of the temple!  It is no demon,
but a man, one man, who still defies us within!--a robber who would
defraud the Romans of the ransom of their lives!--the pillage of many
temples is around him.  Remember now, that the nearer we came to this
place the fewer were the spoils of idolatry that we gathered in; the
treasure which is yours, the treasure which is to free you from the
famine, has been seized by the assassin of our holy brother; it is
there scattered at his feet!  To the gates!  To the gates again!
Absolution for all their sins to the men who burst in the gates!'

Again the mass of timber was taken up; again the gates were assailed;
and again they stood firm--they were now strengthened, barricaded by
the fallen pile.  It seemed hopeless to attempt to break them down
without a reinforcement of men, without employing against them the
heaviest missiles, the strongest engines of war.


The people gave vent to a cry of fury as they heard from the temple the
hollow laughter of the madman triumphing in their defeat.  The words of
the priest, in allaying their superstitious fears, had aroused the
deadly passions that superstition brings forth.  A few among the throng
hurried to the nearest guard-house for assistance, but the greater part
pressed closely round the temple--some pouring forth impotent
execrations against the robber of the public spoil, some joining the
priests in calling on him to yield.  But the clamour lasted not long;
it was suddenly and strangely stilled by the voice of one man in the
crowd, calling loudly to the rest to fire the temple!

The words were hardly spoken ere they were repeated triumphantly on all
sides.  'Fire the temple!' cried the people ferociously.  'Burn it over
the robber's head!  A furnace--a furnace! to melt down the gold and
silver ready to our hands!  Fire the temple!  Fire the temple!'

Those who were most active among the crowd (which was now greatly
increased by stragglers from all parts of the city) entered the houses
behind them, and returned in a few minutes with every inflammable
substance that they could collect in their hands.  A heap of fuel, two
or three feet in height, was raised against the gates immediately, and
soldiers and people pressed forward with torches to light it.  But the
priest who had before spoken waved them back.  'Wait!' he cried; 'the
fate of his body is with the people, but the fate of his soul is with
the Church!'

Then, turning to the temple, he called solemnly and sternly to the
madman, 'Thy hour is come!  repent, confess, and save thy soul!'

'Slay on! slay on!' answered the raving voice from within.  'Slay, till
not a Christian is left!  Victory! Serapis!  See, they drop from our
walls!--they writhe bleeding on the earth beneath us!  There is no
worship but the worship of the gods!  Slay!  Slay on!'

'Light!' cried the priest.  'His damnation be on his own head!
Anathema!  Maranatha!  Let him die accursed!'

The dry fuel was fired at once at all points--it was an anticipation of
an 'Auto da Fe', a burning of a heretic, in the fifth century!  As the
flames rose, the people fell back and watched their rapid progress.
The priests, standing before them in a line, stretched out their hands
in denunciation against the temple, and repeated together the awful
excommunication service of the Roman Church.

      *      *      *      *      *

The fire at the gates had communicated with the idols inside.  It was
no longer on his prostrate altar, but on his funeral pile that Ulpius
now stood; and the image that he clasped was the stake to which he was
bound.  A red glare, dull at first, was now brightening and brightening
below him; flames, quick and noiseless, rose and fell, and rose again,
at different points, illuminating the interior of the temple with
fitful and changing light.  The grim, swarthy forms of the idols seemed
to sway and writhe like living things in torment, as fire and smoke
alternately displayed and concealed them.  A deadly stillness now
overspread the face and form of the Pagan, as he looked down
steadfastly on the deities of his worship engendering his destruction
beneath him.  His cheek--the cheek which had rested in boyhood on his
mother's bosom--was pressed against the gilded breast of the god
Serapis, his taskmaster in life--his pillow in death!

'I rise!  I rise to the world of light, with my deities whom I have
served!' he murmured; 'the brightness of their presence is like a
flaming fire; the smoke of their breath pours forth around me like the
smoke of incense!  I minister in the Temples of the Clouds; and the
glory of eternal sunlight shines round me while I adore!  I rise!  I
rise!'

The smoke whirled in black volumes over his head; the fierce voice of
the fast-spreading fire roared on him; the flames leapt up at his
feet--his robes kindled, burst into radiant light, as the pile yawned
and opened under him.

      *      *      *      *      *


Time had passed.  The strife between the Temple and the Church was
ended.  The priests and the people had formed a wider circle round the
devoted building; all that was inflammable in it had been burnt; smoke
and flame now burst only at intervals through the gates, and gradually
both ceased to appear.  Then the crowd approached nearer to the temple,
and felt the heat of the furnace they had kindled, as they looked in.

The iron gates were red hot--from the great mass behind (still glowing
bright in some places, and heaving and quivering with its own heat) a
thin, transparent vapour rose slowly to the stone roof of the building,
now blackened with smoke.  The priests looked eagerly for the corpse of
the Pagan;  they saw two dark, charred objects closely united together,
lying in a chasm of ashes near the gate, at a spot where the fire had
already exhausted itself, but it was impossible to discern which was
the man and which was the idol.

The necessity of providing means for entering the temple had not been
forgotten while the flames were raging.  Proper implements for forcing
open the gates were now at hand, and already the mob began to dip their
buckets in the Tiber, and pour water wherever any traces of the fire
remained. Soon all obstacles were removed; the soldiers crowded into
the building with spades in their hands, trampled on the black, watery
mire of cinders which covered what had once been the altar of idols,
and throwing out into the street the refuse ashes and the stone images
which had remained unconsumed, dug in what was left, as in a new mine,
for the gold and silver which the fire could not destroy.

The Pagan had lived with his idols, had perished with his idols!--and
now where they were cast away, there he was cast away with them.  The
soldiers, as they dug into fragments the black ruins of his altar,
mingled him in fragments with it!  The people, as they cast the refuse
thrown out to them into the river, cast what remained of him with what
remained of his gods!  And when the temple was deserted, when the
citizens had borne off all the treasure they could collect, when
nothing but a few heaps of dust was left of all that had been burnt,
the night-wind blew away before it the ashes of Ulpius with the ashes
of the deities that Ulpius had served!



CHAPTER 27.

THE VIGIL OF HOPE.

A new prospect now opens before us.  The rough paths through which we
have hitherto threaded our way grow smoother as we approach their
close. Rome, so long dark and gloomy to our view, brightens at length
like a landscape when the rain is past and the first rays of returning
sunlight stream through the parting clouds.  Some days have elapsed,
and in those days the temples have yielded all their wealth; the
conquered Romans have bribed the triumphant barbarians to mercy; the
ransom of the fallen city has been paid.

The Gothic army is still encamped round the walls, but the gates are
opened, markets for food are established in the suburbs, boats appear
on the river and waggons on the highroads, laden with provisions, and
proceeding towards Rome.  All the hidden treasure kept back by the
citizens is now bartered for food; the merchants who hold the market
reap a rich harvest of spoil, but the hungry are filled, the weak are
revived, every one is content.

It is the end of the second day since the free sale of provisions and
the liberty of egress from the city have been permitted by the Goths.
The gates are closed for the night, and the people are quietly
returning, laden with their supplies of food, to their homes.  Their
eyes no longer encounter the terrible traces of the march of pestilence
and famine through every street; the corpses have been removed, and the
sick are watched and sheltered.  Rome is cleansed from her pollutions,
and the virtues of household life begin to revive wherever they once
existed.  Death has thinned every family, but the survivors again
assemble together in the social hall.  Even the veriest criminals, the
lowest outcasts of the population, are united harmlessly for a while in
the general participation of the first benefits of peace.


To follow the citizens to their homes; to trace in their thoughts,
words, and action the effect on them of their deliverance from the
horrors of the blockade; to contemplate in the people of a whole city,
now recovering as it were from a deep swoon, the varying forms of the
first reviving symptoms in all classes, in good and bad, rich and
poor--would afford matter enough in itself for a romance of searching
human interest, for a drama of the passions, moving absorbingly through
strange, intricate, and contrasted scenes.  But another employment than
this now claims our care.  It is to an individual, and not to a divided
source of interest, that our attention turns; we relinquish all
observations on the general mass of the populace to revert to Numerian
and Antonina alone--to penetrate once more into the little dwelling on
the Pincian Hill.

The apartment where the father and daughter had suffered the pangs of
famine together during the period of the blockade, presented an
appearance far different from that which it had displayed on the
occasion when they had last occupied it.  The formerly bare walls were
now covered with rich, thick hangings; and the simple couch and scanty
table of other days had been exchanged for whatever was most luxurious
and complete in the household furniture of the age.  At one end of the
room three women, attended by a little girl, were engaged in preparing
some dishes of fruit and vegetables; at the other, two men were
occupied in low, earnest conversation, occasionally looking round
anxiously to a couch placed against the third side of the apartment, on
which Antonina lay extended, while Numerian watched by her in silence.
The point of Goisvintha's knife had struck deep, but, as yet, the fatal
purpose of the assassination had failed.

The girl's eyes were closed; her lips were parted in the languor of
suffering; one of her hands lay listless on her father's knee.  A
slight expression of pain, melancholy in its very slightness, appeared
on her pale face, and occasionally a long-drawn, quivering breath
escaped her--nature's last touching utterance of its own feebleness!
The old man, as he sat by her side, fixed on her a wistful, inquiring
glance.  Sometimes he raised his hand, and gently and mechanically
moved to and fro the long locks of her hair, as they spread over the
head of the couch; but he never turned to communicate with the other
persons in the room--he sat as if he saw nothing save his daughter's
figure stretched before him, and heard nothing save the faint,
fluttering sound of her breathing, close at his ear.

It was now dark, and one lamp hanging from the ceiling threw a soft
equal light over the room.  The different persons occupying it
presented but little evidence of health and strength in their
countenances, to contrast them in appearance with the wounded girl; all
had undergone the wasting visitation of the famine, and all were pale
and languid, like her.  A strange, indescribable harmony prevailed over
the scene.  Even the calmness of absorbing expectation and trembling
hope, expressed in the demeanour of Numerian, seemed reflected in the
actions of those around him, in the quietness with which the women
pursued their employment, in the lower and lower whispers in which the
men continued their conversation.  There was something pervading the
air of the whole apartment that conveyed a sense of the solemn,
unworldly stillness which we attach to the abstract idea of religion.

Of the two men cautiously talking together, one was the patrician,
Vetranio; the other, a celebrated physician of Rome.

Both the countenance and manner of the senator gave melancholy proof
that the orgie at his palace had altered him for the rest of his life.
He looked what he was, a man changed for ever in constitution and
character.  A fixed expression of anxiety and gloom appeared in his
eyes; his emaciated face was occasionally distorted by a nervous,
involuntary contraction of the muscles; it was evident that the
paralysing effect of the debauch which had destroyed his companions
would remain with him to the end of his existence.  No remnant of his
careless self-possession, his easy, patrician affability, appeared in
his manner, as he now listened to his companion's conversation; years
seemed to have been added to his life since he had headed the table at
'The Banquet of Famine'.


'Yes,' said the physician, a cold, calm man, who spoke much, but
pronounced all his words with emphatic deliberation,--'Yes, as I have
already told you, the wound in itself was not mortal.  If the blade of
the knife had entered near the centre of the neck, she must have died
when she was struck. But it passed outwards and backwards; the large
vessels escaped, and no vital part has been touched.'

'And yet you persist in declaring that you doubt her recovery!'
exclaimed Vetranio, in low, mournful tones.

'I do,' pursued the physician.  'She must have been exhausted in mind
and body when she received the blow--I have watched her carefully; I
know it!  There is nothing of the natural health and strength of youth
to oppose the effects of the wound.  I have seen the old die from
injuries that the young recover, because life in them was losing its
powers of resistance; she is in the position of the old!'

'They have died before me, and she will die before me!  I shall lose
all--all!' sighed Vetranio bitterly to himself.

'The resources of our art are exhausted,' continued the other; 'nothing
remains but to watch carefully and wait patiently.  The chances of life
or death will be decided in a few hours; they are equally balanced now.'

'I shall lose all!--all!' repeated the senator mournfully, as if he
heeded not the last words.

'If she dies,' said the physician, speaking in warmer tones, for he was
struck with pity, in spite of himself, at the spectacle of Vetranio's
utter dejection, 'if she dies, you can at least remember that all that
could be done to secure her life has been done by you.  Her father,
helpless in his lethargy and his age, was fitted only to sit and watch
her, as he has sat and watched her day after day; but you have spared
nothing, forgotten nothing.  Whatever I have asked for, that you have
provided; the hangings round the room, and the couch that she lies on,
are yours; the first fresh supplies of nourishment from the
newly-opened markets were brought here from you; I told you that she
was thinking incessantly of what she had suffered, that it was
necessary to preserve her against her own recollections, that the
presence of women about her might do good, that a child appearing
sometimes in the room might soothe her fancy, might make her look at
what was passing, instead of thinking of what had passed--you found
them, and sent them!  I have seen parents less anxious for their
children, lovers for their mistresses, than you for this girl.'

'My destiny is with her,' interrupted Vetranio, looking round
superstitiously to the frail form on the couch.  'I know nothing of the
mysteries that the Christians call their "Faith", but I believe now in
the soul; I believe that one soul contains the fate of another, and
that her soul contains the fate of mine!'

The physician shook his head derisively.  His calling had determined
his philosophy--he was as ardent a materialist as Epicurus himself.

'Listen,' said Vetranio; 'since I first saw her, a change came over my
whole being; it was as if her life was mingled with mine!  I had no
influence over her, save an influence for ill:  I loved her, and she
was driven defenceless from her home!  I sent my slaves to search Rome
night and day; I exerted all my power, I lavished my wealth to discover
her; and, for the first time in this one effort, I failed in what I had
undertaken.  I felt that through me she was lost--dead!  Days passed
on; life weighed weary on me; the famine came.  You know in what way I
determined that my career should close; the rumour of the Banquet of
Famine reached you as it reached others!'

'It did,' replied the physician.  'And I see before me in your face,'
he added, after a momentary pause, 'the havoc which that ill-omened
banquet has worked.  My friend, be advised!--abandon for ever the
turmoil of your Roman palace, and breathe in tranquillity the air of a
country home.  The strength you once had is gone never to return--if
you would yet live, husband what is still left.'


'Hear me,' pursued Vetranio, in low, gloomy tones.  'I stood alone in
my doomed palace; the friends whom I had tempted to their destruction
lay lifeless around me; the torch was in my hand that was to light our
funeral pile, to set us free from the loathsome world!  I approached
triumphantly to kindle the annihilating flames, when she stood before
me--she, whom I had sought as lost and mourned as dead!  A strong hand
seemed to wrench the torch from me; it dropped to the ground!  She
departed again; but I was powerless to take it up; her look was still
before me; her face, her figure, she herself, appeared ever watching
between the torch and me!'

'Lower!--speak lower!' interrupted the physician, looking on the
senator's agitated features with unconcealed astonishment and pity.
'You retard your own recovery,--you disturb the girl's repose by
discourse such as this.'

'The officers of the senate,' continued Vetranio, sadly resuming his
gentler tones, 'when they entered the palace, found me still standing
on the place where we had met!  Days passed on again; I stood looking
out upon the street, and thought of my companions whom I had lured to
their death, and of my oath to partake their fate, which I had never
fulfilled.  I would have driven my dagger to my heart; but her face was
yet before me, my hands were bound!  In that hour I saw her for the
second time; saw her carried past me--wounded, assassinated!  She had
saved me once; she had saved me twice! I knew that now the chance was
offered me, after having wrought her ill, to work her good; after
failing to discover her when she was lost, to succeed in saving her
when she was dying; after having survived the deaths of my friends at
my own table, to survive to see life restored under my influence, as
well as destroyed!  These were my thoughts; these are my thoughts
still--thoughts felt only since I saw her!  Do you know now why I
believe that her soul contains the fate of mine?  Do you see me,
weakened, shattered, old before my time; my friends lost, my fresh
feelings of youth gone for ever; and can you not now comprehend that
her life is my life?--that if she dies, the one good purpose of my
existence is blighted?--that I lose all I have henceforth to live
for?--all, all!'

As he pronounced the concluding words, the girl's eyes half unclosed,
and turned languidly towards her father.  She made an effort to lift
her hand caressingly from his knee to his neck; but her strength was
unequal even to this slight action.  The hand was raised only a few
inches ere it sank back again to its old position; a tear rolled slowly
over her cheek as she closed her eyes again, but she never spoke.

'See,' said the physician, pointing to her, 'the current of life is at
its lowest ebb!  If it flows again, it must flow to-night.'

Vetranio made no answer; he dropped down on the seat near him, and
covered his face with his robe.

The physician, beholding the senator's situation, and reflecting on the
strange hurriedly-uttered confession which had just been addressed to
him, began to doubt whether the scenes through which his patron had
lately passed had not affected his brain.  Philosopher though he was,
the man of science had never observed the outward symptoms of the first
working of good and pure influences in elevating a degraded mind; he
had never watched the denoting signs of speech and action which mark
the progress of mental revolution while the old nature is changing for
the new; such objects of contemplation existed not for him.  He gently
touched Vetranio on the shoulder. 'Rise,' said he, 'and let us depart.
Those are around her who can watch her best.  Nothing remains for us
but to wait and hope.  With the earliest morning we will return.'

He delivered a few farewell directions to one of the women in
attendance, and then, accompanied by the senator, who, without speaking
again, mechanically rose to follow him, quitted the room.  After this,
the silence was only interrupted by the sound of an occasional whisper,
and of quick, light footsteps passing backwards and forwards.  Then the
cooling, reviving draughts which had been prepared for the night were
poured ready into the cups; and the women approached Numerian, as if to
address him, but he waved his hand impatiently when he saw them; and
then they too, in their turn, departed, to wait in an adjoining
apartment until they should be summoned again.


Nothing changed in the manner of the father when he was left alone in
the chamber of sickness, which the lapse of a few hours might convert
into the chamber of death.  He sat watching Antonina, and touching the
outspread locks of her hair from time to time, as had been his wont.
It was a fair, starry night; the fresh air of the soft winter climate
of the South blew gently over the earth, the great city was sinking
fast into tranquillity, calling voices were sometimes heard faintly
from the principal streets, and the distant noises of martial music
sounded cheerily from the Gothic camp as the sentinels were posted
along the line of watch; but soon these noises ceased, and the
stillness of Rome was as the stillness round the couch of the wounded
girl.

Day after day, and night after night, since the assassination in the
temple, Numerian had kept the same place by his daughter's side.  Each
hour as it passed found him still absorbed in his long vigil of hope;
his life seemed suspended in its onward course by the one influence
that now enthralled it.  At the brief intervals when his bodily
weariness overpowered him on his melancholy watch, it was observed by
those around him that, even in his short dreaming clumbers, his face
remained ever turned in the same direction, towards the head of the
couch, as if drawn thither by some irresistible attraction, by some
powerful ascendancy, felt even amid the deepest repose of sensation,
the heaviest fatigue of the overlaboured mind, and worn, sinking heart.
He held no communication, save by signs, with the friends about him; he
seemed neither to hope, to doubt, nor to despair with them; all his
faculties were strung up to vibrate at one point only, and were dull
and unimpressible in every other direction.

But twice had he been heard to speak more than the fewest, simplest
words.  The first time, when Antonina uttered the name of Goisvintha,
on the recovery of her senses after her wound, he answered eagerly by
reiterated declarations that there was nothing henceforth to fear; for
he had seen the assassin dead under the Pagan's foot on leaving the
temple.  The second time, when mention was incautiously made before him
of rumours circulated through Rome of the burning of an unknown Pagan
priest, hidden in the temple of Serapis, with vast treasures around
him, the old man was seen to start and shudder, and heard to pray for
the soul that was now waiting before the dread judgment-seat; to murmur
about a vain restoration and a discovery made too late; to mourn over
horror that thickened round him, over hope fruitlessly awakened, and
bereavement more terrible than mortal had ever suffered before; to
entreat that the child, the last left of all, might be spared--with
many words more, which ran on themes like these, and which were counted
by all who listened to them but as the wanderings of a mind whose
higher powers were fatally prostrated by feebleness and grief.

One long hour of the night had already passed away since parent and
child had been left together, and neither word nor movement had been
audible in the melancholy room.  But, as the second hour began, the
girl's eyes unclosed again, and she moved painfully on the couch.
Accustomed to interpret the significance of her slightest actions,
Numerian rose and brought her one of the reviving draughts that had
been left ready for use.  After she had drunk, when her eyes met her
father's fixed on her in mute and mournful inquiry, her lips closed,
and formed themselves into an expression which he remembered they had
always assumed when, as a little child, she used silently to hold up
her face to him to be kissed.  The miserable contrast between what she
was now and what she had been them, was beyond the passive endurance,
the patient resignation of the spirit-broken old man; the empty cup
dropped from his hands, he knelt down by the side of the couch and
groaned aloud.

'O father! father!' cried the weak, plaintive voice above him.  'I am
dying!  Let us remember that our time to be together here grows shorter
and shorter, and let us pass it as happily as we can!'

He raised his head, and looked up at her, vacant and wistful, forlorn
already, as if the death-parting was over.


'I have tried to live humbly and gratefully,' she sighed faintly.  'I
have longed to do more good on the earth than I have done!  Yet you
will forgive me now, father, as you have always forgiven me!  You have
been patient with me all my life; more patient than I have ever
deserved! But I had no mother to teach me to love you as I ought, to
teach me what I know now, when my death is near, and time and
opportunity are mine no longer!'

'Hush! hush!' whispered the old man affrightedly; 'you will live!  God
is good, and knows that we have suffered enough.  The curse of the last
separation is not pronounced against us!  Live, live!'

'Father,' said the girl tenderly, 'we have that within us which not
death itself can separate.  In another world I shall still think of you
when you think of me!  I shall see you even when I am no more here,
when you long to see me!  When you go out alone, and sit under the
trees on the garden bank where I used to sit; when you look forth on
the far plains and mountains that I used to look on;  when you read at
night in the Bible that we have read in together, and remember Antonina
as you lie down sorrowful to rest; then I shall see you! then you will
feel that I am looking on you!  You will be calm and consoled, even by
the side of my grave; for you will think, not of the body that is
beneath, but of the spirit that is waiting for you, as I have often
waited for you here when you were away, and I knew that the approach of
the evening would bring you home again!'

'Hush! you will live!--you will live!' repeated Numerian in the same
low, vacant tones.  The strength that still upheld him was in those few
simple words; they were the food of a hope that was born in agony and
cradled in despair.

'Oh, if I might live!' said the girl softly, 'if I might live but for a
few days yet, how much I have to live for!'  She endeavoured to bend
her head towards her father as she spoke; for the words were beginning
to fall faintly and more faintly from her lips--exhaustion was
mastering her once again.  She dwelt for a moment now on the name of
Hermanric, on the grave in the farm-house garden; then reverted again
to her father. The last feeble sounds she uttered were addressed to
him; and their burden was still of consolation and of love.

Soon the old man, as he stooped over her, saw her eyes close
again--those innocent, gentle eyes which even yet preserved their old
expression while the face grew wan and pale around them--and darkness
and night sank down over his soul while he looked.  'She sleeps,' he
murmured in a voice of awe, as he resumed his watching position by the
side of the couch.  'They call death a sleep; but on her face there is
no death!'

The night grew on.  The women who were in attendance entered the room
about midnight, wondering that their assistance had not yet been
required.  They beheld the solemn, unruffled composure on the girl's
wasted face; the rapt attention of Numerian, as he ever preserved the
same attitude by her side; and went out again softly without uttering a
word, even in a whisper.  There was something dread and impressive in
the very appearance of this room, where Death, that destroys, was in
mortal conflict with Youth and Beauty, that adorn, while the eyes of
one old man watched in loneliness the awful progress of the strife.

Morning came, and still there was no change.  Once, when the lamp that
lit the room was fading out as the dawn appeared, Numerian had risen
and looked close on his daughter's face--he thought at that moment that
her features moved; but he saw that the flickering of the dying light
on them had deceived him; the same stillness was over her.  He placed
his ear close to her lips for an instant, and then resumed his place,
not stirring from it again.  The slow current of his blood seemed to
have come to a pause--he was waiting as a man waits with his head on
the block ere the axe descends--as a mother waits to hear that the
breath of life has entered her new-born child.


The sun rose bright in a cloudless sky.  As the fresh, sharp air of the
early dawn warmed under its spreading rays, the women entered the
apartment again, and partly drew aside the curtain and shutter from the
window.  The beams of the new light fell fair and glorifying on the
girl's face; the faint, calm breezed ruffled the lighter locks of her
hair.  Once this would have awakened her; but it did not disturb her
now.

Soon after the voice of the child who sojourned with the women in the
house was heard beneath, in the hall, through the half-opened door of
the room.  The little creature was slowly ascending the stairs, singing
her faltering morning song to herself.  She was preceded on her
approach by a tame dove, bought at the provision market outside the
walls, but preserved for the child as a pet and plaything by its
mother.  The bird fluttered, cooing, into the room, perched upon the
head of the couch, and began dressing its feathers there.  The women
had caught the infection of the old man's enthralling suspense; and
moved not to bid the child retire, or to take away the dove from its
place--they watched like him.  But the soft, lulling notes of the bird
were powerless over the girl's ear, as the light sunbeam over her
face--still she never woke.

The child entered, and pausing in her song, climbed on to the side of
the couch.  She held out one little hand for the dove to perch upon,
placed the other lightly on Antonina's shoulder, and pressed her fresh,
rosy lips to girl's faded cheek.  'I and my bird have come to make
Antonina well this morning,' she said gravely.

The still, heavily-closed eyelids moved!--they quivered, opened,
closed, then opened again.  The eyes had a faint, dreaming, unconscious
look; but Antonina lived!  Antonina was awakened at last to another day
on earth!

Her father's rigid, straining gaze still remained fixed upon her as at
first, but on his countenance there was a blank, an absence of all
appearance of sensation and life.  The women, as they looked on
Antonina and looked on him, began to weep; the child resumed very
softly its morning song, now addressing it to the wounded girl and now
to the dove.

At this moment Vetranio and the physician appeared on the scene.  The
latter advanced to the couch, removed the child from it, and examined
Antonina intently.  At length, partly addressing Numerian, partly
speaking to himself, he said:  'She has slept long, deeply, without
moving, almost without breathing--a sleep like death to all who looked
on it.'

The old man spoke not in reply, but the women answered eagerly in the
affirmative.

'She is saved,' pursued the physician, leisurely quitting the side of
the couch and smiling on Vetranio; 'be careful of her for days and days
to come.'

'Saved! saved!' echoed the child joyfully, setting the dove free in the
room, and running to Numerian to climb on his knees.  The father
glanced down when the clear young voice sounded in his ear.  The
springs of joy, so long dried up in his heart, welled forth again as he
saw the little hands raised towards him entreatingly; his grey head
drooped--he wept.

At a sign from the physician the child was led from the room.  The
silence of deep and solemn emotion was preserved by all who remained;
nothing was heard but the suppressed sobs of the old man, and the
faint, retiring notes of the infant voice still singing its morning
song.  And now one word, joyfully reiterated again and again, made all
the burden of the music--

'SAVED!  SAVED!'


THE CONCLUSION.  'UBI THESAURUS IBI COR.'


Shortly after the opening of the provision markets outside the gates of
Rome, the Goths broke up their camp before the city and retired to
winter quarters in Tuscany.  The negotiations which ensued between
Alaric and the Court and Government at Ravenna, were conducted with
cunning moderation by the conqueror, and with infatuated audacity by
the conquered, and ultimately terminated in a resumption of
hostilities. Rome was besieged a second and a third time by 'the
barbarians'.  On the latter occasion the city was sacked, its palaces
were burnt, its treasures were seized; the monuments of the Christian
religion were alone respected.

But it is no longer with the Goths that our narrative is concerned; the
connection with them which it has hitherto maintained closes with the
end of the first siege of Rome.  We can claim the reader's attention
for historical events no more--the march of our little pageant, arrayed
for his pleasure, is over.  If, however, he has felt, and still
retains, some interest in Antonina, he will not refuse to follow us,
and look on her again ere we part.

More than a month had passed since the besieging army had retired to
their winter quarters, when several of the citizens of Rome assembled
themselves on the plains beyond the walls, to enjoy one of those rustic
festivals of ancient times, which are still celebrated, under different
usages, but with the same spirit, by the Italians of modern days.

The place was a level plot of ground beyond the Pincian Gate, backed by
a thick grove of pine trees, and looking towards the north over the
smooth extent of the country round Rome.  The persons congregated were
mostly of the lower class.  Their amusements were dancing, music, games
of strength and games of chance; and, above all, to people who had
lately suffered the extremities of famine, abundant eating and
drinking--long, serious, ecstatic enjoyment of the powers of
mastication and the faculties of taste.

Among the assembly were some individuals whose dress and manner raised
them, outwardly at least, above the general mass.  These persons walked
backwards and forwards together on different parts of the ground as
observers, not as partakers in the sports.  One of their number,
however, in whatever direction he turned, preserved an isolated
position.  He held an open letter in his hand, which he looked at from
time to time, and appeared to be wholly absorbed in his own thoughts.
This man we may advantageously particularise on his own account, as
well as on account of the peculiarity of his accidental situation; for
he was the favoured minister of Vetranio's former pleasures--'the
industrious Carrio'.

The freedman (who was last introduced to the reader in Chapter XIV., as
exhibiting to Vetranio the store of offal which he had collected during
the famine for the consumption of the palace) had contrived of late
greatly to increase his master's confidence in him.  On the
organisation of the Banquet of Famine, he had discreetly refrained from
testifying the smallest desire to save himself from the catastrophe in
which the senator and his friends had determined to involve themselves.
Securing himself in a place of safety, he awaited the end of the orgie;
and when he found that its unexpected termination left his master still
living to employ him, appeared again as a faithful servant, ready to
resume his customary occupation with undiminished zeal.

After the dispersion of his household during the famine, and amid the
general confusion of the social system in Rome, on the raising of the
blockade, Vetranio found no one near him that he could trust but
Carrio--and he trusted him.  Nor was the confidence misplaced:  the man
was selfish and sordid enough; but these very qualities ensured his
fidelity to his master as long as that master retained the power to
punish and the capacity to reward.


The letter which Carrio held in his hand was addressed to him at a
villa--from which he had just returned--belonging to Vetranio, on the
shores of the Bay of Naples, and was written by the senator from Rome.
The introductory portions of this communication seemed to interest the
freedman but little:  they contained praises of his diligence in
preparing the country-house for the immediate habitation of its owner,
and expressed his master's anxiety to quit Rome as speedily as
possible, for the sake of living in perfect tranquillity, and breathing
the reviving air of the sea, as the physicians had counselled.  It was
the latter part of the letter that Carrio perused and re-perused, and
then meditated over with unwonted attention and labour of mind.  It ran
thus:--

'I have now to repose in you a trust, which you will execute with
perfect fidelity as you value my favour or respect the wealth from
which you may obtain your reward.  When you left Rome you left the
daughter of Numerian lying in danger of death:  she has since revived.
Questions that I have addressed to her during her recovery have
informed me of much in her history that I knew not before; and have
induced me to purchase, for reasons of my own, a farm-house and its
lands, beyond the suburbs.  (The extent of the place and its situation
are written on the vellum that is within this.) The husbandman who
cultivated the property had survived the famine, and will continue to
cultivate it for me.  But it is my desire that the garden, and all that
it contains, shall remain entirely at the disposal of Numerian and his
daughter, who may often repair to it; and who must henceforth be
regarded there as occupying my place and having my authority.  You will
divide your time between overlooking the few slaves whom I leave at the
palace in my absence, and the husbandman and his labourers whom I have
installed at the farm; and you will answer to me for the due
performance of your own duties and the duties of those under you--being
assured that by well filling this office you will serve your own
interests in these, and in all things besides.'

The letter concluded by directing the freedman to return to Rome on a
certain day, and to go to the farm-house at an appointed hour, there to
meet his master, who had further directions to give him, and who would
visit the newly acquired property before he proceeded on his journey to
Naples.

Nothing could exceed the perplexity of Carrio as he read the passage in
his patron's letter which we have quoted above.  Remembering the
incidents attending Vetranio's early connection with Antonina and her
father, the mere circumstances of a farm having been purchased to
flatter what was doubtless some accidental caprice on the part of the
girl, would have little perplexed him.  But that this act should be
followed by the senator's immediate separation of himself from the
society of Numerian's daughter; that she was to gain nothing after all
from these lands which had evidently been bought at her instigation,
but the authority over a little strip of garden; and yet, the
inviolability of this valueless privilege should be insisted on in such
serious terms, and with such an imperative tone of command as the
senator had never been known to use before--these were inconsistencies
which all Carrio's ingenuity failed to reconcile.  The man had been
born and reared in vice; vice had fed him, clothed him, freed him,
given him character, reputation, power in his own small way--he lived
in it as in the atmosphere that he breathed; to show him an action,
referable only to a principle of pure integrity, was to set him a
problem which it was hopeless to solve.  And yet it is impossible, in
one point of view, to pronounce him utterly worthless.  Ignorant of all
distinctions between good and bad, he thought wrong from sheer
inability to see right.

However his instructions might perplex him, he followed them now--and
continued in after days to follow them--to the letter.  If to serve
one's own interests be an art, of that art Carrio deserved to be head
professor.  He arrived at the farm-house, not only punctually, but
before the appointed time, and calling the honest husbandman and the
labourers about him, explained to them every particular of the
authority that his patron had vested in him, with a flowing and
peremptory solemnity of speech which equally puzzled and impressed his
simple audience.  He found Numerian and Antonina in the garden when he
entered it.  The girl had been carried there daily in a litter since
her recovery, and her father had followed.  They were never separated
now; the old man, when his first absorbing anxiety for her was calmed,
remembered again more distinctly the terrible disclosure in the temple,
and the yet more terrible catastrophe that followed it, and he sought
constant refuge from the horror of the recollection in the presence of
his child.


The freedman, during his interview with the father and daughter,
observed, for once, an involuntary and unfeigned respect; but he spoke
briefly, and left them together again almost immediately.  Humble and
helpless as they were, they awed him; they looked, thought, and spoke
like beings of another nature than his; they were connected, he knew
not how, with the mystery of the grave in the garden.  He would have
been self-possessed in the presence of the Emperor himself, but he was
uneasy in theirs.  So he retired to the more congenial scene of the
public festival which was in the immediate neighbourhood of the
farm-house, to await the hour of his patron's arrival, and to perplex
himself afresh by a re-perusal of Vetranio's letter.

The time was now near at hand when it was necessary for the freedman to
return to his appointed post.  He carefully rolled up his note of
instructions, stood for a few minutes vacantly regarding the amusements
which had hitherto engaged so little of his attention, and then,
turning, he proceeded through the pine-grove on his way back.  We will
follow him.

On leaving the grove, a footpath conducted over some fields to the
farm-house.  Arrived here, Carrio hesitated for a moment; then moved
slowly onward to await his master's approach in the lane that led to
the highroad.  At this point we will part company with him, to enter
the garden by the wicket-gate.

The trees, the flower-beds, and the patches of grass, all remained in
their former positions--nothing had been added or taken away since the
melancholy days that were past; but a change was visible in Hermanric's
grave.  The turf above it had been renewed, and a border of small
evergreen shrubs was planted over the track which Goisvintha's
footsteps had traced.  A white marble cross was raised at one end of
the mound; the short Latin inscription on it signified--'PRAY FOR THE
DEAD'.

The sunlight was shining calmly over the grave, and over Numerian and
Antonina as they sat by it. Sometimes when the mirth grew louder at the
rustic festival, it reached them in faint, subdued notes; sometimes
they heard the voices of the labourers in the neighbouring fields
talking to each other at their work; but, besides these, no other
sounds were loud enough to be distinguished.  There was still an
expression of the melancholy and feebleness that grief and suffering
leave behind them on the countenances of the father and daughter; but
resignation and peace appeared there as well--resignation that was
perfected by the hard teaching of woe, and peace that was purer for
being imparted from the one to the other, like the strong and deathless
love from which it grew.

There was something now in the look and attitude of the girl, as she
sat thinking of the young warrior who had died in her defence and for
her love, and training the shrubs to grow closer round the grave,
which, changed though she was, recalled in a different form the old
poetry and tranquillity of her existence when we first saw her singing
to the music of her lute in the garden on the Pincian Hill. No thoughts
of horror and despair were suggested to her as she now looked on the
farm-house scene. Hers was not the grief which shrinks selfishly from
all that revives the remembrance of the dead:  to her, their influence
over the memory was a grateful and a guardian influence that gave a
better purpose to the holiest life, and a nobler nature to the purest
thoughts.

Thus they were sitting by the grave, sad yet content; footsore already
on the pilgrimage of life, yet patient to journey farther if they
might--when an unusual tumult, a noise of rolling wheels, mingled with
a confused sound of voices, was heard in the lane behind them.  They
looked round, and saw that Vetranio was approaching them alone through
the wicket-gate.

He came forward slowly; the stealthy poison instilled by the Banquet of
Famine palpably displayed its presence within him as the clear sunlight
fell on his pale, wasted face.  He smiled kindly as he addressed
Antonina; but the bodily pain and mental agitation which that smile was
intended to conceal, betrayed themselves in his troubled voice as he
spoke.


'This is our last meeting for years--it may be our last meeting for
life,' he said; 'I linger at the outset of my journey, but to behold
you as guardian of the one spot of ground that is most precious to you
on earth--as mistress, indeed, of the little that I give you here!'  He
paused a moment and pointed to the grave, then continued:  'All the
atonement that I owe to you, you can never know--I can never
tell!--think only that I bear away with me a companion in the solitude
to which I go in the remembrance of you.  Be calm, good, happy still,
for my sake, and while you forgive the senator of former days, forget
not the friend who now parts from you in some sickness and sorrow, but
also in much patience and hope!  Farewell!'

His hand trembled as he held it out; a flush overspread the girl's
cheek while she murmured a few inarticulate words of gratitude, and,
bending over it, pressed it to her lips.  Vetranio's heart beat quick;
the action revived an emotion that he dared not cherish; but he looked
at the wan, downcast face before him, at the grave that rose mournful
by his side, and quelled it again.  Yet an instant he lingered to
exchange a farewell with the old man, then turned quickly, passed
through the gate, and they saw him no more.

Antonina's tears fell fast on the grass beneath as she resumed her
place.  When she raised her head again, and saw that her father was
looking at her, she nestled close to him and laid one of her arms round
his neck:  the other gradually dropped to her side, until her hand
reached the topmost leaves of the shrubs that grew round the grave.

      *      *      *      *      *

Shall we longer delay in the farm-house garden?  No!  For us, as for
Vetranio, it is now time to depart! While peace still watches round the
walls of Rome; while the hearts of the father and daughter still repose
together in security, after the trials that have wrung them, let us
quit the scene!  Here, at last, the narrative that we have followed
over a dark and stormy track reposes on a tranquil field; and here let
us cease to pursue it!

So the traveller who traces the course of a river wanders through the
day among the rocks and precipices that lead onward from its troubled
source; and, when the evening is at hand, pauses and rests where the
banks are grassy and the stream is smooth.





A ROGUE'S LIFE.




CHAPTER I.

I AM going to try if I can't write something about myself. My life
has been rather a strange one. It may not seem particularly useful or
respectable; but it has been, in some respects, adventurous; and that
may give it claims to be read, even in the most prejudiced circles. I
am an example of some of the workings of the social system of this
illustrious country on the individual native, during the early part of
the present century; and, if I may say so without unbecoming vanity, I
should like to quote myself for the edification of my countrymen.

Who am I.

I am remarkably well connected, I can tell you. I came into this world
with the great advantage of having Lady Malkinshaw for a grandmother,
her ladyship's daughter for a mother, and Francis James Softly, Esq., M.
D. (commonly called Doctor Softly), for a father. I put my father last,
because he was not so well connected as my mother, and my grandmother
first, because she was the most nobly-born person of the three. I have
been, am still, and may continue to be, a Rogue; but I hope I am not
abandoned enough yet to forget the respect that is due to rank. On this
account, I trust, nobody will show such want of regard for my feelings
as to expect me to say much about my mother's brother. That inhuman
person committed an outrage on his family by making a fortune in the
soap and candle trade. I apologize for mentioning him, even in an
accidental way. The fact is, he left my sister, Annabella, a legacy of
rather a peculiar kind, saddled with certain conditions which indirectly
affected me; but this passage of family history need not be produced
just yet. I apologize a second time for alluding to money matters before
it was absolutely necessary. Let me get back to a pleasing and reputable
subject, by saying a word or two more about my father.

I am rather afraid that Doctor Softly was not a clever medical man; for
in spite of his great connections, he did not get a very magnificent
practice as a physician.

As a general practitioner, he might have bought a comfortable business,
with a house and snug surgery-shop attached; but the son-in-law of Lady
Malkinshaw was obliged to hold up his head, and set up his carriage, and
live in a street near a fashionable square, and keep an expensive
and clumsy footman to answer the door, instead of a cheap and tidy
housemaid. How he managed to "maintain his position" (that is the right
phrase, I think), I never could tell. His wife did not bring him a
farthing. When the honorable and gallant baronet, her father, died, he
left the widowed Lady Malkinshaw with her worldly affairs in a curiously
involved state. Her son (of whom I feel truly ashamed to be obliged to
speak again so soon) made an effort to extricate his mother--involved
himself in a series of pecuniary disasters, which commercial people
call, I believe, transactions--struggled for a little while to get out
of them in the character of an independent gentleman--failed--and then
spiritlessly availed himself of the oleaginous refuge of the soap and
candle trade. His mother always looked down upon him after this; but
borrowed money of him also--in order to show, I suppose, that her
maternal interest in her son was not quite extinct. My father tried
to follow her example--in his wife's interests, of course; but the
soap-boiler brutally buttoned up his pockets, and told my father to go
into business for himself. Thus it happened that we were certainly a
poor family, in spite of the fine appearance we made, the fashionable
street we lived in, the neat brougham we kept, and the clumsy and
expensive footman who answered our door.

What was to be done with me in the way of education?

If my father had consulted his means, I should have been sent to a
cheap commercial academy; but he had to consult his relationship to Lady
Malkinshaw; so I was sent to one of the most fashionable and famous of
the great public schools. I will not mention it by name, because I don't
think the masters would be proud of my connection with it. I ran away
three times, and was flogged three times. I made four aristocratic
connections, and had four pitched battles with them: three thrashed me,
and one I thrashed. I learned to play at cricket, to hate rich people,
to cure warts, to write Latin verses, to swim, to recite speeches, to
cook kidneys on toast, to draw caricatures of the masters, to construe
Greek plays, to black boots, and to receive kicks and serious advice
resignedly. Who will say that the fashionable public school was of no
use to me after that?

After I left school, I had the narrowest escape possible of intruding
myself into another place of accommodation for distinguished people; in
other words, I was very nearly being sent to college. Fortunately for
me, my father lost a lawsuit just in the nick of time, and was obliged
to scrape together every farthing of available money that he possessed
to pay for the luxury of going to law. If he could have saved his seven
shillings, he would certainly have sent me to scramble for a place in
the pit of the great university theater; but his purse was empty, and
his son was not eligible therefore for admission, in a gentlemanly
capacity, at the doors.

The next thing was to choose a profession.

Here the Doctor was liberality itself, in leaving me to my own devices.
I was of a roving adventurous temperament, and I should have liked to
go into the army. But where was the money to come from, to pay for my
commission? As to enlisting in the ranks, and working my way up,
the social institutions of my country obliged the grandson of Lady
Malkinshaw to begin military life as an officer and gentleman, or not
to begin it at all. The army, therefore, was out of the question. The
Church? Equally out of the question: since I could not pay for admission
to the prepared place of accommodation for distinguished people, and
could not accept a charitable free pass, in consequence of my high
connections. The Bar? I should be five years getting to it, and should
have to spend two hundred a year in going circuit before I had earned a
farthing. Physic? This really seemed the only gentlemanly refuge left;
and yet, with the knowledge of my father's experience before me, I was
ungrateful enough to feel a secret dislike for it. It is a degrading
confession to make; but I remember wishing I was not so highly
connected, and absolutely thinking that the life of a commercial
traveler would have suited me exactly, if I had not been a poor
gentleman. Driving about from place to place, living jovially at inns,
seeing fresh faces constantly, and getting money by all this enjoyment,
instead of spending it--what a life for me, if I had been the son of a
haberdasher and the grandson of a groom's widow!

While my father was uncertain what to do with me, a new profession was
suggested by a friend, which I shall repent not having been allowed
to adopt, to the last day of my life. This friend was an eccentric old
gentleman of large property, much respected in our family. One day,
my father, in my presence, asked his advice about the best manner of
starting me in life, with due credit to my connections and sufficient
advantage to myself.

"Listen to my experience," said our eccentric friend, "and, if you are
a wise man, you will make up your mind as soon as you have heard me. I
have three sons. I brought my eldest son up to the Church; he is said to
be getting on admirably, and he costs me three hundred a year. I brought
my second son up to the Bar; he is said to be getting on admirably,
and he costs me four hundred a year. I brought my third son up to
_Quadrilles_--he has married an heiress, and he costs me nothing."

Ah, me! if that worthy sage's advice had only been followed--if I had
been brought up to Quadrilles!--if I had only been cast loose on the
ballrooms of London, to qualify under Hymen, for a golden degree! Oh!
you young ladies with money, I was five feet ten in my stockings; I was
great at small-talk and dancing; I had glossy whiskers, curling locks,
and a rich voice! Ye girls with golden guineas, ye nymphs with crisp
bank-notes, mourn over the husband you have lost among you--over the
Rogue who has broken the laws which, as the partner of a landed or
fund-holding woman, he might have helped to make on the benches of
the British Parliament! Oh! ye hearths and homes sung about in so
many songs--written about in so many books--shouted about in so many
speeches, with accompaniment of so much loud cheering: what a settler
on the hearth-rug; what a possessor of property; what a bringer-up of a
family, was snatched away from you, when the son of Dr. Softly was lost
to the profession of Quadrilles!

It ended in my resigning myself to the misfortune of being a doctor.

If I was a very good boy and took pains, and carefully mixed in the best
society, I might hope in the course of years to succeed to my father's
brougham, fashionably-situated house, and clumsy and expensive footman.
There was a prospect for a lad of spirit, with the blood of the early
Malkinshaws (who were Rogues of great capacity and distinction in the
feudal times) coursing adventurous through every vein! I look back on my
career, and when I remember the patience with which I accepted a medical
destiny, I appear to myself in the light of a hero. Nay, I even went
beyond the passive virtue of accepting my destiny--I actually studied, I
made the acquaintance of the skeleton, I was on friendly terms with the
muscular system, and the mysteries of Physiology dropped in on me in the
kindest manner whenever they had an evening to spare.

Even this was not the worst of it. I disliked the abstruse studies of my
new profession; but I absolutely hated the diurnal slavery of qualifying
myself, in a social point of view, for future success in it. My fond
medical parent insisted on introducing me to his whole connection. I
went round visiting in the neat brougham--with a stethoscope and medical
review in the front-pocket, with Doctor Softly by my side, keeping
his face well in view at the window--to canvass for patients, in the
character of my father's hopeful successor. Never have I been so ill at
ease in prison, as I was in that carriage. I have felt more at home
in the dock (such is the natural depravity and perversity of my
disposition) than ever I felt in the drawing-rooms of my father's
distinguished patrons and respectable friends. Nor did my miseries end
with the morning calls. I was commanded to attend all dinner-parties,
and to make myself agreeable at all balls. The dinners were the worst
trial. Sometimes, indeed, we contrived to get ourselves asked to the
houses of high and mighty entertainers, where we ate the finest French
dishes and drank the oldest vintages, and fortified ourselves sensibly
and snugly in that way against the frigidity of the company. Of these
repasts I have no hard words to say; it is of the dinners we gave
ourselves, and of the dinners which people in our rank of life gave to
us, that I now bitterly complain.

Have you ever observed the remarkable adherence to set forms of speech
which characterizes the talkers of arrant nonsense! Precisely the same
sheepish following of one given example distinguishes the ordering of
genteel dinners.

When we gave a dinner at home, we had gravy soup, turbot and
lobster-sauce, haunch of mutton, boiled fowls and tongue, lukewarm
oyster-patties and sticky curry for side-dishes; wild duck,
cabinet-pudding, jelly, cream and tartlets. All excellent things, except
when you have to eat them continually. We lived upon them entirely in
the season. Every one of our hospitable friends gave us a return dinner,
which was a perfect copy of ours--just as ours was a perfect copy of
theirs, last year. They boiled what we boiled, and we roasted what they
roasted. We none of us ever changed the succession of the courses--or
made more or less of them--or altered the position of the fowls opposite
the mistress and the haunch opposite the master. My stomach used to
quail within me, in those times, when the tureen was taken off and
the inevitable gravy-soup smell renewed its daily acquaintance with my
nostrils, and warned me of the persistent eatable formalities that were
certain to follow. I suppose that honest people, who have known what it
is to get no dinner (being a Rogue, I have myself never wanted for one),
have gone through some very acute suffering under that privation. It may
be some consolation to them to know that, next to absolute starvation,
the same company-dinner, every day, is one of the hardest trials that
assail human endurance. I date my first serious determination to throw
over the medical profession at the earliest convenient opportunity,
from the second season's series of dinners at which my aspirations, as a
rising physician, unavoidably and regularly condemned me to be present.




CHAPTER II.

THE opportunity I wanted presented itself in a curious way, and led,
unexpectedly enough, to some rather important consequences.

I have already stated, among the other branches of human attainment
which I acquired at the public school, that I learned to draw
caricatures of the masters who were so obliging as to educate me. I
had a natural faculty for this useful department of art. I improved it
greatly by practice in secret after I left school, and I ended by making
it a source of profit and pocket money to me when I entered the medical
profession. What was I to do? I could not expect for years to make a
halfpenny, as a physician. My genteel walk in life led me away from all
immediate sources of emolument, and my father could only afford to give
me an allowance which was too preposterously small to be mentioned. I
had helped myself surreptitiously to pocket-money at school, by selling
my caricatures, and I was obliged to repeat the process at home!

At the time of which I write, the Art of Caricature was just approaching
the close of its colored and most extravagant stage of development. The
subtlety and truth to Nature required for the pursuit of it now, had
hardly begun to be thought of then. Sheer farce and coarse burlesque,
with plenty of color for the money, still made up the sum of what the
public of those days wanted. I was first assured of my capacity for the
production of these requisites, by a medical friend of the ripe critical
age of nineteen. He knew a print-publisher, and enthusiastically showed
him a portfolio full of my sketches, taking care at my request not to
mention my name. Rather to my surprise (for I was too conceited to be
greatly amazed by the circumstance), the publisher picked out a few of
the best of my wares, and boldly bought them of me--of course, at his
own price. From that time I became, in an anonymous way, one of the
young buccaneers of British Caricature; cruising about here, there and
everywhere, at all my intervals of spare time, for any prize in the
shape of a subject which it was possible to pick up. Little did my
highly-connected mother think that, among the colored prints in the
shop-window, which disrespectfully illustrated the public and private
proceedings of distinguished individuals, certain specimens bearing
the classic signature of "Thersites Junior," were produced from designs
furnished by her studious and medical son. Little did my respectable
father imagine when, with great difficulty and vexation, he succeeded in
getting me now and then smuggled, along with himself, inside the pale
of fashionable society--that he was helping me to study likenesses which
were destined under my reckless treatment to make the public laugh at
some of his most august patrons, and to fill the pockets of his son with
professional fees, never once dreamed of in his philosophy.

For more than a year I managed, unsuspected, to keep the Privy Purse
fairly supplied by the exercise of my caricaturing abilities. But the
day of detection was to come.

Whether my medical friend's admiration of my satirical sketches led him
into talking about them in public with too little reserve; or whether
the servants at home found private means of watching me in my moments
of Art-study, I know not: but that some one betrayed me, and that
the discovery of my illicit manufacture of caricatures was actually
communicated even to the grandmotherly head and fount of the family
honor, is a most certain and lamentable matter of fact. One morning my
father received a letter from Lady Malkinshaw herself, informing him,
in a handwriting crooked with poignant grief, and blotted at every third
word by the violence of virtuous indignation, that "Thersites Junior"
was his own son, and that, in one of the last of the "ribald's"
caricatures her own venerable features were unmistakably represented as
belonging to the body of a large owl!

Of course, I laid my hand on my heart and indignantly denied everything.
Useless. My original model for the owl had got proofs of my guilt that
were not to be resisted.

The doctor, ordinarily the most mellifluous and self-possessed of
men, flew into a violent, roaring, cursing passion, on this
occasion--declared that I was imperiling the honor and standing of the
family--insisted on my never drawing another caricature, either for
public or private purposes, as long as I lived; and ordered me to go
forthwith and ask pardon of Lady Malkinshaw in the humblest terms that
it was possible to select. I answered dutifully that I was quite ready
to obey, on the condition that he should reimburse me by a trebled
allowance for what I should lose by giving up the Art of Caricature,
or that Lady Malkinshaw should confer on me the appointment of
physician-in-waiting on her, with a handsome salary attached. These
extremely moderate stipulations so increased my father's anger, that he
asserted, with an unmentionably vulgar oath, his resolution to turn me
out of doors if I did not do as he bid me, without daring to hint at
any conditions whatsoever. I bowed, and said that I would save him the
exertion of turning me out of doors, by going of my own accord. He shook
his fist at me; after which it obviously became my duty, as a member
of a gentlemanly and peaceful profession, to leave the room. The same
evening I left the house, and I have never once given the clumsy and
expensive footman the trouble of answering the door to me since that
time.

I have reason to believe that my exodus from home was, on the whole,
favorably viewed by my mother, as tending to remove any possibility of
my bad character and conduct interfering with my sister's advancement in
life.

By dint of angling with great dexterity and patience, under the
direction of both her parents, my handsome sister Annabella had
succeeded in catching an eligible husband, in the shape of a wizen,
miserly, mahogany-colored man, turned fifty, who had made a fortune in
the West Indies. His name was Batterbury; he had been dried up under
a tropical sun, so as to look as if he would keep for ages; he had two
subjects of conversation, the yellow-fever and the advantage of walking
exercise: and he was barbarian enough to take a violent dislike to me.
He had proved a very delicate fish to hook; and, even when Annabella
had caught him, my father and mother had great difficulty in landing
him--principally, they were good enough to say, in consequence of my
presence on the scene. Hence the decided advantage of my removal from
home. It is a very pleasant reflection to me, now, to remember how
disinterestedly I studied the good of my family in those early days.

Abandoned entirely to my own resources, I naturally returned to the
business of caricaturing with renewed ardor.

About this time Thersites Junior really began to make something like a
reputation, and to walk abroad habitually with a bank-note comfortably
lodged among the other papers in his pocketbook. For a year I lived a
gay and glorious life in some of the freest society in London; at the
end of that time, my tradesmen, without any provocation on my part, sent
in their bills. I found myself in the very absurd position of having no
money to pay them, and told them all so with the frankness which is one
of the best sides of my character. They received my advances toward
a better understanding with brutal incivility, and treated me soon
afterward with a want of confidence which I may forgive, but can never
forget. One day, a dirty stranger touched me on the shoulder, and showed
me a dirty slip of paper which I at first presumed to be his card.
Before I could tell him what a vulgar document it looked like, two more
dirty strangers put me into a hackney coach. Before I could prove to
them that this proceeding was a gross infringement on the liberties of
the British subject, I found myself lodged within the walls of a prison.

Well! and what of that? Who am I that I should object to being in
prison, when so many of the royal personages and illustrious characters
of history have been there before me? Can I not carry on my vocation
in greater comfort here than I could in my father's house? Have I any
anxieties outside these walls? No: for my beloved sister is married--the
family net has landed Mr. Batterbury at last. No: for I read in the
paper the other day, that Doctor Softly (doubtless through
the interest of Lady Malkinshaw) has been appointed the
King's-Barber-Surgeon's-Deputy-Consulting Physician. My relatives are
comfortable in their sphere--let me proceed forthwith to make myself
comfortable in mine. Pen, ink, and paper, if you please, Mr. Jailer: I
wish to write to my esteemed publisher.



"DEAR SIR--Please advertise a series of twelve Racy Prints, from my
fertile pencil, entitled, 'Scenes of Modern Prison Life,' by Thersites
Junior. The two first designs will be ready by the end of the week, to
be paid for on delivery, according to the terms settled between us for
my previous publications of the same size.

"With great regard and esteem, faithfully yours,

"FRANK SOFTLY."



Having thus provided for my support in prison, I was enabled to
introduce myself to my fellow-debtors, and to study character for the
new series of prints, on the very first day of my incarceration, with my
mind quite at ease.

If the reader desires to make acquaintance with the associates of
my captivity, I must refer him to "Scenes of Modern Prison Life," by
Thersites Junior, now doubtless extremely scarce, but producible to the
demands of patience and perseverance, I should imagine, if anybody will
be so obliging as to pass a week or so over the catalogue of the British
Museum. My fertile pencil has delineated the characters I met with,
at that period of my life, with a force and distinctness which my pen
cannot hope to rival--has portrayed them all more or less prominently,
with the one solitary exception of a prisoner called Gentleman Jones.
The reasons why I excluded him from my portrait-gallery are so honorable
to both of us, that I must ask permission briefly to record them.

My fellow-captives soon discovered that I was studying their personal
peculiarities for my own advantage and for the public amusement. Some
thought the thing a good joke; some objected to it, and quarreled with
me. Liberality in the matter of liquor and small loans, reconciled a
large proportion of the objectors to their fate; the sulky minority I
treated with contempt, and scourged avengingly with the smart lash of
caricature. I was at that time probably the most impudent man of my age
in all England, and the common flock of jail-birds quailed before the
magnificence of my assurance. One prisoner only set me and my pencil
successfully at defiance. That prisoner was Gentleman Jones.

He had received his name from the suavity of his countenance, the
inveterate politeness of his language, and the unassailable composure of
his manner. He was in the prime of life, but very bald--had been in the
army and the coal trade--wore very stiff collars and prodigiously long
wristbands--seldom laughed, but talked with remarkable glibness, and was
never known to lose his temper under the most aggravating circumstances
of prison existence.

He abstained from interfering with me and my studies, until it was
reported in our society, that in the sixth print of my series, Gentleman
Jones, highly caricatured, was to form one of the principal figures. He
then appealed to me personally and publicly, on the racket-ground, in
the following terms:

"Sir," said he, with his usual politeness and his unwavering smile, "you
will greatly oblige me by not caricaturing my personal peculiarities. I
am so unfortunate as not to possess a sense of humor; and if you did my
likeness, I am afraid I should not see the joke of it."

"Sir," I returned, with my customary impudence, "it is not of the
slightest importance whether _you_ see the joke of it or not. The public
will--and that is enough for me."

With that civil speech, I turned on my heel; and the prisoners near
all burst out laughing. Gentleman Jones, not in the least altered or
ruffled, smoothed down his wristbands, smiled, and walked away.

The same evening I was in my room alone, designing the new print, when
there came a knock at the door, and Gentleman Jones walked in. I got up,
and asked what the devil he wanted. He smiled, and turned up his long
wristbands.

"Only to give you a lesson in politeness," said Gentleman Jones.

"What do you mean, sir? How dare you--?"

The answer was a smart slap on the face. I instantly struck out in a
state of fury--was stopped with great neatness--and received in return a
blow on the head, which sent me down on the carpet half stunned, and too
giddy to know the difference between the floor and the ceiling.

"Sir," said Gentleman Jones, smoothing down his wristbands again, and
addressing me blandly as I lay on the floor, "I have the honor to inform
you that you have now received your first lesson in politeness. Always
be civil to those who are civil to you. The little matter of
the caricature we will settle on a future occasion. I wish you
good-evening."

The noise of my fall had been heard by the other occupants of rooms on
my landing. Most fortunately for my dignity, they did not come in to see
what was the matter until I had been able to get into my chair again.
When they entered, I felt that the impression of the slap was red on my
face still, but the mark of the blow was hidden by my hair. Under these
fortunate circumstances, I was able to keep up my character among my
friends, when they inquired about the scuffle, by informing them that
Gentleman Jones had audaciously slapped my face, and that I had been
obliged to retaliate by knocking him down. My word in the prison was as
good as his; and if my version of the story got fairly the start of his,
I had the better chance of the two of being believed.

I was rather anxious, the next day, to know what course my polite and
pugilistic instructor would take. To my utter amazement, he bowed to me
as civilly as usual when we met in the yard; he never denied my version
of the story; and when my friends laughed at him as a thrashed man, he
took not the slightest notice of their agreeable merriment. Antiquity,
I think, furnishes us with few more remarkable characters than Gentleman
Jones.

That evening I thought it desirable to invite a friend to pass the time
with me. As long as my liquor lasted he stopped; when it was gone, he
went away. I was just locking the door after him, when it was pushed
open gently, but very firmly, and Gentleman Jones walked in.

My pride, which had not allowed me to apply for protection to the prison
authorities, would not allow me now to call for help. I tried to get to
the fireplace and arm myself with the poker, but Gentleman Jones was
too quick for me. "I have come, sir, to give you a lesson in morality
to-night," he said; and up went his right hand.

I stopped the preliminary slap, but before I could hit him, his terrible
left fist reached my head again; and down I fell once more--upon the
hearth-rug this time--not over-heavily.

"Sir," said Gentleman Jones, making me a bow, "you have now received
your first lesson in morality. Always speak the truth; and never say
what is false of another man behind his back. To-morrow, with your
kind permission, we will finally settle the adjourned question of the
caricature. Good-night."

I was far too sensible a man to leave the settling of that question to
him. The first thing in the morning I sent a polite note to Gentleman
Jones, informing him that I had abandoned all idea of exhibiting his
likeness to the public in my series of prints, and giving him full
permission to inspect every design I made before it went out of the
prison. I received a most civil answer, thanking me for my courtesy, and
complimenting me on the extraordinary aptitude with which I profited by
the most incomplete and elementary instruction. I thought I deserved
the compliment, and I think so still. Our conduct, as I have already
intimated, was honorable to us, on either side. It was honorable
attention on the part of Gentleman Jones to correct me when I was in
error; it was honorable common sense in me to profit by the correction.
I have never seen this great man since he compounded with his creditors
and got out of prison; but my feelings toward him are still those of
profound gratitude and respect. He gave me the only useful teaching I
ever had; and if this should meet the eye of Gentleman Jones I hereby
thank him for beginning and ending my education in two evenings, without
costing me or my family a single farthing.




CHAPTER III.

To return to my business affairs. When I was comfortably settled in the
prison, and knew exactly what I owed, I thought it my duty to my father
to give him the first chance of getting me out. His answer to my letter
contained a quotation from Shakespeare on the subject of thankless
children, but no remittance of money. After that, my only course was
to employ a lawyer and be declared a bankrupt. I was most uncivilly
treated, and remanded two or three times. When everything I possessed
had been sold for the benefit of my creditors, I was reprimanded and let
out. It is pleasant to think that, even then, my faith in myself and in
human nature was still not shaken.

About ten days before my liberation, I was thunderstruck at receiving a
visit from my sister's mahogany-colored husband, Mr. Batterbury. When
I was respectably settled at home, this gentleman would not so much as
look at me without a frown; and now, when I was a scamp, in prison, he
mercifully and fraternally came to condole with me on my misfortunes.
A little dexterous questioning disclosed the secret of this prodigious
change in our relations toward each other, and informed me of a family
event which altered my position toward my sister in the most whimsical
manner.

While I was being removed to the bankruptcy court, my uncle in the soap
and candle trade was being removed to the other world. His will took
no notice of my father or my mother; but he left to my sister (always
supposed to be his favorite in the family) a most extraordinary legacy
of possible pin-money, in the shape of a contingent reversion to the
sum of three thousand pounds, payable on the death of Lady Malkinshaw,
provided I survived her.

Whether this document sprang into existence out of any of his involved
money transactions with his mother was more than Mr. Batterbury could
tell. I could ascertain nothing in relation to it, except that the
bequest was accompanied by some cynical remarks, to the effect that the
testator would feel happy if his legacy were instrumental in reviving
the dormant interest of only one member of Doctor Softly's family in the
fortunes of the hopeful young gentleman who had run away from home. My
esteemed uncle evidently felt that he could not in common decency avoid
doing something for his sister's family; and he had done it accordingly
in the most malicious and mischievous manner. This was characteristic of
him; he was just the man, if he had not possessed the document before,
to have had it drawn out on his death-bed for the amiable purpose which
it was now devoted to serve.

Here was a pretty complication! Here was my sister's handsome legacy
made dependent on my outliving my grandmother! This was diverting
enough; but Mr. Batterbury's conduct was more amusing still.

The miserly little wretch not only tried to conceal his greedy desire to
save his own pockets by securing the allowance of pin-money left to his
wife, but absolutely persisted in ignoring the plain fact that his visit
to me sprang from the serious pecuniary interest which he and Annabella
now had in the life and health of your humble servant. I made all
the necessary jokes about the strength of the vital principle in Lady
Malkinshaw, and the broken condition of my own constitution; but he
solemnly abstained from understanding one of them. He resolutely kept up
appearances in the very face of detection; not the faintest shade of red
came over his wicked old mahogany face as he told me how shocked he and
his wife were at my present position, and how anxious Annabella was that
he should not forget to give me her love. Tenderhearted creature! I
had only been in prison six months when that overwhelming testimony
of sisterly affection came to console me in my captivity. Ministering
angel! you shall get your three thousand pounds. I am fifty years
younger than Lady Malkinshaw, and I will take care of myself, Annabella,
for thy dear sake!

The next time I saw Mr. Batterbury was on the day when I at last got
my discharge. He was not waiting to see where I was going next, or what
vital risks I was likely to run on the recovery of my freedom, but
to congratulate me, and to give me Annabella's love. It was a very
gratifying attention, and I said as much, in tones of the deepest
feeling.

"How is dear Lady Malkinshaw?" I asked, when my grateful emotions had
subsided.

Mr. Batterbury shook his head mournfully. "I regret to say, not quite so
well as her friends could wish," he answered. "The last time I had the
pleasure of seeing her ladyship, she looked so yellow that if we had
been in Jamaica I should have said it was a case of death in twelve
hours. I respectfully endeavored to impress upon her ladyship the
necessity of keeping the functions of the liver active by daily walking
exercise; time, distance, and pace being regulated with proper regard to
her age--you understand me?--of course, with proper regard to her age."

"You could not possibly have given her better advice," I said. "When I
saw her, as long as two years ago, Lady Malkinshaw's favorite delusion
was that she was the most active woman of seventy-five in all England.
She used to tumble downstairs two or three times a week, then, because
she never would allow any one to help her; and could not be brought to
believe that she was as blind as a mole, and as rickety on her legs as a
child of a year old. Now you have encouraged her to take to walking, she
will be more obstinate than ever, and is sure to tumble down daily, out
of doors as well as in. Not even the celebrated Malkinshaw toughness can
last out more than a few weeks of that practice. Considering the present
shattered condition of my constitution, you couldn't have given her
better advice--upon my word of honor, you couldn't have given her better
advice!"

"I am afraid," said Mr. Batterbury, with a power of face I envied; "I
am afraid, my dear Frank (let me call you Frank), that I don't quite
apprehend your meaning: and we have unfortunately no time to enter into
explanations. Five miles here by a roundabout way is only half my daily
allowance of walking exercise; five miles back by a roundabout way
remain to be now accomplished. So glad to see you at liberty again!
Mind you let us know where you settle, and take care of yourself; and
do recognize the importance to the whole animal economy of daily walking
exercise--do now! Did I give you Annabella's love? She's so well.
Good-by."

Away went Mr. Batterbury to finish his walk for the sake of his health,
and away went I to visit my publisher for the sake of my pocket.

An unexpected disappointment awaited me. My "Scenes of Modern Prison
Life" had not sold so well as had been anticipated, and my publisher was
gruffly disinclined to speculate in any future works done in the same
style. During the time of my imprisonment, a new caricaturist had
started, with a manner of his own; he had already formed a new school,
and the fickle public were all running together after him and his
disciples. I said to myself: "This scene in the drama of your life, my
friend, has closed in; you must enter on another, or drop the curtain at
once." Of course I entered on another.

Taking leave of my publisher, I went to consult an artist-friend on my
future prospects. I supposed myself to be merely on my way to a change
of profession. As destiny ordered it, I was also on my way to the woman
who was not only to be the object of my first love, but the innocent
cause of the great disaster of my life.

I first saw her in one of the narrow streets leading from Leicester
Square to the Strand. There was something in her face (dimly visible
behind a thick veil) that instantly stopped me as I passed her. I looked
back and hesitated. Her figure was the perfection of modest grace. I
yielded to the impulse of the moment. In plain words, I did what you
would have done, in my place--I followed her.

She looked round--discovered me--and instantly quickened her pace.
Reaching the westward end of the Strand, she crossed the street and
suddenly entered a shop.

I looked through the window, and saw her speak to a respectable elderly
person behind the counter, who darted an indignant look at me, and at
once led my charming stranger into a back office. For the moment, I
was fool enough to feel puzzled; it was out of my character you will
say--but remember, all men are fools when they first fall in love. After
a little while I recovered the use of my senses. The shop was at the
corner of a side street, leading to the market, since removed to make
room for the railway. "There's a back entrance to the house!" I thought
to myself--and ran down the side street. Too late! the lovely fugitive
had escaped me. Had I lost her forever in the great world of London? I
thought so at the time. Events will show that I never was more mistaken
in my life.

I was in no humor to call on my friend. It was not until another day had
passed that I sufficiently recovered my composure to see poverty staring
me in the face, and to understand that I had really no alternative but
to ask the good-natured artist to lend me a helping hand.

I had heard it darkly whispered that he was something of a vagabond. But
the term is so loosely applied, and it seems so difficult, after all, to
define what a vagabond is, or to strike the right moral balance between
the vagabond work which is boldly published, and the vagabond work which
is reserved for private circulation only, that I did not feel justified
in holding aloof from my former friend. Accordingly, I renewed our
acquaintance, and told him my present difficulty. He was a sharp man,
and he showed me a way out of it directly.

"You have a good eye for a likeness," he said; "and you have made
it keep you hitherto. Very well. Make it keep you still. You can't
profitably caricature people's faces any longer--never mind! go to the
other extreme, and flatter them now. Turn portrait-painter. You shall
have the use of this study three days in the week, for ten shillings a
week--sleeping on the hearth-rug included, if you like. Get your
paints, rouse up your friends, set to work at once. Drawing is of
no consequence; painting is of no consequence; perspective is of
no consequence; ideas are of no consequence. Everything is of no
consequence, except catching a likeness and flattering your sitter--and
that you know you can do."

I felt that I could; and left him for the nearest colorman's.

Before I got to the shop, I met Mr. Batterbury taking his walking
exercise. He stopped, shook hands with me affectionately, and asked
where I was going. A wonderful idea struck me. Instead of answering his
question, I asked after Lady Malkinshaw.

"Don't be alarmed," said Mr. Batterbury; "her ladyship tumbled
downstairs yesterday morning."

"My dear sir, allow me to congratulate you!"

"Most fortunately," continued Mr. Batterbury, with a strong emphasis on
the words, and a fixed stare at me; "most fortunately, the servant had
been careless enough to leave a large bundle of clothes for the wash
at the foot of the stairs, while she went to answer the door. Falling
headlong from the landing, her ladyship pitched (pardon me the
expression)--pitched into the very middle of the bundle. She was a
little shaken at the time, but is reported to be going on charmingly
this morning. Most fortunate, was it not? Seen the papers? Awful news
from Demerara--the yellow fever--"

"I wish I was at Demerara," I said, in a hollow voice.

"You! Why?" exclaimed Mr. Batterbury, aghast.

"I am homeless, friendless, penniless," I went on, getting more hollow
at every word. "All my intellectual instincts tell me that I could
retrieve my position and live respectably in the world, if I might only
try my hand at portrait-painting--the thing of all others that I am
naturally fittest for. But I have nobody to start me; no sitter to give
me a first chance; nothing in my pocket but three-and-sixpence; and
nothing in my mind but a doubt whether I shall struggle on a little
longer, or end it immediately in the Thames. Don't let me detain you
from your walk, my dear sir. I'm afraid Lady Malkinshaw will outlive me,
after all!"

"Stop!" cried Mr. Batterbury; his mahogany face actually getting
white with alarm. "Stop! Don't talk in that dreadfully unprincipled
manner--don't, I implore, I insist! You have plenty of friends--you have
me, and your sister. Take to portrait-painting--think of your family,
and take to portrait-painting!"

"Where am I to get a sitter?' I inquired, with a gloomy shake of the
head.

"Me," said Mr. Batterbury, with an effort. "I'll be your first sitter.
As a beginner, and especially to a member of the family, I suppose your
terms will be moderate. Small beginnings--you know the proverb?" Here he
stopped; and a miserly leer puckered up his mahogany cheeks.

"I'll do you, life-size, down to your waistcoat, for fifty pounds," said
I.

Mr. Batterbury winced, and looked about him to the right and left, as if
he wanted to run away. He had five thousand a year, but he contrived to
took, at that moment, as if his utmost income was five hundred. I walked
on a few steps.

"Surely those terms are rather high to begin with?" he said, walking
after me. "I should have thought five-and-thirty, or perhaps forty--"

"A gentleman, sir, cannot condescend to bargain," said I, with mournful
dignity. "Farewell!" I waved my hand, and crossed over the way.

"Don't do that!" cried Mr. Batterbury. "I accept. Give me your address.
I'll come tomorrow. Will it include the frame! There! there! it doesn't
include the frame, of course. Where are you going now? To the colorman?
He doesn't live in the Strand, I hope--or near one of the bridges. Think
of Annabella, think of the family, think of the fifty pounds--an income,
a year's income to a prudent man. Pray, pray be careful, and compose
your mind: promise me, my dear, dear fellow--promise me, on your word of
honor, to compose your mind!"

I left him still harping on that string, and suffering, I believe, the
only serious attack of mental distress that had ever affected him in the
whole course of his life.



Behold me, then, now starting afresh in the world, in the character of
a portrait-painter; with the payment of my remuneration from my first
sitter depending whimsically on the life of my grandmother. If you care
to know how Lady Malkinshaw's health got on, and how I succeeded in
my new profession, you have only to follow the further course of these
confessions, in the next chapter.




CHAPTER IV.

I GAVE my orders to the colorman, and settled matters with my friend the
artist that day.

The next morning, before the hour at which I expected my sitter,
having just now as much interest in the life of Lady Malkinshaw as Mr.
Batterbury had in her death, I went to make kind inquiries after her
ladyship's health. The answer was most reassuring. Lady Malkinshaw had
no present intention of permitting me to survive her. She was, at that
very moment, meritoriously and heartily engaged in eating her breakfast.
My prospects being now of the best possible kind, I felt encouraged to
write once more to my father, telling him of my fresh start in life, and
proposing a renewal of our acquaintance. I regret to say that he was so
rude as not to answer my letter.

Mr. Batterbury was punctual to the moment. He gave a gasp of relief when
he beheld me, full of life, with my palette on my thumb, gazing fondly
on my new canvas.

"That's right!" he said. "I like to see you with your mind composed.
Annabella would have come with me; but she has a little headache this
morning. She sends her love and best wishes."

I seized my chalks and began with that confidence in myself which has
never forsaken me in any emergency. Being perfectly well aware of
the absolute dependence of the art of portrait-painting on the art
of flattery, I determined to start with making the mere outline of my
likeness a compliment to my sitter.

It was much easier to resolve on doing this than really to do it. In
the first place, my hand would relapse into its wicked old caricaturing
habits. In the second place, my brother-in-law's face was so
inveterately and completely ugly as to set every artifice of pictorial
improvement at flat defiance. When a man has a nose an inch long, with
the nostrils set perpendicularly, it is impossible to flatter it--you
must either change it into a fancy nose, or resignedly acquiesce in
it. When a man has no perceptible eyelids, and when his eyes globularly
project so far out of his head, that you expect to have to pick them up
for him whenever you see him lean forward, how are mortal fingers and
bushes to diffuse the right complimentary expression over them? You must
either do them the most hideous and complete justice, or give them up
altogether. The late Sir Thomas Lawrence, P.R.A., was undoubtedly the
most artful and uncompromising flatterer that ever smoothed out all the
natural characteristic blemishes from a sitter's face; but even that
accomplished parasite would have found Mr. Batterbury too much for him,
and would have been driven, for the first time in his practice of art,
to the uncustomary and uncourtly resource of absolutely painting a
genuine likeness.

As for me, I put my trust in Lady Malkinshaw's power of living, and
portrayed the face of Mr. Batterbury in all its native horror. At
the same time, I sensibly guarded against even the most improbable
accidents, by making him pay me the fifty pounds as we went on, by
installments. We had ten sittings. Each one of them began with a message
from Mr. Batterbury, giving me Annabella's love and apologies for not
being able to come and see me. Each one of them ended with an argument
between Mr. Batterbury and me relative to the transfer of five pounds
from his pocket to mine. I came off victorious on every occasion--being
backed by the noble behavior of Lady Malkinshaw, who abstained from
tumbling down, and who ate and drank, and slept and grew lusty, for
three weeks together. Venerable woman! She put fifty pounds into my
pocket. I shall think of her with gratitude and respect to the end of
my days.

One morning, while I was sitting before my completed portrait, inwardly
shuddering over the ugliness of it, a suffocating smell of musk was
wafted into the studio; it was followed by a sound of rustling
garments; and that again was succeeded by the personal appearance of my
affectionate sister, with her husband at her heels. Annabella had got to
the end of her stock of apologies, and had come to see me.

She put her handkerchief to her nose the moment she entered the room.

"How do you do, Frank? Don't kiss me: you smell of paint, and I can't
bear it."

I felt a similar antipathy to the smell of musk, and had not the
slightest intention of kissing her; but I was too gallant a man to
say so; and I only begged her to favor me by looking at her husband's
portrait.

Annabella glanced all round the room, with her handkerchief still at
her nose, and gathered her magnificent silk dress close about her superb
figure with her disengaged hand.

"What a horrid place!" she said faintly behind her handkerchief. "Can't
you take some of the paint away? I'm sure there's oil on the floor. How
am I to get past that nasty table with the palette on it? Why can't you
bring the picture down to the carriage, Frank?"

Advancing a few steps, and looking suspiciously about her while she
spoke, her eyes fell on the chimney-piece. An eau-de-Cologne bottle
stood upon it, which she took up immediately with a languishing sigh.

It contained turpentine for washing brushes in. Before I could warn her,
she had sprinkled herself absently with half the contents of the bottle.
In spite of all the musk that now filled the room, the turpentine
betrayed itself almost as soon as I cried "Stop!" Annabella, with
a shriek of disgust, flung the bottle furiously into the fireplace.
Fortunately it was summer-time, or I might have had to echo the shriek
with a cry of "Fire!"

"You wretch! you brute! you low, mischievous, swindling blackguard!"
cried my amiable sister, shaking her skirts with all her might, "you
have done this on purpose! Don't tell me! I know you have. What do
you mean by pestering me to come to this dog-kennel of a place?" she
continued, turning fiercely upon the partner of her existence and
legitimate receptacle of all her superfluous wrath. "What do you mean by
bringing me here, to see how you have been swindled? Yes, sir, swindled!
He has no more idea of painting than you have. He has cheated you out
of your money. If he was starving tomorrow he would be the last man in
England to make away with himself--he is too great a wretch--he is too
vicious--he is too lost to all sense of respectability--he is too much
of a discredit to his family. Take me away! Give me your arm directly!
I told you not to go near him from the first. This is what comes of your
horrid fondness for money. Suppose Lady Malkinshaw does outlive him;
suppose I do lose my legacy. What is three thousand pounds to you? My
dress is ruined. My shawl's spoiled. _He_ die! If the old woman lives
to the age of Methuselah, he won't die. Give me your arm. No! Go to my
father. I want medical advice. My nerves are torn to pieces. I'm giddy,
faint, sick--SICK, Mr. Batterbury!"

Here she became hysterical, and vanished, leaving a mixed odor of musk
and turpentine behind her, which preserved the memory of her visit for
nearly a week afterward.

"Another scene in the drama of my life seems likely to close in before
long," thought I. "No chance now of getting my amiable sister to
patronize struggling genius. Do I know of anybody else who will sit to
me? No, not a soul. Having thus no portraits of other people to paint,
what is it my duty, as a neglected artist, to do next? Clearly to take a
portrait of myself."

I did so, making my own likeness quite a pleasant relief to the ugliness
of my brother-in-law's. It was my intention to send both portraits
to the Royal Academy Exhibition, to get custom, and show the public
generally what I could do. I knew the institution with which I had to
deal, and called my own likeness, Portrait of a Nobleman.

That dexterous appeal to the tenderest feelings of my distinguished
countrymen very nearly succeeded. The portrait of Mr. Batterbury (much
the more carefully-painted picture of the two) was summarily turned out.
The Portrait of a Nobleman was politely reserved to be hung up, if the
Royal Academicians could possibly find room for it. They could not.
So that picture also vanished back into the obscurity of the artist's
easel. Weak and well-meaning people would have desponded under these
circumstances; but your genuine Rogue is a man of elastic temperament,
not easily compressible under any pressure of disaster. I sent the
portrait of Mr. Batterbury to the house of that distinguished patron,
and the Portrait of a Nobleman to the Pawnbroker's. After this I had
plenty of elbow-room in the studio, and could walk up and down briskly,
smoking my pipe, and thinking about what I should do next.

I had observed that the generous friend and vagabond brother artist,
whose lodger I now was, never seemed to be in absolute want of money;
and yet the walls of his studio informed me that nobody bought his
pictures. There hung all his great works, rejected by the Royal Academy,
and neglected by the patrons of Art; and there, nevertheless, was he,
blithely plying the brush; not rich, it is true, but certainly never
without money enough in his pocket for the supply of all his modest
wants. Where did he find his resources? I determined to ask him the
question the very next time he came to the studio.

"Dick," I said (we called each other by our Christian names), "where do
you get your money?"

"Frank," he answered, "what makes you ask that question?"

"Necessity," I proceeded. "My stock of money is decreasing, and I
don't know how to replenish it. My pictures have been turned out of the
exhibition-rooms; nobody comes to sit to me; I can't make a farthing;
and I must try another line in the Arts, or leave your studio. We are
old friends now. I've paid you honestly week by week; and if you can
oblige me, I think you ought. You earn money somehow. Why can't I?"

"Are you at all particular?" asked Dick.

"Not in the least," I answered.

Dick nodded, and looked pleased; handed me my hat, and put on his own.

"You are just the sort of man I like," he remarked, "and I would sooner
trust you than any one else I know. You ask how I contrive to earn
money, seeing that all my pictures are still in my own possession. My
dear fellow, whenever my pockets are empty, and I want a ten-pound note
to put into them, I make an Old Master."

I stared hard at him, not at first quite understanding what he meant.

"The Old Master I can make best," continued Dick, "is Claude Lorraine,
whom you may have heard of occasionally as a famous painter of classical
landscapes. I don't exactly know (he has been dead so long) how many
pictures he turned out, from first to last; but we will say, for the
sake of argument, five hundred. Not five of these are offered for sale,
perhaps, in the course of five years. Enlightened collectors of old
pictures pour into the market by fifties, while genuine specimens of
Claude, or of any other Old Master you like to mention, only dribble
in by ones and twos. Under these circumstances, what is to be done? Are
unoffending owners of galleries to be subjected to disappointment?
Or are the works of Claude, and the other fellows, to be benevolently
increased in number, to supply the wants of persons of taste and
quality? No man of humanity but must lean to the latter alternative. The
collectors, observe, don't know anything about it--they buy Claude (to
take an instance from my own practice) as they buy all the other Old
Masters, because of his reputation, not because of the pleasure they get
from his works. Give them a picture with a good large ruin, fancy trees,
prancing nymphs, and a watery sky; dirty it down dexterously to the
right pitch; put it in an old frame; call it a Claude; and the sphere
of the Old Master is enlarged, the collector is delighted, the
picture-dealer is enriched, and the neglected modern artist claps a
joyful hand on a well-filled pocket. Some men have a knack at making
Rembrandts, others have a turn for Raphaels, Titians, Cuyps, Watteaus,
and the rest of them. Anyhow, we are all made happy--all pleased with
each other--all benefited alike. Kindness is propagated and money is
dispersed. Come along, my boy, and make an Old Master!"




CHAPTER V.

HE led the way into the street as he spoke. I felt the irresistible
force of his logic. I sympathized with the ardent philanthropy of his
motives. I burned with a noble ambition to extend the sphere of the Old
Masters. In short, I took the tide at the flood, and followed Dick.

We plunged into some by-streets, struck off sharp into a court, and
entered a house by a back door. A little old gentleman in a black velvet
dressing-gown met us in the passage. Dick instantly presented me: "Mr.
Frank Softly--Mr. Ishmael Pickup." The little old gentleman stared at
me distrustfully. I bowed to him with that inexorable politeness which
I first learned under the instructive fist of Gentleman Jones, and which
no force of adverse circumstances has ever availed to mitigate in after
life. Mr. Ishmael Pickup followed my lead. There is not the least need
to describe him--he was a Jew.

"Go into the front show-room, and look at the pictures, while I speak to
Mr. Pickup," said Dick, familiarly throwing open a door, and pushing me
into a kind of gallery beyond. I found myself quite alone, surrounded by
modern-antique pictures of all schools and sizes, of all degrees of dirt
and dullness, with all the names of all the famous Old Masters, from
Titian to Teniers, inscribed on their frames. A "pearly little gem," by
Claude, with a ticket marked "Sold" stuck into the frame, particularly
attracted my attention. It was Dick's last ten-pound job; and it did
credit to the youthful master's abilities as a workman-like maker of
Claudes.

I have been informed that, since the time of which I am writing, the
business of gentlemen of Mr. Pickup's class has rather fallen off,
and that there are dealers in pictures, nowadays, who are as just and
honorable men as can be found in any profession or calling, anywhere
under the sun. This change, which I report with sincerity and reflect on
with amazement, is, as I suspect, mainly the result of certain wholesale
modern improvements in the position of contemporary Art, which
have necessitated improvements and alterations in the business of
picture-dealing.

In my time, the encouragers of modern painting were limited in number
to a few noblemen and gentlemen of ancient lineage, who, in matters of
taste, at least, never presumed to think for themselves. They either
inherited or bought a gallery more or less full of old pictures. It was
as much a part of their education to put their faith in these on hearsay
evidence, as to put their faith in King, Lords and Commons. It was an
article of their creed to believe that the dead painters were the great
men, and that the more the living painters imitated the dead, the better
was their chance of becoming at some future day, and in a minor degree,
great also. At certain times and seasons, these noblemen and gentlemen
self-distrustfully strayed into the painting-room of a modern artist,
self-distrustfully allowed themselves to be rather attracted by his
pictures, self-distrustfully bought one or two of them at prices which
would appear so incredibly low, in these days, that I really cannot
venture to quote them. The picture was sent home; the nobleman or
gentleman (almost always an amiable and a hospitable man) would ask the
artist to his house and introduce him to the distinguished individuals
who frequented it; but would never admit his picture, on terms of
equality, into the society even of the second-rate Old Masters. His work
was hung up in any out-of-the-way corner of the gallery that could be
found; it had been bought under protest; it was admitted by sufferance;
its freshness and brightness damaged it terribly by contrast with the
dirtiness and the dinginess of its elderly predecessors; and its only
points selected for praise were those in which it most nearly resembled
the peculiar mannerism of some Old Master, not those in which it
resembled the characteristics of the old mistress--Nature.

The unfortunate artist had no court of appeal that he could turn to.
Nobody beneath the nobleman, or the gentleman of ancient lineage, so
much as thought of buying a modern picture. Nobody dared to whisper that
the Art of painting had in anywise been improved or worthily enlarged in
its sphere by any modern professors. For one nobleman who was ready
to buy one genuine modern picture at a small price, there were twenty
noblemen ready to buy twenty more than doubtful old pictures at great
prices. The consequence was, that some of the most famous artists of
the English school, whose pictures are now bought at auction sales for
fabulous sums, were then hardly able to make an income. They were a
scrupulously patient and conscientious body of men, who would as soon
have thought of breaking into a house, or equalizing the distribution of
wealth, on the highway, by the simple machinery of a horse and pistol,
as of making Old Masters to order. They sat resignedly in their lonely
studios, surrounded by unsold pictures which have since been covered
again and again with gold and bank-notes by eager buyers at auctions
and show-rooms, whose money has gone into other than the painter's
pockets---who have never dreamed that the painter had the smallest moral
right to a farthing of it. Year after year, these martyrs of the brush
stood, palette in hand, fighting the old battle of individual
merit against contemporary dullness--fighting bravely, patiently,
independently; and leaving to Mr. Pickup and his pupils a complete
monopoly of all the profit which could be extracted, in their line
of business, from the feebly-buttoned pocket of the patron, and the
inexhaustible credulity of the connoisseur.

Now all this is changed. Traders and makers of all kinds of commodities
have effected a revolution in the picture-world, never dreamed of by the
noblemen and gentlemen of ancient lineage, and consistently protested
against to this day by the very few of them who still remain alive.

The daring innovators started with the new notion of buying a picture
which they themselves could admire and appreciate, and for the
genuineness of which the artist was still living to vouch. These
rough and ready customers were not to be led by rules or frightened by
precedents; they were not to be easily imposed upon, for the article
they wanted was not to be easily counterfeited. Sturdily holding to
their own opinions, they thought incessant repetitions of Saints,
Martyrs, and Holy Families, monotonous and uninteresting--and said so.
They thought little pictures of ugly Dutch women scouring pots, and
drunken Dutchmen playing cards, dirty and dear at the price--and said
so. They saw that trees were green in nature, and brown in the Old
Masters, and they thought the latter color not an improvement on
the former--and said so. They wanted interesting subjects; variety,
resemblance to nature; genuineness of the article, and fresh paint;
they had no ancestors whose feelings, as founders of galleries, it was
necessary to consult; no critical gentlemen and writers of valuable
works to snub them when they were in spirits; nothing to lead them by
the nose but their own shrewdness, their own interests, and their own
tastes--so they turned their backs valiantly on the Old Masters, and
marched off in a body to the living men.

From that time good modern pictures have risen in the scale. Even as
articles of commerce and safe investments for money, they have now (as
some disinterested collectors who dine at certain annual dinners I know
of, can testify) distanced the old pictures in the race. The modern
painters who have survived the brunt of the battle, have lived to see
pictures for which they once asked hundreds, selling for thousands, and
the young generation making incomes by the brush in one year, which
it would have cost the old heroes of the easel ten to accumulate. The
posterity of Mr. Pickup still do a tolerable stroke of business (making
bright modern masters for the market which is glutted with the dingy old
material), and will, probably, continue to thrive and multiply in the
future: the one venerable institution of this world which we can safely
count upon as likely to last, being the institution of human folly.
Nevertheless, if a wise man of the reformed taste wants a modern
picture, there are places for him to go to now where he may be sure of
getting it genuine; where, if the artist is not alive to vouch for his
work, the facts at any rate have not had time to die which vouch for
the dealer who sells it. In my time matters were rather different. The
painters _we_ throve by had died long enough ago for pedigrees to get
confused, and identities disputable; and if I had been desirous of
really purchasing a genuine Old Master for myself--speaking as a
practical man--I don't know where I should have gone to ask for one,
or whose judgment I could have safely relied on to guard me from being
cheated, before I bought it.



We are stopping a long time in the picture-gallery, you will say. I am
very sorry--but we must stay a little longer, for the sake of a living
picture, the gem of the collection.

I was still admiring Mr. Pickup's Old Masters, when a dirty little boy
opened the door of the gallery, and introduced a young lady.

My heart--fancy my having a heart!--gave one great bound in me. I
recognized the charming person whom I had followed in the street.

Her veil was not down this time. All the beauty of her large, soft,
melancholy, brown eyes beamed on me. Her delicate complexion became
suddenly suffused with a lovely rosy flush. Her glorious black hair--no!
I will make an effort, I will suppress my ecstasies. Let me only say
that she evidently recognized me. Will you believe it?--I felt myself
coloring as I bowed to her. I never blushed before in my life. What a
very curious sensation it is!

The horrid boy claimed her attention with a grin.

"Master's engaged," he said. "Please to wait here."

"I don't wish to disturb Mr. Pickup," she answered.

What a voice! No! I am drifting back into ecstasies: her voice was
worthy of her--I say no more.

"If you will be so kind as to show him this," she proceeded; "he knows
what it is. And please say, my father is very ill and very anxious. It
will be quite enough if Mr. Pickup will only send me word by you--Yes or
No."

She gave the boy an oblong slip of stamped paper. Evidently a promissory
note. An angel on earth, sent by an inhuman father, to ask a Jew for
discount! Monstrous!

The boy disappeared with the message.

I seized my opportunity of speaking to her. Don't ask me what I said!
Never before (or since) have I talked such utter nonsense, with such
intense earnestness of purpose and such immeasurable depth of feeling.
Do pray remember what you said yourself, the first time you had the
chance of opening your heart to _your_ young lady. The boy returned
before I had half done, and gave her back the odious document.

"Mr. Pickup's very sorry, miss. The answer is, No."

She lost all her lovely color, and sighed, and turned away. As she
pulled down her veil, I saw the tears in her eyes. Did that piteous
spectacle partially deprive me of my senses? I actually entreated her to
let me be of some use--as if I had been an old friend, with money enough
in my pocket to discount the note myself. She brought me back to my
senses with the utmost gentleness.

"I am afraid you forget, sir, that we are strangers. Good-morning."

I followed her to the door. I asked leave to call on her father, and
satisfy him about myself and my family connections. She only answered
that her father was too ill to see visitors. I went out with her on to
the landing. She turned on me sharply for the first time.

"You can see for yourself, sir, that I am in great distress. I appeal to
you, as a gentleman, to spare me."

If you still doubt whether I was really in love, let the facts speak for
themselves. I hung my head, and let her go.

When I returned alone to the picture-gallery--when I remembered that I
had not even had the wit to improve my opportunity by discovering her
name and address--I did really and seriously ask myself if these were
the first symptoms of softening of the brain. I got up, and sat down
again. I, the most audacious man of my age in London, had behaved like a
bashful boy! Once more I had lost her--and this time, also, I had nobody
but myself to blame for it.

These melancholy meditations were interrupted by the appearance of
my friend, the artist, in the picture-gallery. He approached me
confidentially, and spoke in a mysterious whisper.

"Pickup is suspicious," he said; "and I have had all the difficulty in
the world to pave your way smoothly for you at the outset. However,
if you can contrive to make a small Rembrandt, as a specimen, you may
consider yourself employed here until further notice. I am obliged to
particularize Rembrandt, because he is the only Old Master disengaged
at present. The professional gentleman who used to do him died the other
day in the Fleet--he had a turn for Rembrandts, and can't be easily
replaced. Do you think you could step into his shoes? It's a peculiar
gift, like an ear for music, or a turn for mathematics. Of course
you will be put up to the simple elementary rules, and will have the
professional gentleman's last Rembrandt as a guide; the rest depends,
my dear friend, on your powers of imitation. Don't be discouraged by
failures, but try again and again; and mind you are dirty and dark
enough. You have heard a great deal about the light and shade of
Rembrandt--Remember always that, in your case, light means dusky yellow,
and shade dense black; remember that, and--"

"No pay," said the voice of Mr. Pickup behind me; "no pay, my dear,
unlesh your Rembrandt ish good enough to take me in--even me, Ishmael,
who dealsh in pictersh and knowsh what'sh what."

What did I care about Rembrandt at that moment? I was thinking of my
lost young lady; and I should probably have taken no notice of Mr.
Pickup, if it had not occurred to me that the old wretch must know her
father's name and address. I at once put the question. The Jew grinned,
and shook his grisly head. "Her father'sh in difficultiesh, and mum's
the word, my dear." To that answer he adhered, in spite of all that I
could say to him.

With equal obstinacy I determined, sooner or later, to get my
information.

I took service under Mr. Pickup, purposing to make myself essential to
his prosperity, in a commercial sense--and then to threaten him with
offering my services to a rival manufacturer of Old Masters, unless
he trusted me with the secret of the name and address. My plan looked
promising enough at the time. But, as some wise person has said, Man
is the sport of circumstances. Mr. Pickup and I parted company
unexpectedly, on compulsion. And, of all the people in the world, my
grandmother, Lady Malkinshaw, was the unconscious first cause of the
events which brought me and the beloved object together again, for the
third time!




CHAPTER VI.

ON the next day, I was introduced to the Jew's workshop, and to the
eminent gentlemen occupying it. My model Rembrandt was put before me;
the simple elementary rules were explained; and my materials were all
placed under my hands.

Regard for the lovers of the Old Masters, and for the moral well-being
of society, forbids me to be particular about the nature of my labors,
or to go into dangerous detail on the subject of my first failures
and my subsequent success. I may, however, harmlessly admit that my
Rembrandt was to be of the small or cabinet size, and that, as there was
a run on Burgomasters just then, my subject was naturally to be of
the Burgomaster sort. Three parts of my picture consisted entirely of
different shades of dirty brown and black; the fourth being composed
of a ray of yellow light falling upon the wrinkled face of a
treacle-colored old man. A dim glimpse of a hand, and a faint suggestion
of something like a brass washhand basin, completed the job, which
gave great satisfaction to Mr. Pickup, and which was described in the
catalogue as--



"A Burgomaster at Breakfast. Originally in the collection of Mynheer
Van Grubb. Amsterdam. A rare example of the master. Not engraved. The
chiar'oscuro in this extraordinary work is of a truly sublime character.
Price, Two Hundred Guineas."



I got five pounds for it. I suppose Mr. Pickup got one-ninety-five.

This was perhaps not very encouraging as a beginning, in a pecuniary
point of view. But I was to get five pounds more, if my Rembrandt sold
within a given time. It sold a week after it was in a fit state to be
trusted in the showroom. I got my money, and began enthusiastically on
another Rembrandt--"A Burgomaster's Wife Poking the Fire." Last time,
the chiar'oscuro of the master had been yellow and black, this time it
was to be red and black. I was just on the point of forcing my way into
Mr. Pickup's confidence, as I had resolved, when a catastrophe happened,
which shut up the shop and abruptly terminated my experience as a maker
of Old Masters.

"The Burgomaster's Breakfast" had been sold to a new customer, a
venerable connoisseur, blessed with a great fortune and a large
picture-gallery. The old gentleman was in raptures with the
picture--with its tone, with its breadth, with its grand feeling for
effect, with its simple treatment of detail. It wanted nothing, in his
opinion, but a little cleaning. Mr. Pickup knew the raw and ticklish
state of the surface, however, far too well, to allow of even an
attempt at performing this process, and solemnly asserted, that he was
acquainted with no cleansing preparation which could be used on the
Rembrandt without danger of "flaying off the last exquisite glazings of
the immortal master's brush." The old gentleman was quite satisfied with
this reason for not cleaning the Burgomaster, and took away his purchase
in his own carriage on the spot.

For three weeks we heard nothing more of him. At the end of that time, a
Hebrew friend of Mr. Pickup, employed in a lawyer's office, terrified
us all by the information that a gentleman related to our venerable
connoisseur had seen the Rembrandt, had pronounced it to be an impudent
counterfeit, and had engaged on his own account to have the picture
tested in a court of law, and to charge the seller and maker thereof
with conspiring to obtain money under false pretenses. Mr. Pickup and I
looked at each other with very blank faces on receiving this agreeable
piece of news. What was to be done? I recovered the full use of my
faculties first; and I was the man who solved that important and
difficult question, while the rest were still utterly bewildered by it.
"Will you promise me five and twenty pounds in the presence of these
gentlemen if I get you out of this scrape?" said I to my terrified
employer. Ishmael Pickup wrung his dirty hands and answered, "Yesh, my
dear!"

Our informant in this awkward matter was employed at the office of the
lawyers who were to have the conducting of the case against us; and he
was able to tell me some of the things I most wanted to know in relation
to the picture.

I found out from him that the Rembrandt was still in our customer's
possession. The old gentleman had consented to the question of its
genuineness being tried, but had far too high an idea of his own
knowledge as a connoisseur to incline to the opinion that he had been
taken in. His suspicious relative was not staying in the house, but was
in the habit of visiting him, every day, in the forenoon. That was as
much as I wanted to know from others. The rest depended on myself, on
luck, time, human credulity, and a smattering of chemical knowledge
which I had acquired in the days of my medical studies. I left the
conclave at the picture-dealer's forthwith, and purchased at the nearest
druggist's a bottle containing a certain powerful liquid, which I
decline to particularize on high moral grounds. I labeled the bottle
"The Amsterdam Cleansing Compound"; and I wrapped round it the following
note:



"Mr. Pickup's respectful compliments to Mr.--(let us say, Green). Is
rejoiced to state that he finds himself unexpectedly able to forward Mr.
Green's views relative to the cleaning of 'The Burgomaster's Breakfast.'
The inclosed compound has just reached him from Amsterdam. It is made
from a recipe found among the papers of Rembrandt himself--has been
used with the most astonishing results on the Master's pictures in
every gallery of Holland, and is now being applied to the surface of the
largest Rembrandt in Mr. P.'s own collection. Directions for use: Lay
the picture flat, pour the whole contents of the bottle over it gently,
so as to flood the entire surface; leave the liquid on the surface for
six hours, then wipe it off briskly with a soft cloth of as large a
size as can be conveniently used. The effect will be the most wonderful
removal of all dirt, and a complete and brilliant metamorphosis of the
present dingy surface of the picture."



I left this note and the bottle myself at two o'clock that day; then
went home, and confidently awaited the result.

The next morning our friend from the office called, announcing himself
by a burst of laughter outside the door. Mr. Green had implicitly
followed the directions in the letter the moment he received it--had
allowed the "Amsterdam Cleansing Compound" to remain on the Rembrandt
until eight o'clock in the evening--had called for the softest linen
cloth in the whole house--and had then, with his own venerable hands,
carefully wiped off the compound, and with it the whole surface of the
picture! The brown, the black, the Burgomaster, the breakfast, and the
ray of yellow light, all came clean off together in considerably less
than a minute of time. If the picture, was brought into court now, the
evidence it could give against us was limited to a bit of plain panel,
and a mass of black pulp rolled up in a duster.

Our line of defense was, of course, that the compound had been
improperly used. For the rest, we relied with well-placed confidence on
the want of evidence against us. Mr. Pickup wisely closed his shop for a
while, and went off to the Continent to ransack the foreign galleries.
I received my five and twenty pounds, rubbed out the beginning of my
second Rembrandt, closed the back door of the workshop behind me, and
there was another scene of my life at an end. I had but one circumstance
to regret--and I did regret it bitterly. I was still as ignorant as ever
of the young lady's name and address.

My first visit was to the studio of my excellent artist-friend, whom
I have already presented to the reader under the sympathetic name of
"Dick." He greeted me with a letter in his hand. It was addressed to
me--it had been left at the studio a few days since; and (marvel of all
marvels!) the handwriting was Mr. Batterbury's. Had this philanthropic
man not done befriending me even yet? Were there any present or
prospective advantages to be got out of him still? Read his letter, and
judge.



"SIR--Although you have forfeited by your ungentlemanly conduct toward
myself, and your heartlessly mischievous reception of my dear wife, all
claim upon the forbearance of the most forbearing of your relatives,
I am disposed, from motives of regard for the tranquillity of Mrs.
Batterbury's family, and of sheer good-nature so far as I am myself
concerned, to afford you one more chance of retrieving your position by
leading a respectable life. The situation I am enabled to offer you is
that of secretary to a new Literary and Scientific Institution, about to
be opened in the town of Duskydale, near which neighborhood I possess,
as you must be aware, some landed property. The office has been placed
at my disposal, as vice-president of the new Institution. The salary is
fifty pounds a year, with apartments on the attic-floor of the building.
The duties are various, and will be explained to you by the local
committee, if you choose to present yourself to them with the inclosed
letter of introduction. After the unscrupulous manner in which you have
imposed on my liberality by deceiving me into giving you fifty pounds
for an audacious caricature of myself, which it is impossible to hang
up in any room of the house, I think this instance of my forgiving
disposition still to befriend you, after all that has happened, ought to
appeal to any better feelings that you may still have left, and revive
the long dormant emotions of repentance and self-reproach, when you
think on your obedient servant,

"DANIEL BATTERBURY."

Bless me! What A long-winded style, and what a fuss about fifty pounds
a year, and a bed in an attic! These were naturally the first emotions
which Mr. Batterbury's letter produced in me. What was his real motive
for writing it? I hope nobody will do me so great an injustice as to
suppose that I hesitated for one instant about the way of finding _that_
out. Of course I started off directly to inquire if Lady Malkinshaw had
had another narrow escape of dying before me.

"Much better, sir," answered my grandmother's venerable butler, wiping
his lips carefully before he spoke; "her ladyship's health has been much
improved since her accident."

"Accident!" I exclaimed. "What, another? Lately? Stairs again?"

"No, sir; the drawing-room window this time," answered the butler, with
semi-tipsy gravity. "Her ladyship's sight having been defective of late
years, occasions her some difficulty in calculating distances.
Three days ago, her ladyship went to look out of the window, and,
miscalculating the distance--" Here the butler, with a fine dramatic
feeling for telling a story, stopped just before the climax of the
narrative, and looked me in the face with an expression of the deepest
sympathy.

"And miscalculating the distance?" I repeated impatiently.

"Put her head through a pane of glass," said the butler, in a soft
voice suited to the pathetic nature of the communication. "By great
good fortune her ladyship had been dressed for the day, and had got her
turban on. This saved her ladyship's head. But her ladyship's neck, sir,
had a very narrow escape. A bit of the broken glass wounded it within
half a quarter of an inch of the carotty artery" (meaning, probably,
carotid); "I heard the medical gentleman say, and shall never forget
it to my dying day, that her ladyship's life had been saved by a
hair-breadth. As it was, the blood lost (the medical gentleman said
that, too, sir) was accidentally of the greatest possible benefit,
being apoplectic, in the way of clearing out the system. Her ladyship's
appetite has been improved ever since--the carriage is out airing of
her at this very moment--likewise, she takes the footman's arm and the
maid's up and downstairs now, which she never would hear of before this
last accident. 'I feel ten years younger' (those were her ladyship's own
words to me, this very day), 'I feel ten years younger, Vokins, since I
broke the drawing-room window.' And her ladyship looks it!"

No doubt. Here was the key to Mr. Batterbury's letter of forgiveness.
His chance of receiving the legacy looked now further off than ever;
he could not feel the same confidence as his wife in my power of living
down any amount of starvation and adversity; and he was, therefore,
quite ready to take the first opportunity of promoting my precious
personal welfare and security, of which he could avail himself, without
spending a farthing of money. I saw it all clearly, and admired the
hereditary toughness of the Malkinshaw family more gratefully than ever.
What should I do? Go to Duskydale? Why not? It didn't matter to me where
I went, now that I had no hope of ever seeing those lovely brown eyes
again.

I got to my new destination the next day, presented my credentials, gave
myself the full advantage of my high connections, and was received with
enthusiasm and distinction.

I found the new Institution torn by internal schisms even before it was
opened to the public. Two factious governed it--a grave faction and
a gay faction. Two questions agitated it: the first referring to the
propriety of celebrating the opening season by a public ball, and the
second to the expediency of admitting novels into the library. The grim
Puritan interest of the whole neighborhood was, of course, on the
grave side--against both dancing and novels, as proposed by local
loose thinkers and latitudinarians of every degree. I was officially
introduced to the debate at the height of the squabble; and found myself
one of a large party in a small room, sitting round a long table, each
man of us with a new pewter inkstand, a new quill pen, and a clean sheet
of foolscap paper before him. Seeing that everybody spoke, I got on
my legs along with the rest, and made a slashing speech on the
loose-thinking side. I was followed by the leader of the grim
faction--an unlicked curate of the largest dimensions.

"If there were, so to speak, no other reason against dancing," said
my reverend opponent, "there is one unanswerable objection to it.
Gentlemen! John the Baptist lost his head through dancing!"'

Every man of the grim faction hammered delightedly on the table, as that
formidable argument was produced; and the curate sat down in triumph. I
jumped up to reply, amid the counter-cheering of the loose-thinkers;
but before I could say a word the President of the Institution and the
rector of the parish came into the room.

They were both men of authority, men of sense, and fathers of charming
daughters, and they turned the scale on the right side in no time. The
question relating to the admission of novels was postponed, and the
question of dancing or no dancing was put to the vote on the spot. The
President, the rector and myself, the three handsomest and highest-bred
men in the assembly, led the way on the liberal side, waggishly warning
all gallant gentlemen present to beware of disappointing the young
ladies. This decided the waverers, and the waverers decided the
majority. My first business, as Secretary, was the drawing out of a
model card of admission to the ball.

My next occupation was to look at the rooms provided for me.

The Duskydale Institution occupied a badly-repaired ten-roomed house,
with a great flimsy saloon built at one side of it, smelling of paint
and damp plaster, and called the Lecture Theater. It was the chilliest,
ugliest, emptiest, gloomiest place I ever entered in my life; the idea
of doing anything but sitting down and crying in it seemed to me quite
preposterous; but the committee took a different view of the matter,
and praised the Lecture Theater as a perfect ballroom. The Secretary's
apartments were two garrets, asserting themselves in the most barefaced
manner, without an attempt at disguise. If I had intended to do more
than earn my first quarter's salary, I should have complained. But as
I had not the slightest intention of remaining at Duskydale, I could
afford to establish a reputation for amiability by saying nothing.

"Have you seen Mr. Softly, the new Secretary? A most distinguished
person, and quite an acquisition to the neighborhood." Such was
the popular opinion of me among the young ladies and the liberal
inhabitants. "Have you seen Mr. Softly, the new Secretary? A worldly,
vainglorious young man. The last person in England to promote the
interests of our new Institution." Such was the counter-estimate of
me among the Puritan population. I report both opinions quite
disinterestedly. There is generally something to be said on either
side of every question; and, as for me, I can always hold up the scales
impartially, even when my own character is the substance weighing in
them. Readers of ancient history need not be reminded, at this time of
day, that there may be Roman virtue even in a Rogue.

The objects, interests, and general business of the Duskydale
Institution were matters with which I never thought of troubling myself
on assuming the duties of Secretary. All my energies were given to the
arrangements connected with the opening ball.

I was elected by acclamation to the office of general manager of the
entertainments; and I did my best to deserve the confidence reposed in
me; leaving literature and science, so far as I was concerned, perfectly
at liberty to advance themselves or not, just as they liked. Whatever
my colleagues may have done, after I left them, nobody at Duskydale
can accuse me of having ever been accessory to the disturbing of
quiet people with useful knowledge. I took the arduous and universally
neglected duty of teaching the English people how to be amused entirely
on my own shoulders, and left the easy and customary business of making
them miserable to others.

My unhappy countrymen! (and thrice unhappy they of the poorer sort)--any
man can preach to them, lecture to them, and form them into classes--but
where is the man who can get them to amuse themselves? Anybody may cram
their poor heads; but who will brighten their grave faces? Don't read
story-books, don't go to plays, don't dance! Finish your long day's
work and then intoxicate your minds with solid history, revel in
the too-attractive luxury of the lecture-room, sink under the soft
temptation of classes for mutual instruction! How many potent, grave and
reverent tongues discourse to the popular ear in these siren strains,
and how obediently and resignedly this same weary popular ear listens!
What if a bold man spring up one day, crying aloud in our social
wilderness, "Play, for Heaven's sake, or you will work yourselves into
a nation of automatons! Shake a loose leg to a lively fiddle! Women
of England! drag the lecturer off the rostrum, and the male mutual
instructor out of the class, and ease their poor addled heads of
evenings by making them dance and sing with you. Accept no offer from
any man who cannot be proved, for a year past, to have systematically
lost his dignity at least three times a week, after office hours. You,
daughters of Eve, who have that wholesome love of pleasure which is one
of the greatest adornments of the female character, set up a society for
the promotion of universal amusement, and save the British nation from
the lamentable social consequences of its own gravity!" Imagine a
voice crying lustily after this fashion--what sort of echoes would it
find?--Groans?

I know what sort of echoes my voice found. They were so discouraging
to me, and to the frivolous minority of pleasure-seekers, that I
recommended lowering the price of admission so as to suit the means of
any decent people who were willing to leave off money-grubbing and tear
themselves from the charms of mutual instruction for one evening at
least. The proposition was indignantly negatived by the managers of the
Institution. I am so singularly obstinate a man that I was not to be
depressed even by this.

My next efforts to fill the ballroom could not be blamed. I procured
a local directory, put fifty tickets in my pocket, dressed myself in
nankeen pantaloons and a sky-blue coat (then the height of fashion),
and set forth to tout for dancers among all the members of the genteel
population, who, not being notorious Puritans, had also not been so
obliging as to take tickets for the ball. There never was any pride or
bashfulness about me. Excepting certain periods of suspense and anxiety,
I am as even-tempered a Rogue as you have met with anywhere since the
days of Gil Blas.

My temperament being opposed to doing anything with regularity, I opened
the directory at hazard, and determined to make my first call at the
first house that caught my eye. Vallombrosa Vale Cottages. No. 1. Doctor
and Miss Dulcifer. Very good. I have no preferences. Let me sell the
first two tickets there. I found the place; I opened the garden gate; I
advanced to the door, innocently wondering what sort of people I should
find inside.

If I am asked what was the true reason for this extraordinary activity
on my part, in serving the interests of a set of people for whom I cared
nothing, I must honestly own that the loss of my young lady was at the
bottom of it. Any occupation was welcome which kept my mind, in some
degree at least, from dwelling on the bitter disappointment that had
befallen me. When I rang the bell at No. 1, did I feel no presentiment
of the exquisite surprise in store for me? I felt nothing of the sort.
The fact is, my digestion is excellent. Presentiments are more closely
connected than is generally supposed with a weak state of stomach.

I asked for Miss Dulcifer, and was shown into the sitting-room.

Don't expect me to describe my sensations: hundreds of sensations flew
all over me. There she was, sitting alone, near the window! There she
was, with nimble white fingers, working a silk purse!

The melancholy in her face and manner, when I had last seen her,
appeared no more. She was prettily dressed in maize color, and the room
was well furnished. Her father had evidently got over his difficulties.
I had been inclined to laugh at his odd name, when I found it in the
directory! Now I began to dislike it, because it was her name, too. It
was a consolation to remember that she could change it. Would she change
it for mine?

I was the first to recover; I boldly drew a chair near her and took her
hand.

"You see," I said, "it is of no use to try to avoid me. This is the
third time we have met. Will you receive me as a visitor, under these
extraordinary circumstances? Will you give me a little happiness to
compensate for what I have suffered since you left me?"

She smiled and blushed.

"I am so surprised," she answered, "I don't know what to say."

"Disagreeably surprised?" I asked.

She first went on with her work, and then replied (a little sadly, as I
thought):

"No!"

I was ready enough to take advantage of my opportunities this time; but
she contrived with perfect politeness to stop me. She seemed to remember
with shame, poor soul, the circumstances under which I had last seen
her.

"How do you come to be at Duskydale?" she inquired, abruptly changing
the subject. "And how did you find us out here?"

While I was giving her the necessary explanations her father came in. I
looked at him with considerable curiosity.

A tall stout gentleman with impressive respectability oozing out of him
at every pore--with a swelling outline of black-waistcoated stomach,
with a lofty forehead, with a smooth double chin resting pulpily on a
white cravat. Everything in harmony about him except his eyes, and these
were so sharp, bright and resolute that they seemed to contradict the
bland conventionality which overspread all the rest of the man. Eyes
with wonderful intelligence and self-dependence in them; perhaps, also,
with something a little false in them, which I might have discovered
immediately under ordinary circumstances: but I looked at the doctor
through the medium of his daughter, and saw nothing of him at the first
glance but his merits.

"We are both very much indebted to you, sir, for your politeness in
calling," he said, with excessive civility of manner. "But our stay
at this place has drawn to an end. I only came here for the
re-establishment of my daughter's health. She has benefited greatly
by the change of air, and we have arranged to return home to-morrow.
Otherwise, we should have gladly profited by your kind offer of tickets
for the ball."

Of course I had one eye on the young lady while he was speaking. She was
looking at her father, and a sudden sadness was stealing over her face.
What did it mean? Disappointment at missing the ball? No, it was a
much deeper feeling than that. My interest was excited. I addressed a
complimentary entreaty to the doctor not to take his daughter away from
us. I asked him to reflect on the irreparable eclipse that he would be
casting over the Duskydale ballroom. To my amazement, she only
looked down gloomily on her work while I spoke; her father laughed
contemptuously.

"We are too completely strangers here," he said, "for our loss to be
felt by any one. From all that I can gather, society in Duskydale will
be glad to hear of our departure. I beg your pardon, Alicia--I ought to
have said _my_ departure."

Her name was Alicia! I declare it was a luxury to me to hear it--the
name was so appropriate, so suggestive of the grace and dignity of her
beauty.

I turned toward her when the doctor had done. She looked more gloomily
than before. I protested against the doctor's account of himself.
He laughed again, with a quick distrustful lo ok, this time, at his
daughter.

"If you were to mention my name among your respectable inhabitants," he
went on, with a strong, sneering emphasis on the word respectable, "they
would most likely purse up their lips and look grave at it. Since I gave
up practice as a physician, I have engaged in chemical investigations
on a large scale, destined I hope, to lead to some important public
results. Until I arrive at these, I am necessarily obliged, in my
own interests, to keep my experiments secret, and to impose similar
discretion on the workmen whom I employ. This unavoidable appearance
of mystery, and the strictly retired life which my studies compel me to
lead, offend the narrow-minded people in my part of the county, close
to Barkingham; and the unpopularity of my pursuits has followed me here.
The general opinion, I believe, is, that I am seeking by unholy arts for
the philosopher's stone. Plain man, as you see me, I find myself getting
quite the reputation of a Doctor Faustus in the popular mind. Even
educated people in this very place shake their heads and pity my
daughter there for living with an alchemical parent, within easy
smelling-distance of an explosive laboratory. Excessively absurd, is it
not?"

It might have been excessively absurd, but the lovely Alicia sat with
her eyes on her work, looking as if it were excessively sad, and not
giving her father the faintest answering smile when he glanced toward
her and laughed, as he said his last words. I could not at all tell
what to make of it. The doctor talked of the social consequences of his
chemical inquiries as if he were living in the middle ages. However,
I was far too anxious to see the charming brown eyes again to ask
questions which would be sure to keep them cast down. So I changed the
topic to chemistry in general; and, to the doctor's evident astonishment
and pleasure, told him of my own early studies in the science.

This led to the mention of my father, whose reputation had reached the
ears of Doctor Dulcifer. As he told me that, his daughter looked up--the
sun of beauty shone on me again! I touched next on my high connections,
and on Lady Malkinshaw; I described myself as temporarily banished from
home for humorous caricaturing, and amiable youthful wildness. She was
interested; she smiled--and the sun of beauty shone warmer than ever!
I diverged to general topics, and got brilliant and amusing. She
laughed--the nightingale notes of her merriment bubbled into my ears
caressingly--why could I not shut my eyes and listen to them? Her color
rose; her face grew animated. Poor soul! A little lively company was but
too evidently a rare treat to her. Under such circumstances, who would
not be amusing? If she had said to me, "Mr. Softly, I like tumbling," I
should have made a clown of myself on the spot. I should have stood on
my head (if I could), and been amply rewarded for the graceful exertion,
if the eyes of Alicia had looked kindly on my elevated heels!

How long I stayed is more than I can tell. Lunch came up. I eat and
drank, and grew more amusing than ever. When I at last rose to go, the
brown eyes looked on me very kindly, and the doctor gave me his card.

"If you don't mind trusting yourself in the clutches of Doctor Faustus,"
he said, with a gay smile, "I shall be delighted to see you if you are
ever in the neighborhood of Barkingham."

I wrung his hand, mentally relinquishing my secretaryship while I
thanked him for the invitation. I put out my hand next to his daughter,
and the dear friendly girl met the advance with the most charming
readiness. She gave me a good, hearty, vigorous, uncompromising shake.
O precious right hand! never did I properly appreciate your value until
that moment.

Going out with my head in the air, and my senses in the seventh heaven,
I jostled an elderly gentleman passing before the garden gate. I turned
round to apologize; it was my brother in office, the estimable Treasurer
of the Duskydale Institute.

"I have been half over the town looking after you," he said. "The
Managing Committee, on reflection, consider your plan of personally
soliciting public attendance at the hall to be compromising the dignity
of the Institution, and beg you, therefore, to abandon it."

"Very well," said I, "there is no harm done. Thus far, I have only
solicited two persons, Doctor and Miss Dulcifer, in that delightful
little cottage there."

"You don't mean to say you have asked _them_ to come to the ball!"

"To be sure I have. And I am sorry to say they can't accept the
invitation. Why should they not be asked?"

"Because nobody visits them."

"And why should nobody visit them?"

The Treasurer put his arm confidentially through mine, and walked me on
a few steps.

"In the first place," he said, "Doctor Dulcifer's name is not down in
the Medical List."

"Some mistake," I suggested, in my off-hand way. "Or some foreign
doctor's degree not recognized by the prejudiced people in England."

"In the second place," continued the Treasurer, "we have found out that
he is not visited at Barkingham. Consequently, it would be the height of
imprudence to visit him here."

"Pooh! pooh! All the nonsense of narrow-minded people, because he lives
a retired life, and is engaged in finding out chemical secrets which the
ignorant public don't know how to appreciate."

"The shutters are always up in the front top windows of his house at
Barkingham," said the Treasurer, lowering his voice mysteriously. "I
know it from a friend resident near him. The windows themselves are
barred. It is currently reported that the top of the house, inside, is
shut off by iron doors from the bottom. Workmen are employed there who
don't belong to the neighborhood, who don't drink at the public houses,
who only associate with each other. Unfamiliar smells and noises find
their way outside sometimes. Nobody in the house can be got to talk. The
doctor, as he calls himself, does not even make an attempt to get into
society, does not even try to see company for the sake of his poor
unfortunate daughter. What do you think of all that?"

"Think!" I repeated contemptuously; "I think the inhabitants of
Barkingham are the best finders of mares' nests in all England. The
doctor is making important chemical discoveries (the possible value of
which I can appreciate, being chemical myself), and he is not quite
fool enough to expose valuable secrets to the view of all the world. His
laboratory is at the top of the house, and he wisely shuts it off from
the bottom to prevent accidents. He is one of the best fellows I ever
met with, and his daughter is the loveliest girl in the world. What
do you all mean by making mysteries about nothing? He has given me an
invitation to go and see him. I suppose the next thing you will find out
is, that there is something underhand even in that?"

"You won't accept the invitation?"

"I shall, at the very first opportunity; and if you had seen Miss
Alicia, so would you."

"Don't go. Take my advice and don't go," said the Treasurer, gravely.
"You are a young man. Reputable friends are of importance to you at the
outset of life. I say nothing against Doctor Dulcifer--he came here as
a stranger, and he goes away again as a stranger--but you can't be sure
that his purpose in asking you so readily to his house is a harmless
one. Making a new acquaintance is always a doubtful speculation; but
when a man is not visited by his respectable neighbors--"

"Because he doesn't open his shutters," I interposed sarcastically.

"Because there are doubts about him and his house which he will not
clear up," retorted the Treasurer. "You can take your own way. You may
turn out right, and we may all be wrong; I can only say again, it is
rash to make doubtful acquaintances. Sooner or later you are always
sure to repent it. In your place I should certainly not accept the
invitation."

"In my place, my dear sir," I answered, "you would do exactly what I
mean to do."

The Treasurer took his arm out of mine, and without saying another word,
wished me good-morning.




CHAPTER VII.

I HAD spoken confidently enough, while arguing the question of
Doctor Dulcifer's respectability with the Treasurer of the D uskydale
Institution; but, if my perceptions had not been blinded by my
enthusiastic admiration for Alicia, I think I should have secretly
distrusted my own opinion as soon as I was left by myself. Had I been
in full possession of my senses, I might have questioned, on reflection,
whether the doctor's method of accounting for the suspicions which kept
his neighbors aloof from him, was quite satisfactory. Love is generally
described, I believe, as the tender passion. When I remember the
insidiously relaxing effect of it on all my faculties, I feel inclined
to alter the popular definition, and to call it a moral vapor-bath.

What the Managing Committee of the Duskydale Institution thought of the
change in me, I cannot imagine. The doctor and his daughter left the
town on the day they had originally appointed, before I could make
any excuse for calling again; and, as a necessary consequence of their
departure, I lost all interest in the affairs of the ball, and yawned
in the faces of the committee when I was obliged to be present at their
deliberations in my official capacity.

It was all Alicia with me, whatever they did. I read the Minutes through
a soft medium of maize-colored skirts. Notes of melodious laughter
bubbled, in my mind's ear, through all the drawling and stammering of
our speech-making members. When our dignified President thought he had
caught my eye, and made oratorical overtures to me from the top of the
table, I was lost in the contemplation of silk purses and white fingers
weaving them. I meant "Alicia" when I said "hear, hear"--and when I
officially produced my subscription list, it was all aglow with the
roseate hues of the marriage-license. If any unsympathetic male readers
should think this statement exaggerated, I appeal to the ladies--_they_
will appreciate the rigid, yet tender, truth of it.

The night of the ball came. I have nothing but the vaguest recollection
of it.

I remember that the more the perverse lecture theater was warmed the
more persistently it smelled of damp plaster; and that the more brightly
it was lighted, the more overgrown and lonesome it looked. I can recall
to mind that the company assembled numbered about fifty, the room being
big enough to hold three hundred. I have a vision still before me,
of twenty out of these fifty guests, solemnly executing intricate
figure-dances, under the superintendence of an infirm local
dancing-master--a mere speck of fidgety human wretchedness twisting
about in the middle of an empty floor. I see, faintly, down the dim
vista of the Past, an agreeable figure, like myself, with a cocked hat
under its arm, black tights on its lightly tripping legs, a rosette in
its buttonhole, and an engaging smile on its face, walking from end to
end of the room, in the character of Master of the Ceremonies. These
visions and events I can recall vaguely; and with them my remembrances
of the ball come to a close. It was a complete failure, and that would,
of itself, have been enough to sicken me of remaining at the Duskydale
Institution, even if I had not had any reasons of the tender sort for
wishing to extend my travels in rural England to the neighborhood of
Barkingham.

The difficulty was how to find a decent pretext for getting away.
Fortunately, the Managing Committee relieved me of any perplexity on
this head, by passing a resolution, one day, which called upon the
President to remonstrate with me on my want of proper interest in the
affairs of the Institution. I replied to the remonstrance that the
affairs of the Institution were so hopelessly dull that it was equally
absurd and unjust to expect any human being to take the smallest
interest in them. At this there arose an indignant cry of "Resign!"
from the whole committee; to which I answered politely, that I should be
delighted to oblige the gentlemen, and to go forthwith, on condition of
receiving a quarter's salary in the way of previous compensation.

After a sordid opposition from an economical minority, my condition of
departure was accepted. I wrote a letter of resignation, received in
exchange twelve pounds ten shillings, and took my place, that same day,
on the box-seat of the Barkingham mail.

Rather changeable this life of mine, was it not? Before I was
twenty-five years of age, I had tried doctoring, caricaturing
portrait-painting, old picture-making, and Institution-managing; and
now, with the help of Alicia, I was about to try how a little marrying
would suit me. Surely, Shakespeare must have had me prophetically in his
eye, when he wrote about "one man in his time playing many parts." What
a character I should have made for him, if he had only been alive now!

I found out from the coachman, among other matters, that there was a
famous fishing stream near Barkingham; and the first thing I did, on
arriving at the town, was to buy a rod and line.

It struck me that my safest way of introducing myself would be to
tell Doctor Dulcifer that I had come to the neighborhood for a little
fishing, and so to prevent him from fancying that I was suspiciously
prompt in availing myself of his offered hospitality. I put up, of
course, at the inn--stuck a large parchment book of flies half in and
half out of the pocket of my shooting-jacket--and set off at once to the
doctor's. The waiter of whom I asked my way stared distrustfully while
he directed me. The people at the inn had evidently heard of my new
friend, and were not favorably disposed toward the cause of scientific
investigation.

The house stood about a mile out of the town, in a dip of ground near
the famous fishing-stream. It was a lonely, old-fashioned red-brick
building, surrounded by high walls, with a garden and plantation behind
it.

As I rang at the gate-bell, I looked up at the house. Sure enough all
the top windows in front were closed with shutters and barred. I was let
in by a man in livery; who, however, in manners and appearance, looked
much more like a workman in disguise than a footman. He had a very
suspicious eye, and he fixed it on me unpleasantly when I handed him my
card.

I was shown into a morning-room exactly like other morning-rooms in
country houses.

After a long delay the doctor came in, with scientific butchers' sleeves
on his arms, and an apron tied round his portly waist. He apologized for
coming down in his working dress, and said everything that was civil and
proper about the pleasure of unexpectedly seeing me again so soon. There
was something rather preoccupied, I thought, in those brightly resolute
eyes of his; but I naturally attributed it to the engrossing influence
of his scientific inquiries. He was evidently not at all taken in by my
story about coming to Barkingham to fish; but he saw, as well as I did,
that it would do to keep up appearances, and contrived to look highly
interested immediately in my parchment-book. I asked after his daughter.
He said she was in the garden, and proposed that we should go and find
her. We did find her, with a pair of scissors in her hand, outblooming
the flowers that she was trimming. She looked really glad to see me--her
brown eyes beamed clear and kindly--she gave my hand another inestimable
shake--the summer breezes waved her black curls gently upward from her
waist--she had on a straw hat and a brown Holland gardening dress.
I eyed it with all the practical interest of a linendraper. O Brown
Holland you are but a coarse and cheap fabric, yet how soft and
priceless you look when clothing the figure of Alicia!

I lunched with them. The doctor recurred to the subject of my angling
intentions, and asked his daughter if she had heard what parts of the
stream at Barkingham were best for fishing in.

She replied, with a mixture of modest evasiveness and adorable
simplicity, that she had sometimes seen gentlemen angling from a
meadow-bank about a quarter of a mile below her flower-garden. I risked
everything in my usual venturesome way, and asked if she would show
me where the place was, in case I called the next morning with my
fishing-rod. She looked dutifully at her father. He smiled and nodded.
Inestimable parent!

On rising to take leave, I was rather curious to know whether he would
offer me a bed in the house, or not. He detected the direction of my
thoughts in my face and manner, and apologized for not having a bed to
offer me; every spare room in the house being occupied by his chemical
assistants, and by the lumber of laboratories. Even while he was
speaking those few words, Alicia's face changed just as I had seen
it change at our first interview. The downcast, gloomy expression
overspread it again. Her father's eye wandered toward her when mine
did, and suddenly assumed the same distrustful look which I remembered
detecting in it, under similar circumstances, at Duskydale. What could
this mean?

The doctor shook hands with me in the hall, leaving the workman-like
footman to open the door.

I stopped to admire a fine pair of stag's antlers. The footman coughed
impatiently. I still lingered, hearing the doctor's footsteps ascending
the stairs. They suddenly stopped; and then there was a low heavy
clang, like the sound of a closing door made of iron, or of some other
unusually strong material; then total silence, interrupted by another
impatient cough from the workman-like footman. After that, I thought my
wisest proceeding would be to go away before my mysterious attendant was
driven to practical extremities.

Between thoughts of Alicia, and inquisitive yearnings to know more about
the doctor's experiments, I passed rather a restless night at my inn.

The next morning, I found the lovely mistress of my destiny, with the
softest of shawls on her shoulders, the brightest of parasols in her
hand, and the smart little straw hat of the day before on her head,
ready to show me the way to the fishing-place. If I could be sure
beforehand that these pages would only be read by persons actually
occupied in the making of love--that oldest and longest-established of
all branches of manufacturing industry--I could go into some very tender
and interesting particulars on the subject of my first day's fishing,
under the adorable auspices of Alicia. But as I cannot hope for a wholly
sympathetic audience--as there may be monks, misogynists, political
economists, and other professedly hard-hearted persons present among
those whom I now address--I think it best to keep to safe generalities,
and to describe my love-making in as few sentences as the vast, though
soft, importance of the subject will allow me to use.

Let me confess, then, that I assumed the character of a fastidious
angler, and managed to be a week in discovering the right place to fish
in--always, it is unnecessary to say, under Alicia's guidance. We went
up the stream and down the stream, on one side. We crossed the bridge,
and went up the stream and down the stream on the other. We got into
a punt, and went up the stream (with great difficulty), and down the
stream (with great ease). We landed on a little island, and walked all
round it, and inspected the stream attentively from a central point of
view. We found the island damp, and went back to the bank, and up the
stream, and over the bridge, and down the stream again; and then, for
the first time, the sweet girl turned appealingly to me, and confessed
that she had exhausted her artless knowledge of the locality. It was
exactly a week from the day when I had first followed her into the
fields with my fishing-rod over my shoulder; and I had never yet caught
anything but Alicia's hand, and that not with my hook.

We sat down close together on the bank, entirely in consequence of our
despair at not finding a good fishing-place. I looked at the brown eyes,
and they turned away observantly down the stream. I followed them, and
they turned away inquiringly up the stream. Was this angel of patience
and kindness still looking for a fishing place? And was it _up_ the
stream, after all? No!--she smiled and shook her head when I asked the
question, and the brown eyes suddenly stole a look at me. I could
hold out no longer In one breathless moment I caught hold of both her
hands--in one stammering sentence I asked her if she would be my wife.

She tried faintly to free her hands--gave up the attempt--smiled--made
an effort to look grave--gave that up, too--sighed suddenly--checked
herself suddenly--said nothing. Perhaps I ought to have taken my answer
for granted; but the least business-like man that ever lived becomes
an eminently practical character in matters of love. I repeated my
question. She looked away confusedly; her eye lighted on a corner of
her father's red-brick house, peeping through a gap in the plantation
already mentioned; and her blushing cheeks lost their color instantly. I
felt her hands grow cold; she drew them resolutely out of mine, and rose
with the tears in her eyes. Had I offended her?

"No," she said when I asked her the question, and turned to me again,
and held out her hand with such frank, fearless kindness, that I almost
fell on my knees to thank her for it.

Might I hope ever to hear her say "Yes" to the question that I had asked
on the riverbank?

She sighed bitterly, and turned again toward the red-brick house.

Was there any family reason against her saying "Yes"? Anything that I
must not inquire into? Any opposition to be dreaded from her father?

The moment I mentioned her father, she shrank away from me and burst
into a violent fit of crying.

"Don't speak of it again!" she said in a broken voice. "I mustn't--you
mustn't--ah, don't, don't say a word more about it! I'm not distressed
with you--it is not your fault. Don't say anything--leave me quiet for a
minute. I shall soon be better it you leave me quiet."

She dried her eyes directly, with a shiver as if it was cold, and took
my arm. I led her back to the house-gate; and then, feeling that I
could not go in to lunch as usual, after what had happened, said I would
return to the fishing-place.

"Shall I come to dinner this evening?" I asked, as I rang the gate-bell
for her.

"Oh, yes--yes!--do come, or he--"

The mysterious man-servant opened the door, and we parted before she
could say the next words.




CHAPTER VIII.

I WENT back to the fishing-place with a heavy heart, overcome by
mournful thoughts, for the first time in my life. It was plain that
she did not dislike me, and equally plain that there was some obstacle
connected with her father, which forbade her to listen to my offer of
marriage. From the time when she had accidentally looked toward the
red-brick house, something in her manner which it is quite impossible
to describe, had suggested to my mind that this obstacle was not only
something she could not mention, but something that she was partly
ashamed of, partly afraid of, and partly doubtful about. What could it
be? How had she first known it? In what way was her father connected
with it?

In the course of our walks she had told me nothing about herself which
was not perfectly simple and unsuggestive.

Her childhood had been passed in England. After that, she had lived with
her father and mother at Paris, where the doctor had many friends--for
all of whom she remembered feeling more or less dislike, without being
able to tell why. They had then come to England, and had lived in
lodgings in London. For a time they had been miserably poor. But, after
her mother's death--a sudden death from heart disease--there had come a
change in their affairs, which she was quite unable to explain. They had
removed to their present abode, to give the doctor full accommodation
for the carrying on of his scientific pursuits. He often had occasion to
go to London; but never took her with him. The only woman at home
now, beside herself, was an elderly person, who acted as cook and
housekeeper, and who had been in their service for many years. It was
very lonely sometimes not having a companion of her own age and sex;
but she had got tolerably used to bear it, and to amuse herself with her
books, and music, and flowers.

Thus far she chatted about herself quite freely; but when I tried, even
in the vaguest manner, to lead her into discussing the causes of
her strangely secluded life, she looked so distressed, and became so
suddenly silent, that I naturally refrained from saying another word on
that topic. One conclusion, however, I felt tolerably sure that I had
drawn correctly from what she said: her father's conduct toward her,
though not absolutely blamable or grossly neglectful on any point,
had still never been of a nature to make her ardently fond of him. He
performed the ordinary parental duties rigidly and respectably enough;
but he had apparently not cared to win all the filial love which his
daughter would have bestowed on a more affectionate man.

When, after reflecting on what Alicia had told me, I began to call to
mind what I had been able to observe for myself, I found ample materials
to excite my curiosity in relation to the doctor, if not my distrust.

I have already described how I heard the clang of the heavy door, on the
occasion of my first visit to the red-brick house. The next day, when
the doctor again took leave of me in the hall, I hit on a plan for
seeing the door as well as hearing it. I dawdled on my way out, till I
heard the clang again; then pretended to remember some important message
which I had forgotten to give to the doctor, and with a look of innocent
hurry ran upstairs to overtake him. The disguised workman ran after
me with a shout of "Stop!" I was conveniently deaf to him--reached the
first floor landing--and arrived at a door which shut off the whole
staircase higher up; an iron door, as solid as if it belonged to a
banker's strong-room, and guarded millions of money. I returned to the
hall, inattentive to the servant's not over-civil remonstrances, and,
saying that I would wait till I saw the doctor again, left the house.

The next day two pale-looking men, in artisan costume, came up to the
gate at the same time as I did, each carrying a long wooden box under
his arm, strongly bound with iron. I tried to make them talk while we
were waiting for admission, but neither of them would go beyond "Yes,"
or "No"; and both had, to my eyes, some unmistakably sinister lines in
their faces. The next day the houskeeping cook came to the door--a buxom
old woman with a look and a ready smile, and something in her manner
which suggested that she had not begun life quite so respectably as she
was now ending it. She seemed to be decidedly satisfied with my personal
appearance; talked to me on indifferent matters with great glibness;
but suddenly became silent and diplomatic the moment I looked toward the
stair and asked innocently if she had to go up and down them often in
the course of the day. As for the doctor himself he was unapproachable
on the subject of the mysterious upper regions. If I introduced
chemistry in general into the conversation he begged me not to spoil his
happy holiday hours with his daughter and me, by leading him back to his
work-a-day thoughts. If I referred to his own experiments in particular
he always made a joke about being afraid of my chemical knowledge, and
of my wishing to anticipate him in his discoveries. In brief, after a
week's run of the lower regions, the upper part of the red-brick
house and the actual nature of its owner's occupations still remained
impenetrable mysteries to me, pry, ponder, and question as I might.

Thinking of this on the river-bank, in connection with the distressing
scene which I had just had with Alicia, I found that the mysterious
obstacle at which she had hinted, the mysterious life led by her
father, and the mysterious top of the house that had hitherto defied
my curiosity, all three connected themselves in my mind as links of the
same chain. The obstacle to my marrying Alicia was the thing that most
troubled me. If I only found out what it was, and if I made light of
it (which I was resolved beforehand to do, let it be what it might), I
should most probably end by overcoming her scruples, and taking her away
from the ominous red-brick house in the character of my wife. But how
was I to make the all-important discovery?

Cudgeling my brains for an answer to this question, I fell at last into
reasoning upon it, by a process of natural logic, something after this
fashion: The mysterious top of the house is connected with the
doctor, and the doctor is connected with the obstacle which has made
wretchedness between Alicia and me. If I can only get to the top of the
house, I may get also to the root of the obstacle. It is a dangerous and
an uncertain experiment; but, come what may of it, I will try and find
out, if human ingenuity can compass the means, what Doctor Dulcifer's
occupation really is, on the other side of that iron door.

Having come to this resolution (and deriving, let me add,
parenthetically, great consolation from it), the next subject of
consideration was the best method of getting safely into the top regions
of the house.

Picking the lock of the iron door was out of the question, from the
exposed nature of the situation which that mysterious iron barrier
occupied. My only possible way to the second floor lay by the back of
the house. I had looked up at it two or three times, while walking
in the garden after dinner with Alicia. What had I brought away in
my memory as the result of that casual inspection of my host's back
premises? Several fragments of useful information.

In the first place, one of the most magnificent vines I had ever seen
grew against the back wall of the house, trained carefully on a strong
trellis-work. In the second place, the middle first-floor back window
looked out on a little stone balcony, built on the top of the porch
over the garden door. In the third place, the back windows of the
second floor had been open, on each occasion when I had seen them--most
probably to air the house, which could not be ventilated from the front
during the hot summer weather, in consequence of the shut-up condition
of all the windows thereabouts. In the fourth place, hard by the
coach-house in which Doctor Dulcifer's neat gig was put up, there was a
tool-shed, in which the gardener kept his short pruning-ladder. In the
fifth and last place, outside the stable in which Doctor Dulcifer's
blood mare lived in luxurious solitude, was a dog-kennel with a large
mastiff chained to it night and day. If I could only rid myself of the
dog--a gaunt, half-starved brute, made savage and mangy by perpetual
confinement--I did not see any reason to despair of getting in
undiscovered at one of the second-floor windows--provided I waited until
a sufficiently late hour, and succeeded in scaling the garden wall at
the back of the house.

Life without Alicia being not worth having, I determined to risk the
thing that very night.

Going back at once to the town of Barkingham, I provided myself with a
short bit of rope, a little bull's-eye lantern, a small screwdriver, and
a nice bit of beef chemically adapted for the soothing of troublesome
dogs. I then dressed, disposed of these things neatly in my coat
pockets, and went to the doctor's to dinner. In one respect,
Fortune favored my audacity. It was the sultriest day of the whole
season--surely they could not think of shutting up the second-floor back
windows to-night!

Alicia was pale and silent. The lovely brown eyes, when they looked
at me, said as plainly as in words, "We have been crying a great deal,
Frank, since we saw you last." The little white fingers gave mine a
significant squeeze--and that was all the reference that passed between
us to what happened in the morning. She sat through the dinner bravely;
but, when the dessert came, left us for the night, with a few shy,
hurried words about the excessive heat of the weather being too much
for her. I rose to open the door, and exchanged a last meaning look with
her, as she bowed and went by me. Little did I think that I should have
to live upon nothing but the remembrance of that look for many weary
days that were yet to come.

The doctor was in excellent spirits, and almost oppressively hospitable.
We sat sociably chatting over our claret till past eight o'clock. Then
my host turned to his desk to write a letter before the post want out;
and I strolled away to smoke a cigar in the garden.

Second-floor back windows all open, atmosphere as sultry as ever,
gardener's pruning-ladder quite safe in the tool-shed, savage mastiff
in his kennel crunching his bones for supper. Good. The dog will not be
visited again tonight: I may throw my medicated bit of beef at once into
his kennel. I acted on the idea immediately; the dog seized his piece of
beef; I heard a snap, a wheeze, a choke, and a groan--and there was the
mastiff disposed of, inside the kennel, where nobody could find out that
he was dead till the time came for feeding him the next morning.

I went back to the doctor; we had a social glass of cold
brandy-and-water together; I lighted another cigar, and took my leave.
My host being too respectable a man not to keep early country hours, I
went away, as usual, about ten. The mysterious man-servant locked the
gate behind me. I sauntered on the road back to Barkingham for about
five minutes, then struck off sharp for the plantation, lighted
my lantern with the help of my cigar and a brimstone match of that
barbarous period, shut down the slide again, and made for the garden
wall.

It was formidably high, and garnished horribly with broken bottles;
but it was also old, and when I came to pick at the mortar with my
screw-driver, I found it reasonably rotten with age and damp.

I removed four bricks to make footholes in different positions up the
wall. It was desperately hard and long work, easy as it may sound in
description--especially when I had to hold on by the top of the wall,
with my flat opera hat (as we used to call it in those days) laid, as a
guard, between my hand and the glass, while I cleared a way through the
sharp bottle-ends for my other hand and my knees. This done, my great
difficulty was vanquished; and I had only to drop luxuriously into a
flower-bed on the other side of the wall.

Perfect stillness in the garden: no sign of a light anywhere at the back
of the house: first-floor windows all shut: second-floor windows still
open. I fetched the pruning-ladder; put it against the side of the
porch; tied one end of my bit of rope to the top round of it; took the
other end in my mouth, and prepared to climb to the balcony over the
porch by the thick vine branches and the trellis-work.

No man who has had any real experience of life can have failed to
observe how amazingly close, in critical situations, the grotesque
and the terrible, the comic and the serious, contrive to tread on each
other's heels. At such times, the last thing we ought properly to
think of comes into our heads, or the least consistent event that could
possibly be expected to happen does actually occur. When I put my
life in danger on that memorable night, by putting my foot on the
trellis-work, I absolutely thought of the never-dying Lady Malkinshaw
plunged in refreshing slumber, and of the frantic exclamations Mr.
Batterbury would utter if he saw what her ladyship's grandson was
doing with his precious life and limbs at that critical moment. I am no
hero--I was fully aware of the danger to which I was exposing myself;
and yet I protest that I caught myself laughing under my breath, with
the most outrageous inconsistency, at the instant when I began the
ascent of the trellis-work.

I reached the balcony over the porch in safety, depending more upon
the tough vine branches than the trellis-work during my ascent. My next
employment was to pull up the pruning-ladder, as softly as possible,
by the rope which I held attached to it. This done, I put the ladder
against the house wall, listened, measured the distance to the open
second-floor window with my eye, listened again--and, finding all quiet,
began my second and last ascent. The ladder was comfortably long, and I
was conveniently tall; my hand was on the window-sill--I mounted another
two rounds--and my eyes were level with the interior of the room.

Suppose any one should be sleeping there!

I listened at the window attentively before I ventured on taking my
lantern out of my coatpocket. The night was so quite and airless that
there was not the faintest rustle among the leaves in the garden beneath
me to distract my attention. I listened. The breathing of the lightest
of sleepers must have reached my ear, through that intense stillness, if
the room had been a bedroom, and the bed were occupied. I heard nothing
but the quick beat of my own heart. The minutes of suspense were passing
heavily--I laid my other hand over the window-sill, then a moment of
doubt came--doubt whether I should carry the adventure any further. I
mastered my hesitation directly--it was too late for second thoughts.
"Now for it!" I whispered to myself, and got in at the window.

To wait, listening again, in the darkness of that unknown region, was
more than I had courage for. The moment I was down on the floor, I
pulled the lantern out of my pocket and raised the shade.

So far, so good--I found myself in a dirty lumber-room. Large pans, some
of them cracked and more of them broken; empty boxes bound with iron, of
the same sort as those I had seen the workmen bringing in at the front
gate; old coal sacks; a packing-case full of coke; and a huge, cracked,
mouldy blacksmith's bellows--these were the principal objects that I
observed in the lumber-room. The one door leading out of it was open,
as I had expected it would be, in order to let the air through the back
window into the house. I took off my shoes, and stole into the passage.
My first impulse, the moment I looked along it, was to shut down my
lantern-shade, and listen again.

Still I heard nothing; but at the far end of the passage I saw a bright
light pouring through the half-opened door of one of the mysterious
front rooms.

I crept softly toward it. A decidedly chemical smell began to steal into
my nostrils--and, listening again, I thought I heard above me, and
in some distant room, a noise like the low growl of a large furnace,
muffled in some peculiar manner. Should I retrace my steps in that
direction? No--not till I had seen something of the room with the bright
light, outside of which I was now standing. I bent forward softly;
looking by little and little further and further through the opening of
the door, until my head and shoulders were fairly inside the room, and
my eyes had convinced me that no living soul, sleeping or waking, was in
any part of it at that particular moment. Impelled by a fatal curiosity,
I entered immediately, and began to look about me with eager eyes.

I saw iron ladles, pans full of white sand, files with white metal left
glittering in their teeth, molds of plaster of Paris, bags containing
the same material in powder, a powerful machine with the name and use
of which I was theoretically not unacquainted, white metal in a
partially-fused state, bottles of aquafortis, dies scattered over a
dresser, crucibles, sandpaper, bars of metal, and edged tools in plenty,
of the strangest construction. I was not at all a scrupulous man, as
the reader knows by this time; but when I looked at these objects, and
thought of Alicia, I could not for the life of me help shuddering. There
was not the least doubt about it, even after the little I had seen:
the important chemical pursuits to which Doctor Dulcifer was devoting
himself, meant, in plain English and in one word--Coining.

Did Alicia know what I knew now, or did she only suspect it?

Whichever way I answered that question in my own mind, I could be no
longer at any loss for an explanation of her behavior in the meadow
by the stream, or of that unnaturally gloomy, downcast look which
overspread her face when her father's pursuits were the subject of
conversation. Did I falter in my resolution to marry her, now that I had
discovered what the obstacle was which had made mystery and wretchedness
between us? Certainly not. I was above all prejudices. I was the
least particular of mankind. I had no family affection in my way--and,
greatest fact of all, I was in love. Under those circumstances what
Rogue of any spirit would have faltered? After the first shock of the
discovery was over, my resolution to be Alicia's husband was settled
more firmly than ever.

There was a little round table in a corner of the room furthest from
the door, which I had not yet examined. A feverish longing to look at
everything within my reach--to penetrate to the innermost recesses of
the labyrinth in which I had involved myself--consumed me. I went to the
table, and saw upon it, ranged symmetrically side by side, four objects
which looked like thick rulers wrapped up in silver paper. I opened the
paper at the end of one of the rulers, and found that it was composed of
half-crowns. I had closed the paper again, and was just raising my head
from the table over which it had been bent, when my right cheek came
in contact with something hard and cold. I started back--looked up--and
confronted Doctor Dulcifer, holding a pistol at my right temple.




CHAPTER IX.

THE doctor (like me) had his shoes off. The doctor (like me) had come
in without making the least noise. He cocked the pistol without saying a
word. I felt that I was probably standing face to face with death, and
I too said not a word. We two Rogues looked each other steadily and
silently in the face--he, the mighty and prosperous villain, with my
life in his hands: I, the abject and poor scamp, waiting his mercy.

It must have been at least a minute after I heard the click of the
cocked pistol before he spoke.

"How did you get here?" he asked.

The quiet commonplace terms in which he put his question, and the
perfect composure and politeness of his manner, reminded me a little of
Gentleman Jones. But the doctor was much the more respectable-looking
man of the two; his baldness was more intellectual and benevolent; there
was a delicacy and propriety in the pulpiness of his fat white chin, a
bland bagginess in his unwhiskered cheeks, a reverent roughness about
his eyebrows and a fullness in his lower eyelids, which raised him far
higher, physiognomically speaking, in the social scale, than my old
prison acquaintance. Put a shovel-hat on Gentleman Jones, and the effect
would only have been eccentric; put the same covering on the head of
Doctor Dulcifer, and the effect would have been strictly episcopal.

"How did you get here?" he repeated, still without showing the least
irritation.

I told him how I had got in at the second-floor window, without
concealing a word of the truth. The gravity of the situation, and the
sharpness of the doctor's intellects, as expressed in his eyes, made
anything like a suppression of facts on my part a desperately dangerous
experiment.

"You wanted to see what I was about up here, did you?" said he, when I
had ended my confession. "Do you know?"

The pistol barrel touched my cheek as he said the last words. I
thought of all the suspicious objects scattered about the room, of the
probability that he was only putting this question to try my courage, of
the very likely chance that he would shoot me forthwith, if I began to
prevaricate. I thought of these things, and boldly answered:

"Yes, I do know."

He looked at me reflectively; then said, in low, thoughtful tones,
speaking, not to me, but entirely to himself:

"Suppose I shoot him?"

I saw in his eye, that if I flinched, he would draw the trigger.

"Suppose you trust me?" I said, without moving a muscle.

"I trusted you, as an honest man, downstairs, and I find you, like a
thief, up here," returned the doctor, with a self-satisfied smile at
the neatness of his own retort. "No," he continued, relapsing into
soliloquy: "there is risk every way; but the least risk perhaps is to
shoot him."

"Wrong," said I. "There are relations of mine who have a pecuniary
interest in my life. I am the main condition of a contingent reversion
in their favor. If I am missed, I shall be inquired after." I have
wondered since at my own coolness in the face of the doctor's pistol;
but my life depended on my keeping my self-possession, and the desperate
nature of the situation lent me a desperate courage.

"How do I know you are not lying?" he asked.

"Have I not spoken the truth, hitherto?"

Those words made him hesitate. He lowered the pistol slowly to his side.
I began to breathe freely.

"Trust me," I repeated. "If you don't believe I would hold my tongue
about what I have seen here, for your sake, you may be certain that I
would for--"

"For my daughter's," he interposed, with a sarcastic smile.

I bowed with all imaginable cordiality. The doctor waved his pistol in
the air contemptuously.

"There are two ways of making you hold your tongue," he said. "The first
is shooting you; the second is making a felon of you. On consideration,
after what you have said, the risk in either case seems about equal. I
am naturally a humane man; your family have done me no injury; I will
not be the cause of their losing money; I won't take your life, I'll
have your character. We are all felons on this floor of the house. You
have come among us--you shall be one of us. Ring that bell."

He pointed with the pistol to a bell-handle behind me. I pulled it in
silence.

Felon! The word has an ugly sound--a very ugly sound. But, considering
how near the black curtain had been to falling over the adventurous
drama of my life, had I any right to complain of the prolongation of the
scene, however darkly it might look at first? Besides, some of the best
feelings of our common nature (putting out of all question the value
which men so unaccountably persist in setting on their own lives),
impelled me, of necessity, to choose the alternative of felonious
existence in preference to that of respectable death. Love and Honor
bade me live to marry Alicia; and a sense of family duty made me shrink
from occasioning a loss of three thousand pounds to my affectionate
sister. Perish the far-fetched scruples which would break the heart of
one lovely woman, and scatter to the winds the pin-money of another!

"If you utter one word in contradiction of anything I say when my
workmen come into the room," said the doctor, uncocking his pistol as
soon as I had rung the bell, "I shall change my mind about leaving your
life and taking your character. Remember that; and keep a guard on your
tongue."

The door opened, and four men entered. One was an old man whom I had not
seen before; in the other three I recognized the workman-like footman,
and the two sinister artisans whom I had met at the house-gate. They all
started, guiltily enough, at seeing me.

"Let me introduce you," said the doctor, taking me by the arm. "Old File
and Young File, Mill and Screw--Mr. Frank Softly. We have nicknames
in this workshop, Mr. Softly, derived humorously from our professional
tools and machinery. When you have been here long enough, you will get
a nickname, too. Gentlemen," he continued, turning to the workmen, "this
is a new recruit, with a knowledge of chemistry which will be useful to
us. He is perfectly well aware that the nature of our vocation makes
us suspicious of all newcomers, and he, therefore, desires to give you
practical proof that he is to be depended on, by making half-a-crown
immediately, and sending the same up, along with our handiwork, directed
in his own handwriting, to our estimable correspondents in London. When
you have all seen him do this of his own free will, and thereby put his
own life as completely within the power of the law as we have put
ours, you will know that he is really one of us, and will be under no
apprehensions for the future. Take great pains with him, and as soon as
he turns out a tolerably neat article, from the simple flatted plates,
under your inspection, let me know. I shall take a few hours' repose
on my camp-bed in the study, and shall be found there whenever you want
me."

He nodded to us all round in the most friendly manner, and left the
room.

I looked with considerable secret distrust at the four gentlemen who
were to instruct me in the art of making false coin. Young File was the
workman-like footman; Old File was his father; Mill and Screw were the
two sinister artisans. The man of the company whose looks I liked least
was Screw. He had wicked little twinkling eyes--and they followed me
about treacherously whenever I moved. "You and I, Screw, are likely to
quarrel," I thought to myself, as I tried vainly to stare him out of
countenance.

I entered on my new and felonious functions forthwith. Resistance was
useless, and calling for help would have been sheer insanity. It was
midnight; and, even supposing the windows had not been barred, the
house was a mile from any human habitation. Accordingly, I abandoned
myself to fate with my usual magnanimity. Only let me end in winning
Alicia, and I am resigned to the loss of whatever small shreds and
patches of respectability still hang about me--such was my philosophy.
I wish I could have taken higher moral ground with equally consoling
results to my own feelings.

The same regard for the well-being of society which led me to abstain
from entering into particulars on the subject of Old Master-making, when
I was apprenticed to Mr. Ishmael Pickup, now commands me to be equally
discreet on the kindred subject of Half-Crown-making, under the auspices
of Old File, Young File, Mill, and Screw.

Let me merely record that I was a kind of machine in the hands of these
four skilled workmen. I moved from room to room, and from process to
process, the creature of their directing eyes and guiding hands. I cut
myself, I burned myself, I got speechless from fatigue, and giddy from
want of sleep. In short, the sun of the new day was high in the heavens
before it was necessary to disturb Doctor Dulcifer. It had absolutely
taken me almost as long to manufacture a half-a-crown feloniously as
it takes a respectable man to make it honestly. This is saying a great
deal; but it is literally true for all that.

Looking quite fresh and rosy after his night's sleep, the doctor
inspected my coin with the air of a schoolmaster examining a little
boy's exercise; then handed it to Old File to put the finished touches
and correct the mistakes. It was afterward returned to me. My own hand
placed it in one of the rouleaux of false half-crowns; and my own hand
also directed the spurious coin, when it had been safely packed up, to
a certain London dealer who was to be on the lookout for it by the next
night's mail. That done, my initiation was so far complete.

"I have sent for your luggage, and paid your bill at the inn," said the
doctor; "of course in your name. You are now to enjoy the hospitality
that I could not extend to you before. A room upstairs has been prepared
for you. You are not exactly in a state of confinement; but, until your
studies are completed, I think you had better not interrupt them by
going out."

"A prisoner!" I exclaimed aghast.

"Prisoner is a hard word," answered the doctor. "Let us say, a guest
under surveillance."

"Do you seriously mean that you intend to keep me shut up in this part
of the house, at your will and pleasure?" I inquired, my heart sinking
lower and lower at every word I spoke.

"It is very spacious and airy," said the doctor; "as for the lower part
of the house, you would find no company there, so you can't want to go
to it."

"No company!" I repeated faintly.

"No. My daughter went away this morning for change of air and scene,
accompanied by my housekeeper. You look astonished, my dear sir--let
me frankly explain myself. While you were the respectable son of Doctor
Softly, and grandson of Lady Malkinshaw, I was ready enough to let my
daughter associate with you, and should not have objected if you had
married her off my hands into a highly-connected family. Now, however,
when you are nothing but one of the workmen in my manufactory of money,
your social position is seriously altered for the worse; and, as I could
not possibly think of you for a son-in-law, I have considered it best to
prevent all chance of your communicating with Alicia again, by sending
her away from this house while you are in it. You will be in it until I
have completed certain business arrangements now in a forward state of
progress--after that, you may go away if you please. Pray remember that
you have to thank yourself for the position you now stand in; and do
me the justice to admit that my conduct toward you is remarkably
straightforward, and perfectly natural under all the circumstances."

These words fairly overwhelmed me. I did not even make an attempt to
answer them. The hard trials to my courage, endurance, and physical
strength, through which I had passed within the last twelve hours, had
completely exhausted all my powers of resistance. I went away speechless
to my own room; and when I found myself alone there, burst out crying.
Childish, was it not?

When I had been rested and strengthened by a few hours' sleep, I found
myself able to confront the future with tolerable calmness.

What would it be best for me to do? Ought I to attempt to make my
escape? I did not despair of succeeding; but when I began to think of
the consequences of success, I hesitated. My chief object now was, not
so much to secure my own freedom, as to find my way to Alicia. I had
never been so deeply and desperately in love with her as I was now, when
I knew she was separated from me. Suppose I succeeded in escaping from
the clutches of Doctor Dulcifer--might I not be casting myself uselessly
on the world, without a chance of finding a single clew to trace her
by? Suppose, on the other hand, that I remained for the present in
the red-brick house--should I not by that course of conduct be putting
myself in the best position for making discoveries?

In the first place, there was the chance that Alicia might find some
secret means of communicating with me if I remained where I was. In the
second place, the doctor would, in all probability, have occasion to
write to his daughter, or would be likely to receive letters from her;
and, if I quieted all suspicion on my account, by docile behavior,
and kept my eyes sharply on the lookout, I might find opportunities of
surprising the secrets of his writing-desk. I felt that I need be under
no restraints of honor with a man who was keeping me a prisoner, and who
had made an accomplice of me by threatening my life. Accordingly,
while resolving to show outwardly an amiable submission to my fate, I
determined at the same time to keep secretly on the watch, and to take
the very first chance of outwitting Doctor Dulcifer that might happen
to present itself. When we next met I was perfectly civil to him. He was
too well-bred a man not to match me on the common ground of courtesy.

"Permit me to congratulate you," he said, "on the improvement in your
manner and appearance. You are beginning well, Francis. Go on as you
have begun."




CHAPTER X.

MY first few days' experience in my new position satisfied me that
Doctor Dulcifer preserved himself from betrayal by a system of
surveillance worthy of the very worst days of the Holy Inquisition
itself.

No man of us ever knew that he was not being overlooked at home, or
followed when he went out, by another man. Peepholes were pierced in the
wall of each room, and we were never certain, while at work, whose eye
was observing, or whose ear was listening in secret. Though we all lived
together, we were probably the least united body of men ever assembled
under one roof. By way of effectually keeping up the want of union
between us, we were not all trusted alike. I soon discovered that
Old File and Young File were much further advanced in the doctor's
confidence than Mill, Screw, or myself. There was a locked-up room,
and a continually-closed door shutting off a back staircase, of both of
which Old File and Young File possessed keys that were never so much as
trusted in the possession of the rest of us. There was also a trap-door
in the floor of the principal workroom, the use of which was known to
nobody but the doctor and his two privileged men. If we had not been all
nearly on an equality in the matter of wages, these distinctions
would have made bad blood among us. As it was, nobody having reason
to complain of unjustly-diminished wages, nobody cared about any
preferences in which profit was not involved.

The doctor must have gained a great deal of money by his skill as a
coiner. His profits in business could never have averaged less than five
hundred per cent; and, to do him justice, he was really a generous as
well as a rich master.

Even I, as a new hand, was, in fair proportion, as well paid by the week
as the rest.

We, of course, had nothing to do with the passing of false money--we
only manufactured it (sometimes at the rate of four hundred pounds'
worth in a week); and left its circulation to be managed by our
customers in London and the large towns. Whatever we paid for in
Barkingham was paid for in the genuine Mint coinage. I used often
to compare my own true guineas, half-crowns and shillings with our
imitations under the doctor's supervision, and was always amazed at the
resemblance. Our scientific chief had discovered a process something
like what is called electrotyping nowadays, as I imagine. He was very
proud of this; but he was prouder still of the ring of his metal, and
with reason: it must have been a nice ear indeed that could discover the
false tones in the doctor's coinage.

If I had been the most scrupulous man in the world, I must still have
received my wages, for the very necessary purpose of not appearing to
distinguish myself invidiously from my fellow-workmen. Upon the whole,
I got on well with them. Old File and I struck up quite a friendship.
Young File and Mill worked harmoniously with me, but Screw and I (as I
had foreboded) quarreled.

This last man was not on good terms with his fellows, and had less of
the doctor's confidence than any of the rest of us. Naturally not of a
sweet temper, his isolated position in the house had soured him, and he
rashly attempted to vent his ill-humor on me, as a newcomer. For some
days I bore with him patiently; but at last he got the better of my
powers of endurance; and I gave him a lesson in manners, one day, on the
educational system of Gentleman Jones. He did not return the blow, or
complain to the doctor; he only looked at me wickedly, and said: "I'll
be even with you for that, some of these days." I soon forgot the words
and the look.

With Old File, as I have said, I became quite friendly. Excepting the
secrets of our prison-house, he was ready enough to talk on subjects
about which I was curious.

He had known his present master as a young man, and was perfectly
familiar with all the events of his career. From various conversations,
at odds and ends of spare time, I discovered that Doctor Dulcifer had
begun life as a footman in a gentleman's family; that his young mistress
had eloped with him, taking away with her every article of value that
was her own personal property, in the shape of jewelry and dresses; that
they had lived upon the sale of these things for some time; and that
the husband, when the wife's means were exhausted, had turned
strolling-player for a year or two. Abandoning that pursuit, he had
next become a quack-doctor, first in a resident, then in a vagabond
capacity--taking a medical degree of his own conferring, and holding to
it as a good traveling title for the rest of his life. From the selling
of quack medicines he had proceeded to the adulterating of foreign
wines, varied by lucrative evening occupation in the Paris gambling
houses. On returning to his native land, he still continued to turn his
chemical knowledge to account, by giving his services to that particular
branch of our commercial industry which is commonly described as the
adulteration of commodities; and from this he had gradually risen to
the more refined pursuit of adulterating gold and silver--or, to use the
common phrase again, making bad money.

According to Old File's statement, though Doctor Dulcifer had never
actually ill-used his wife, he had never lived on kind terms with her:
the main cause of the estrangement between them, in later years, being
Mrs. Dulcifer's resolute resistance to her husband's plans for emerging
from poverty, by the simple process of coining his own money. The poor
woman still held fast by some of the principles imparted to her in
happier days; and she was devotedly fond of her daughter. At the time
of her sudden death, she was secretly making arrangements to leave
the doctor, and find a refuge for herself and her child in a foreign
country, under the care of the one friend of her family who had not cast
her off. Questioning my informant about Alicia next, I found that he
knew very little about her relations with her father in later years.
That she must long since have discovered him to be not quite so
respectable a man as he looked, and that she might suspect something
wrong was going on in the house at the present time, were, in Old File's
opinion, matters of certainty; but that she knew anything positively on
the subject of her father's occupations, he seemed to doubt. The doctor
was not the sort of man to give his daughter, or any other woman, the
slightest chance of surprising his secrets.

These particulars I gleaned during one long month of servitude and
imprisonment in the fatal red-brick house.

During all that time not the slightest intimation reached me of Alicia's
whereabouts. Had she forgotten me? I could not believe it. Unless
the dear brown eyes were the falsest hypocrites in the world, it was
impossible that she should have forgotten me. Was she watched? Were all
means of communicating with me, even in secret, carefully removed from
her? I looked oftener and oftener into the doctor's study as those
questions occurred to me; but he never quitted it without locking the
writing-desk first--he never left any papers scattered on the table, and
he was never absent from the room at any special times and seasons that
could be previously calculated upon. I began to despair, and to feel
in my lonely moments a yearning to renew that childish experiment of
crying, which I have already adverted to, in the way of confession.
Moralists will be glad to hear that I really suffered acute mental
misery at this time of my life. My state of depression would have
gratified the most exacting of Methodists; and my penitent face
would have made my fortune if I could only have been exhibited by a
reformatory association on the platform of Exeter Hall.

How much longer was this to last? Whither should I turn my steps when I
regained my freedom? In what direction throughout all England should I
begin to look for Alicia?

Sleeping and walking--working and idling--those were now my constant
thoughts. I did my best to prepare myself for every emergency that could
happen; I tried to arm myself beforehand against every possible accident
that could befall me. While I was still hard at work sharpening my
faculties and disciplining my energies in this way, an accident befell
the doctor, on the possibility of which I had not dared to calculate,
even in my most hopeful moments.




CHAPTER XI.

ONE morning I was engaged in the principal workroom with my employer. We
were alone. Old File and his son were occupied in the garrets. Screw had
been sent to Barkingham, accompanied, on the usual precautionary plan,
by Mill. They had been gone nearly an hour when the doctor sent me into
the next room to moisten and knead up some plaster of Paris. While I was
engaged in this occupation, I suddenly heard strange voices in the large
workroom. My curiosity was instantly excited. I drew back the little
shutter from the peephole in the wall, and looked through it.

I saw first my old enemy, Screw, with his villainous face much paler
than usual; next, two respectably-dressed strangers whom he appeared
to have brought into the room; and next to them Young File, addressing
himself to the doctor.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said my friend, the workman-like footman; "but
before these gentlemen say anything for themselves, I wish to explain,
as they seem strangers to you, that I only let them in after I had heard
them give the password. My instructions are to let anybody in on our
side of the door if they can give the password. No offense, sir, but I
want it to be understood that I have done my duty."

"Quite right, my man," said the doctor, in his blandest manner. "You may
go back to your work."

Young File left the room, with a scrutinizing look for the two strangers
and a suspicious frown for Screw.

"Allow us to introduce ourselves," began the elder of the two strangers.

"Pardon me for a moment," interposed the doctor. "Where is Mill?" he
added, turning to Screw.

"Doing our errands at Barkingham," answered Screw, turning paler than
ever.

"We happened to meet your two men, and to ask them the way to your
house," said the stranger who had just spoken. "This man, with a caution
that does him infinite credit, required to know our business before he
told us. We managed to introduce the password--'Happy-go-lucky'--into
our answer. This of course quieted suspicion; and he, at our request,
guided us here, leaving his fellow-workman, as he has just told you, to
do all errands at Barkingham."

While these words were being spoken, I saw Screw's eyes wandering
discontentedly and amazedly round the room. He had left me in it with
the doctor before he went out: was he disappointed at not finding me in
it on his return?

While this thought was passing through my mind, the stranger resumed his
explanations.

"We are here," he said, "as agents appointed to transact private
business, out of London, for Mr. Manasseh, with whom you have dealings,
I think?"

"Certainly," said the doctor, with a smile.

"And who owes you a little account, which we are appointed to settle."

"Just so!" remarked the doctor, pleasantly rubbing his hands one over
the other. "My good friend, Mr. Manasseh, does not like to trust the
post, I suppose? Very glad to make your acquaintance, gentlemen. Have
you got the little memorandum about you?"

"Yes; but we think there is a slight inaccuracy in it. Have you any
objection to let us refer to your ledger?"

"Not the least in the world. Screw, go down into my private laboratory,
open the table-drawer nearest the window, and bring up a locked book,
with a parchment cover, which you will find in it."

As Screw obeyed I saw a look pass between him and the two strangers
which made me begin to feel a little uneasy. I thought the doctor
noticed it too; but he preserved his countenance, as usual, in a state
of the most unruffled composure.

"What a time that fellow is gone!" he exclaimed gayly. "Perhaps I had
better go and get the book myself."

The two strangers had been gradually lessening the distance between
the doctor and themselves, ever since Screw had left the room. The last
words were barely out of his mouth, before they both sprang upon him,
and pinioned his arms with their hands.

"Steady, my fine fellow," said Mr. Manasseh's head agent. "It's no go.
We are Bow Street runners, and we've got you for coining."

"Not a doubt of it," said the doctor, with the most superb coolness.
"You needn't hold me. I'm not fool enough to resist when I'm fairly
caught."

"Wait till we've searched you; and then we'll talk about that," said the
runner.*

The doctor submitted to the searching with the patience of a martyr.
No offensive weapon being found in his pockets, they allowed him to sit
down unmolested in the nearest chair.

"Screw, I suppose?" said the doctor, looking inquiringly at the
officers.

"Exactly," said the principal man of the two. "We have been secretly
corresponding with him for weeks past. We have nabbed the man who went
out with him, and got him safe at Barkingham. Don't expect Screw back
with the ledger. As soon as he has made sure that the rest of you are in
the house, he is to fetch another man or two of our Bow Street lot, who
are waiting outside till they hear from us. We only want an old man and
a young one, and a third pal of yours who is a gentleman born, to make
a regular clearance in the house. When we have once got you all, it
will be the prettiest capture that's ever been made since I was in the
force."

What the doctor answered to this I cannot say. Just as the officer had
done speaking, I heard footsteps approaching the room in which I was
listening. Was Screw looking for me? I instantly closed the peephole
and got behind the door. It opened back upon me, and, sure enough, Screw
entered cautiously.

An empty old wardrobe stood opposite the door. Evidently suspecting
that I might have taken the alarm and concealed myself inside it, he
approached it on tiptoe. On tiptoe also I followed him; and, just as his
hands were on the wardrobe door, my hands were on his throat. He was
a little man, and no match for me. I easily and gently laid him on his
back, in a voiceless and half-suffocated state--throwing myself right
over him, to keep his legs quiet. When I saw his face getting black, and
his small eyes growing largely globular, I let go with one hand, crammed
my empty plaster of Paris bag, which lay close by, into his mouth,
tied it fast, secured his hands and feet, and then left him perfectly
harmless, while I took counsel with myself how best to secure my own
safety.

I should have made my escape at once; but for what I heard the officer
say about the men who were waiting outside. Were they waiting near or
at a distance? Were they on the watch at the front or the back of
the house? I thought it highly desirable to give myself a chance of
ascertaining their whereabouts from the talk of the officers in the
next room, before I risked the possibility of running right into their
clutches on the outer side of the door.

I cautiously opened the peephole once more.

The doctor appeared to be still on the most friendly terms with his
vigilant guardians from Bow Street.

"Have you any objection to my ringing for some lunch, before we are
all taken off to London together?" I heard him ask in his most cheerful
tones. "A glass of wine and a bit of bread and cheese won't do you any
harm, gentlemen, if you are as hungry as I am."

"If you want to eat and drink, order the victuals at once," replied one
of the runners, sulkily. "We don't happen to want anything ourselves."

"Sorry for it," said the doctor. "I have some of the best old Madeira in
England."

"Like enough," retorted the officer sarcastically. "But you see we are
not quite such fools as we look; and we have heard of such a thing, in
our time, as hocussed wine."

"O fie! fie!" exclaimed the doctor merrily. "Remember how well I am
behaving myself, and don't wound my feelings by suspecting me of such
shocking treachery as that!"

He moved to a corner of the room behind him, and touched a knob in the
wall which I had never before observed. A bell rang directly, which had
a new tone in it to my ears.

"Too bad," said the doctor, turning round again to the runners; "really
too bad, gentlemen, to suspect me of that!"

Shaking his head deprecatingly, he moved back to the corner, pulled
aside something in the wall, disclosed the mouth of a pipe which was a
perfect novelty to me, and called down it.

"Moses!"

It was the first time I had heard that name in the house.

"Who is Moses?" inquired the officers both together, advancing on him
suspiciously.

"Only my servant," answered the doctor. He turned once more to the pipe,
and called down it:

"Bring up the Stilton Cheese, and a bottle of the Old Madeira."

The cheese we had in use at that time was of purely Dutch extraction.
I remembered Port, Sherry, and Claret in my palmy dinner-days at
the doctor's family-table; but certainly not Old Madeira. Perhaps
he selfishly kept his best wine and his choicest cheese for his own
consumption.

"Sam," said one of the runners to the other, "you look to our civil
friend here, and I'll grab Moses when he brings up the lunch."

"Would you like to see what the operation of coining is, while my man
is getting the lunch ready?" said the doctor. "It may be of use to me
at the trial, if you can testify that I afforded you every facility
for finding out anything you might want to know. Only mention my polite
anxiety to make things easy and instructive from the very first, and
I may get recommended to mercy. See here--this queer-looking machine,
gentlemen (from which two of my men derive their nicknames), is what we
call a Mill-and-Screw."

He began to explain the machine with the manner and tone of a lecturer
at a scientific institution. In spite of themselves, the officers burst
out laughing. I looked round at Screw as the doctor got deeper into his
explanations. The traitor was rolling his wicked eyes horribly at me.
They presented so shocking a sight, that I looked away again. What was I
to do next? The minutes were getting on, and I had not heard a word
yet, through the peephole, on the subject of the reserve of Bow Street
runners outside. Would it not be best to risk everything, and get away
at once by the back of the house?

Just as I had resolved on venturing the worst, and making my escape
forthwith, I heard the officers interrupt the doctor's lecture.

"Your lunch is a long time coming," said one of them.

"Moses is lazy," answered the doctor; "and the Madeira is in a remote
part of the cellar. Shall I ring again?"

"Hang your ringing again!" growled the runner, impatiently. "I don't
understand why our reserve men are not here yet. Suppose you go and give
them a whistle, Sam."

"I don't half like leaving you," returned Sam. "This learned gentleman
here is rather a shifty sort of chap; and it strikes me that two of us
isn't a bit too much to watch him."

"What's that?" exclaimed Sam's comrade, suspiciously.

A crash of broken crockery in the lower part of the house had followed
that last word of the cautious officer's speech. Naturally, I could draw
no special inference from the sound; but, for all that, it filled me
with a breathless interest and suspicion, which held me irresistibly at
the peephole--though the moment before I had made up my mind to fly from
the house.

"Moses is awkward as well as lazy," said the doctor. "He has dropped the
tray! Oh, dear, dear me! he has certainly dropped the tray."

"Let's take our learned friend downstairs between us," suggested Sam. "I
shan't be easy till we've got him out of the house."

"And I shan't be easy if we don't handcuff him before we leave the
room," returned the other.

"Rude conduct, gentlemen--after all that has passed, remarkably rude
conduct," said the doctor. "May I, at least, get my hat while my hands
are at liberty? It hangs on that peg opposite to us." He moved toward it
a few steps into the middle of the room while he spoke.

"Stop!" said Sam; "I'll get your hat for you. We'll see if there's
anything inside it or not, before you put it on."

The doctor stood stockstill, like a soldier at the word, Halt.

"And I'll get the handcuffs," said the other runner, searching his
coat-pockets.

The doctor bowed to him assentingly and forgivingly.

"Only oblige me with my hat, and I shall be quite ready for you," he
said--paused for one moment, then repeated the words, "Quite ready," in
a louder tone--and instantly disappeared through the floor!

I saw the two officers rush from opposite ends of the room to a great
opening in the middle of it. The trap-door on which the doctor had been
standing, and on which he had descended, closed up with a bang at the
same moment; and a friendly voice from the lower regions called out
gayly, "Good-by!"

The officers next made for the door of the room. It had been locked from
the other side. As they tore furiously at the handle, the roll of the
wheels of the doctor's gig sounded on the drive in front of the house;
and the friendly voice called out once more, "Good-by!"

I waited just long enough to see the baffled officers unbarring the
window shutters for the purpose of giving the alarm, before I closed the
peephole, and with a farewell look at the distorted face of my prostrate
enemy, Screw, left the room.

The doctor's study-door was open as I passed it on my way downstairs.
The locked writing-desk, which probably contained the only clew to
Alicia's retreat that I was likely to find, was in its usual place on
the table. There was no time to break it open on the spot. I rolled it
up in my apron, took it off bodily under my arm, and descended to the
iron door on the staircase. Just as I was within sight of it, it was
opened from the landing on the other side. I turned to run upstairs
again, when a familiar voice cried, "Stop!" and looking round, I beheld
Young File.

"All right!" he said. "Father's off with the governor in the gig, and
the runners in hiding outside are in full cry after them. If Bow Street
can get within pistol-shot of the blood mare, all I can say is, I give
Bow Street full leave to fire away with both barrels! Where's Screw?"

"Gagged by me in the casting-room."

"Well done, you! Got all your things, I see, under your arm? Wait two
seconds while I grab my money. Never mind the rumpus upstairs--there's
nobody outside to help them; and the gate's locked, if there was."

He darted past me up the stairs. I could hear the imprisoned officers
shouting for help from the top windows. Their reserve men must have been
far away, by this time, in pursuit of the gig; and there was not much
chance of their getting useful help from any stray countryman who might
be passing along the road, except in the way of sending a message to
Barkingham. Anyhow we were sure of a half hour to escape in, at the very
least.

"Now then," said Young File, rejoining me; "let's be off by the back way
through the plantations. How came you to lay your lucky hands on Screw?"
he continued, when we had passed through the iron door, and had closed
it after us.

"Tell me first how the doctor managed to make a hole in the floor just
in the nick of time."

"What! did you see the trap sprung?"

"I saw everything."

"The devil you did! Had you any notion that signals were going on, all
the while you were on the watch? We have a regular set of them in case
of accidents. It's a rule that father, and me, and the doctor are
never to be in the workroom together--so as to keep one of us always at
liberty to act on the signals.--Where are you going to?"

"Only to get the gardener's ladder to help us over the wall. Go on."

"The first signal is a private bell--that means, _Listen at the pipe._
The next is a call down the pipe for 'Moses'--that means, _Danger! Lock
the door._ 'Stilton Cheese' means, _Put the Mare to;_ and 'Old Madeira'
_Stand by the trap._ The trap works in that locked-up room you never got
into; and when our hands are on the machinery, we are awkward enough
to have a little accident with the luncheon tray. 'Quite Ready' is the
signal to lower the trap, which we do in the regular theater-fashion. We
lowered the doctor smartly enough, as you saw, and got out by the back
staircase. Father went in the gig, and I let them out and locked the
gates after them. Now you know as much as I've got breath to tell you."

We scaled the wall easily by the help of the ladder. When we were down
on the other side, Young File suggested that the safest course for us
was to separate, and for each to take his own way. We shook hands and
parted. He went southward, toward London, and I went westward, toward
the sea-coast, with Doctor Dulcifer's precious writing-desk safe under
my arm.

     * The "Bow Street runners" of those days were the
     predecessors of the detective police of the present time.





CHAPTER XII.

FOR a couple of hours I walked on briskly, careless in what direction I
went, so long as I kept my back turned on Barkingham.

By the time I had put seven miles of ground, according to my
calculations, between me and the red-brick house, I began to look upon
the doctor's writing-desk rather in the light of an incumbrance, and
determined to examine it without further delay. Accordingly I picked up
the first large stone I could find in the road, crossed a common, burst
through a hedge, and came to a halt, on the other side, in a thick wood.
Here, finding myself well screened from public view, I broke open the
desk with the help of the stone, and began to look over the contents.

To my unspeakable disappointment I found but few papers of any kind
to examine. The desk was beautifully fitted with all the necessary
materials for keeping up a large correspondence; but there were not
more than half a dozen letters in it altogether. Four were on business
matters, and the other two were of a friendly nature, referring to
persons and things in which I did not feel the smallest interest. I
found besides half a dozen bills receipted (the doctor was a mirror of
punctuality in the payment of tradesmen), note and letter-paper of the
finest quality, clarified pens, a pretty little pin-cushion, two small
account-books filled with the neatest entries, and some leaves
of blotting-paper. Nothing else; absolutely nothing else, in the
treacherous writing-desk on which I had implicitly relied to guide me to
Alicia's hiding-place.

I groaned in sheer wretchedness over the destruction of all my dearest
plans and hopes. If the Bow Street runners had come into the plantation
just as I had completed the rifling of the desk I think I should have
let them take me without making the slightest effort at escape. As it
was, no living soul appeared within sight of me. I must have sat at the
foot of a tree for full half an hour, with the doctor's useless bills
and letters before me, with my head in my hands, and with all my
energies of body and mind utterly crushed by despair.

At the end of the half hour, the natural restlessness of my faculties
began to make itself felt.

Whatever may be said about it in books, no emotion in this world ever
did, or ever will, last for long together. The strong feeling may return
over and over again; but it must have its constant intervals of change
or repose. In real life the bitterest grief doggedly takes its rest and
dries its eyes; the heaviest despair sinks to a certain level, and stops
there to give hope a chance of rising, in spite of us. Even the joy of
an unexpected meeting is always an imperfect sensation, for it never
lasts long enough to justify our secret anticipations--our happiness
dwindles to mere every-day contentment before we have half done with it.

I raised my head, and gathered the bills and letters together, and stood
up a man again, wondering at the variableness of my own temper, at the
curious elasticity of that toughest of all the vital substances within
us, which we call Hope. "Sitting and sighing at the foot of this tree,"
I thought, "is not the way to find Alicia, or to secure my own safety.
Let me circulate my blood and rouse my ingenuity, by taking to the road
again."

Before I forced my way back to the open side of the hedge, I thought it
desirable to tear up the bills and letters, for fear of being traced by
them if they were found in the plantation. The desk I left where it was,
there being no name on it. The note-paper and pens I pocketed--forlorn
as my situation was, it did not authorize me to waste stationery. The
blotting-paper was the last thing left to dispose of: two neatly-folded
sheets, quite clean, except in one place, where the impression of a few
lines of writing appeared. I was about to put the blotting-paper into
my pocket after the pens, when something in the look of the writing
impressed on it, stopped me.

Four blurred lines appeared of not more than two or three words each,
running out one beyond another regularly from left to right. Had the
doctor been composing poetry and blotting it in a violent hurry? At a
first glance, that was more than I could tell. The order of the written
letters, whatever they might be, was reversed on the face of the
impression taken of them by the blotting-paper. I turned to the other
side of the leaf. The order of the letters was now right, but the
letters themselves were sometimes too faintly impressed, sometimes
too much blurred together to be legible. I held the leaf up to the
light--and there was a complete change: the blurred letters grew
clearer, the invisible connecting lines appeared--I could read the words
from first to last.

The writing must have been hurried, and it had to all appearance been
hurriedly dried toward the corner of a perfectly clean leaf of the
blotting-paper. After twice reading, I felt sure that I had made out
correctly the following address:

Miss Giles, 2 Zion Place, Crickgelly, N. Wales.

It was hard under the circumstances, to form an opinion as to the
handwriting; but I thought I could recognize the character of some of
the doctor's letters, even in the blotted impression of them. Supposing
I was right, who was Miss Giles?

Some Welsh friend of the doctor's, unknown to me? Probably enough. But
why not Alicia herself under an assumed name? Having sent her from home
to keep her out of my way, it seemed next to a certainty that her father
would take all possible measures to prevent my tracing her, and would,
therefore, as a common act of precaution, forbid her to travel under her
own name. Crickgelly, North Wales, was assuredly a very remote place to
banish her to; but then the doctor was not a man to do things by halves:
he knew the lengths to which my cunning and resolution were capable of
carrying me; and he would have been innocent indeed if he had hidden his
daughter from me in any place within reasonable distance of Barkingham.
Last, and not least important, Miss Giles sounded in my ears exactly
like an assumed name.

Was there ever any woman absolutely and literally named Miss Giles?
However I may have altered my opinion on this point since, my mind was
not in a condition at that time to admit the possible existence of any
such individual as a maiden Giles. Before, therefore, I had put the
precious blotting-paper into my pocket, I had satisfied myself that
my first duty, under all the circumstances, was to shape my flight
immediately to Crickgelly. I could be certain of nothing--not even
of identifying the doctor's handwriting by the impression on the
blotting-paper. But provided I kept clear of Barkingham, it was all
the same to me what part of the United Kingdom I went to; and, in
the absence of any actual clew to her place of residence, there was
consolation and encouragement even in following an imaginary trace.
My spirits rose to their natural height as I struck into the highroad
again, and beheld across the level plain the smoke, chimneys, and church
spires of a large manufacturing town. There I saw the welcome promise
of a coach--the happy chance of making my journey to Crickgelly easy and
rapid from the very outset.

On my way to the town, I was reminded by the staring of all the people I
passed on the road, of one important consideration which I had hitherto
most unaccountably overlooked--the necessity of making some radical
change in my personal appearance.

I had no cause to dread the Bow Street runners, for not one of them
had seen me; but I had the strongest possible reasons for distrusting a
meeting with my enemy, Screw. He would certainly be made use of by
the officers for the purpose of identifying the companions whom he had
betrayed; and I had the best reasons in the world to believe that he
would rather assist in the taking of me than in the capture of all the
rest of the coining gang put together--the doctor himself not excepted.
My present costume was of the dandy sort--rather shabby, but gay in
color and outrageous in cut. I had not altered it for an artisan's suit
in the doctor's house, because I never had any intention of staying
there a day longer than I could possibly help. The apron in which I had
wrapped the writing-desk was the only approach I had made toward wearing
the honorable uniform of the workingman.

Would it be wise now to make my transformation complete, by adding to
the apron a velveteen jacket and a sealskin cap? No: my hands were
too white, my manners too inveterately gentleman-like, for all artisan
disguise. It would be safer to assume a serious character--to shave
off my whiskers, crop my hair, buy a modest hat and umbrella, and dress
entirely in black. At the first slopshop I encountered in the suburbs of
the town, I got a carpet-bag and a clerical-looking suit. At the first
easy shaving-shop I passed, I had my hair cropped and my whiskers taken
off. After that I retreated again to the country--walked back till I
found a convenient hedge down a lane off the highroad--changed my upper
garments behind it, and emerged, bashful, black, and reverend, with my
cotton umbrella tucked modestly under my arm, my eyes on the ground, my
head in the air, and my hat off my forehead. When I found two laborers
touching their caps to me on my way back to the town, I knew that it was
all right, and that I might now set the vindictive eyes of Screw himself
safely at defiance.

I had not the most distant notion where I was when I reached the High
Street, and stopped at The Green Bull Hotel and Coach-office. However,
I managed to mention my modest wishes to be conveyed at once in the
direction of Wales, with no more than a becoming confusion of manner.

The answer was not so encouraging as I could have wished. The coach to
Shrewsbury had left an hour before, and there would be no other public
conveyance running in my direct ion until the next morning. Finding
myself thus obliged to yield to adverse circumstances, I submitted
resignedly, and booked a place outside by the next day's coach, in the
name of the Reverend John Jones. I thought it desirable to be at once
unassuming and Welsh in the selection of a traveling name; and therefore
considered John Jones calculated to fit me, in my present emergency, to
a hair.

After securing a bed at the hotel, and ordering a frugal curate's dinner
(bit of fish, two chops, mashed potatoes, semolina pudding, half-pint of
sherry), I sallied out to look at the town.

Not knowing the name of it, and not daring to excite surprise by asking,
I found the place full of vague yet mysterious interest. Here I was,
somewhere in central England, just as ignorant of localities as if I had
been suddenly deposited in Central Africa. My lively fancy revelled in
the new sensation. I invented a name for the town, a code of laws
for the inhabitants, productions, antiquities, chalybeate springs,
population, statistics of crime, and so on, while I walked about the
streets, looked in at the shop-windows, and attentively examined the
Market-place and Town-hall. Experienced travelers, who have exhausted
all novelties, would do well to follow my example; they may be certain,
for one day at least, of getting some fresh ideas, and feeling a new
sensation.

On returning to dinner in the coffee-room, I found all the London papers
on the table.

The _Morning Post_ happened to lie uppermost, so I took it away to
my own seat to occupy the time, while my unpretending bit of fish was
frying. Glancing lazily at the advertisements on the first page, to
begin with, I was astonished by the appearance of the following lines,
at the top of a column:



"If F-- --K S--FTL--Y will communicate with his distressed and alarmed
relatives, Mr. and Mrs. B--TT--RB--RY, he will hear of something to
his advantage, and may be assured that all will be once more forgiven.
A--B--LLA entreats him to write."



What, in the name of all that is most mysterious, does this mean! was my
first thought after reading the advertisement. Can Lady Malkinshaw have
taken a fresh lease of that impregnable vital tenement, at the door of
which Death has been knocking vainly for so many years past? (Nothing
more likely.) Was my felonious connection with Doctor Dulcifer
suspected? (It seemed improbable.) One thing, however, was certain: I
was missed, and the Batterburys were naturally anxious about me--anxious
enough to advertise in the public papers.

I debated with myself whether I should answer their pathetic appeal
or not. I had all my money about me (having never let it out of my own
possession during my stay in the red-brick house), and there was plenty
of it for the present; so I thought it best to leave the alarm and
distress of my anxious relatives unrelieved for a little while longer,
and to return quietly to the perusal of the _ Morning Post._

Five minutes of desultory reading brought me unexpectedly to an
explanation of the advertisement, in the shape of the following
paragraph:



"ALARMING ILLNESS OF LADY MALKINSHAW.--We regret to announce that this
venerable lady was seized with an alarming illness on Saturday last,
at her mansion in town. The attack took the character of a fit--of what
precise nature we have not been able to learn. Her ladyship's medical
attendant and near relative, Doctor Softly, was immediately called
in, and predicted the most fatal results. Fresh medical attendance was
secured, and her ladyship's nearest surviving relatives, Mrs. Softly,
and Mr. and Mrs. Batterbury, of Duskydale Park, were summoned. At
the time of their arrival her ladyship's condition was comatose, her
breathing being highly stertorous. If we are rightly informed, Doctor
Softly and the other medical gentlemen present gave it as their opinion
that if the pulse of the venerable sufferer did not rally in the course
of a quarter of an hour at most, very lamentable results might be
anticipated. For fourteen minutes, as our reporter was informed, no
change took place; but, strange to relate, immediately afterward her
ladyship's pulse rallied suddenly in the most extraordinary manner. She
was observed to open her eyes very wide, and was heard, to the surprise
and delight of all surrounding the couch, to ask why her ladyship's
usual lunch of chicken-broth with a glass of Amontillado sherry was not
placed on the table as usual. These refreshments having been produced,
under the sanction of the medical gentlemen, the aged patient partook
of them with an appearance of the utmost relish. Since this happy
alteration for the better, her ladyship's health has, we rejoice to
say, rapidly improved; and the answer now given to all friendly
and fashionable inquirers is, in the venerable lady's own humorous
phraseology, 'Much better than could be expected.'"


Well done, my excellent grandmother! my firm, my unwearied, my undying
friend! Never can I say that my case is desperate while you can swallow
your chicken-broth and sip your Amontillado sherry. The moment I want
money, I will write to Mr. Batterbury, and cut another little golden
slice out of that possible three-thousand-pound-cake, for which he has
already suffered and sacrificed so much. In the meantime, O venerable
protectress of the wandering Rogue! let me gratefully drink your health
in the nastiest and smallest half-pint of sherry this palate ever
tasted, or these eyes ever beheld!

I went to bed that night in great spirits. My luck seemed to be
returning to me; and I began to feel more than hopeful of really
discovering my beloved Alicia at Crickgelly, under the alias of Miss
Giles.

The next morning the Rev. John Jones descended to breakfast so rosy,
bland, and smiling, that the chambermaids simpered as he tripped by
them in the passage, and the landlady bowed graciously as he passed
her parlor door. The coach drove up, and the reverend gentleman (after
waiting characteristically for the woman's ladder) mounted to his place
on the roof, behind the coachman. One man sat there who had got up
before him--and who should that man be, but the chief of the Bow Street
runners, who had rashly tried to take Doctor Dulcifer into custody!

There could not be the least doubt of his identity; I should have known
his face again among a hundred. He looked at me as I took my place by
his side, with one sharp searching glance--then turned his head away
toward the road. Knowing that he had never set eyes on my face (thanks
to the convenient peephole at the red-brick house), I thought my meeting
with him was likely to be rather advantageous than otherwise. I had now
an opportunity of watching the proceedings of one of our pursuers, at
any rate--and surely this was something gained.

"Fine morning, sir," I said politely.

"Yes," he replied in the gruffest of monosyllables.

I was not offended: I could make allowance for the feelings of a man who
had been locked up by his own prisoner.

"Very fine morning, indeed," I repeated, soothingly and cheerfully.

The runner only grunted this time. Well, well! we all have our little
infirmities. I don't think the worse of the man now, for having been
rude to me, that morning, on the top of the Shrewsbury coach.

The next passenger who got up and placed himself by my side was a
florid, excitable, confused-looking gentleman, excessively talkative
and familiar. He was followed by a sulky agricultural youth in
top-boots--and then, the complement of passengers on our seat behind the
coachman was complete.

"Heard the news, sir?" said the florid man, turning to me.

"Not that I am aware of," I answered.

"It's the most tremendous thing that has happened these fifty
years," said the florid man. "A gang of coiners, sir, discovered at
Barkingham--in a house they used to call the Grange. All the dreadful
lot of bad silver that's been about, they're at the bottom of. And the
head of the gang not taken!--escaped, sir, like a ghost on the stage,
through a trap-door, after actually locking the runners into his
workshop. The blacksmiths from Barkingham had to break them out; the
whole house was found full of iron doors, back staircases, and all that
sort of thing, just like the Inquisition. A most respectable man, the
original proprietor! Think what a misfortune to have let his house to a
scoundrel who has turned the whole inside into traps, furnaces, and iron
doors. The fellow's reference, sir, was actually at a London bank, where
he kept a first-rate account. What is to become of society? where is our
protection? Where are our characters, when we are left at the mercy of
scoundrels? The times are awful--upon my soul, the times we live in are
perfectly awful!"

"Pray, sir, is there any chance of catching this coiner?" I inquired
innocently.

"I hope so, sir; for the sake of outraged society, I hope so," said
the excitable man. "They've printed handbills at Barkingham, offering
a reward for taking him. I was with my friend the mayor, early this
morning, and saw them issued. 'Mr. Mayor,' says I, 'I'm going West--give
me a few copies--let me help to circulate them--for the sake of outraged
society, let me help to circulate them. Here they are--take a few, sir,
for distribution. You'll see these are three other fellows to be
caught besides the principal rascal--one of them a scamp belonging to
a respectable family. Oh! what times! Take three copies, and pray
circulate them in three influential quarters. Perhaps that gentleman
next you would like a few. Will you take three, sir?"

"No, I won't," said the Bow Street runner doggedly. "Nor yet one of
'em--and it's my opinion that the coining-gang would be nabbed all the
sooner, if you was to give over helping the law to catch them."

This answer produced a vehement expostulation from my excitable
neighbor, to which I paid little attention, being better engaged in
reading the handbill.

It described the doctor's personal appearance with remarkable accuracy,
and cautioned persons in seaport towns to be on the lookout for him. Old
File, Young File, and myself were all dishonorably mentioned together
in a second paragraph, as runaways of inferior importance Not a word was
said in the handbill to show that the authorities at Barkingham even so
much as suspected the direction in which any one of us had escaped. This
would have been very encouraging, but for the presence of the runner
by my side, which looked as if Bow Street had its suspicions, however
innocent Barkingham might be.

Could the doctor have directed his flight toward Crickgelly? I trembled
internally as the question suggested itself to me. Surely he would
prefer writing to Miss Giles to join him when he got to a safe place of
refuge, rather than encumber himself with the young lady before he was
well out of reach of the far-stretching arm of the law. This seemed
infinitely the most natural course of conduct. Still, there was the
runner traveling toward Wales--and not certainly without a special
motive. I put the handbills in my pocket, and listened for any hints
which might creep out in his talk; but he perversely kept silent.
The more my excitable neighbor tried to dispute with him, the more
contemptuously he refused to break silence. I began to feel vehemently
impatient for our arrival at Shrewsbury; for there only could I hope to
discover something more of my formidable fellow-traveler's plans.

The coach stopped for dinner; and some of our passengers left us, the
excitable man with the handbills among the number. I got down, and stood
on the doorstep of the inn, pretending to be looking about me, but in
reality watching the movements of the runner.

Rather to my surprise, I saw him go to the door of the coach and speak
to one of the inside passengers. After a short conversation, of which I
could not hear one word, the runner left the coach door and entered
the inn, called for a glass of brandy and water, and took it out to
his friend, who had not left the vehicle. The friend bent forward to
receive it at the window. I caught a glimpse of his face, and felt my
knees tremble under me--it was Screw himself!

Screw, pale and haggard-looking, evidently not yet recovered from the
effect of my grip on his throat! Screw, in attendance on the runner,
traveling inside the coach in the character of an invalid. He must be
going this journey to help the Bow Street officers to identify some one
of our scattered gang of whom they were in pursuit. It could not be the
doctor--the runner could discover him without assistance from anybody.
Why might it not be me?

I began to think whether it would be best to trust boldly in my
disguise, and my lucky position outside the coach, or whether I should
abandon my fellow-passengers immediately. It was not easy to settle at
once which course was the safest--so I tried the effect of looking at my
two alternatives from another point of view. Should I risk everything,
and go on resolutely to Crickgelly, on the chance of discovering that
Alicia and Miss Giles were one and the same person--or should I give up
on the spot the only prospect of finding my lost mistress, and direct my
attention entirely to the business of looking after my own safety?

As the latter alternative practically resolved itself into the simple
question of whether I should act like a man who was in love, or like a
man who was not, my natural instincts settled the difficulty in no time.
I boldly imitated the example of my fellow-passengers, and went in to
dinner, determined to go on afterward to Crickgelly, though all Bow
Street should be following at my heels.




CHAPTER XIII.

SECURE as I tried to feel in my change of costume, my cropped hair, and
my whiskerless cheeks, I kept well away from the coach-window, when the
dinner at the inn was over and the passengers were called to take their
places again. Thus far--thanks to the strength of my grasp on his
neck, which had left him too weak to be an outside passenger--Screw had
certainly not seen me; and, if I played my cards properly, there was no
reason why he should see me before we got to our destination.

Throughout the rest of the journey I observed the strictest caution, and
fortune seconded my efforts. It was dark when we got to Shrewsbury. On
leaving the coach I was enabled, under cover of the night, to keep a
sharp watch on the proceedings of Screw and his Bow Street ally. They
did not put up at the hotel, but walked away to a public house. There,
my clerical character obliged me to leave them at the door.

I returned to the hotel, to make inquiries about conveyances.

The answers informed me that Crickgelly was a little fishing-village,
and that there was no coach direct to it, but that two coaches running
to two small Welsh towns situated at nearly equal distances from my
destination, on either side of it, would pass through Shrewsbury
the next morning. The waiter added, that I could book a
place--conditionally--by either of these vehicles; and that, as they
were always well-filled, I had better be quick in making my choice
between them. Matters had now arrived at such a pass, that nothing was
left for me but to trust to chance. If I waited till the morning to see
whether Screw and the Bow Street runner traveled in my direction, and to
find out, in case they did, which coach they took, I should be running
the risk of losing a place for myself, and so delaying my journey for
another day. This was not to be thought of. I told the waiter to book me
a place in which coach he pleased. The two were called respectively The
Humming Bee, and The Red Cross Knight. The waiter chose the latter.

Sleep was not much in my way that night. I rose almost as early as Boots
himself--breakfasted--then sat at the coffee-room window looking out
anxiously for the two coaches.

Nobody seemed to agree which would pass first. Each of the inn servants
of whom I inquired made it a matter of partisanship, and backed his
favorite coach with the most consummate assurance. At last, I heard the
guard's horn and the clatter of the horses' hoofs. Up drove a coach--I
looked out cautiously--it was the Humming Bee. Three outside places were
vacant; one behind the coachman; two on the dickey. The first was taken
immediately by a farmer, the second---to my unspeakable disgust and
terror--was secured by the inevitable Bow Street runner; who, as soon as
h e was up, helped the weakly Screw into the third place, by his side.
They were going to Crickgelly; not a doubt of it, now.

I grew mad with impatience for the arrival of the Red Cross Knight.
Half-an-hour passed--forty minutes--and then I heard another horn and
another clatter--and the Red Cross Knight rattled up to the hotel door
at full speed. What if there should be no vacant place for me! I ran
to the door with a sinking heart. Outside, the coach was declared to be
full.

"There is one inside place," said the waiter, "if you don't mind paying
the--"

Before he could say the rest, I was occupying that one inside place. I
remember nothing of the journey from the time we left the hotel door,
except that it was fearfully long. At some hour of the day with which I
was not acquainted (for my watch had stopped for want of winding up), I
was set down in a clean little street of a prim little town (the name of
which I never thought of asking), and was told that the coach never went
any further.

No post-chaise was to be had. With incredible difficulty I got first a
gig, then a man to drive it; and, last, a pony to draw it. We hobbled
away crazily from the inn door. I thought of Screw and the Bow Street
runner approaching Crickgelly, from their point of the compass, perhaps
at the full speed of a good post-chaise--I thought of that, and would
have given all the money in my pocket for two hours' use of a fast
road-hack.

Judging by the time we occupied in making the journey, and a little also
by my own impatience, I should say that Crickgelly must have been at
least twenty miles distant from the town where I took the gig. The sun
was setting, when we first heard, through the evening stillness, the
sound of the surf on the seashore. The twilight was falling as we
entered the little fishing village, and let our unfortunate pony stop,
for the last time, at a small inn door.

The first question I asked of the landlord was, whether two gentlemen
(friends of mine, of course, whom I expected to meet) had driven into
Crickgelly, a little while before me. The reply was in the negative;
and the sense of relief it produced seemed to rest me at once, body and
mind, after my long and anxious journey. Either I had beaten the spies
on the road, or they were not bound to Crickgelly. Any way, I had first
possession of the field of action. I paid the man who had driven me, and
asked my way to Zion Place. My directions were simple--I had only to go
through the village, and I should find Zion Place at the other end of
it.

The village had a very strong smell, and a curious habit of building
boats in the street between intervals of detached cottages; a helpless,
muddy, fishy little place. I walked through it rapidly; turned inland
a few hundred yards; ascended some rising ground; and discerned, in the
dim twilight, four small lonesome villas standing in pairs, with a shed
and a saw-pit on one side, and a few shells of unfinished houses on
the other. Some madly speculative builder was evidently trying to turn
Crickgelly into a watering-place.

I made out Number Two, and discovered the bell-handle with difficulty,
it was growing so dark. A servant-maid--corporeally enormous; but, as I
soon found, in a totally undeveloped state, mentally--opened the door.

"Does Miss Giles live here?" I asked.

"Don't see no visitors," answered the large maiden. "'T'other one tried
it and had to go away. You go, too."

"'T'othor one?" I repeated. "Another visitor? And when did he call?"

"Better than an hour ago."

"Was there nobody with him?"

"No. Don't see no visitors. He went. You go, too."

Just as she repeated that exasperating formula of words, a door opened
at the end of the passage. My voice had evidently reached the ears of
somebody in the back parlor. Who the person was I could not see, but I
heard the rustle of a woman's dress. My situation was growing desperate,
my suspicions were aroused--I determined to risk everything--and I
called softly in the direction of the open door, "Alicia!"

A voice answered, "Good heavens! Frank?" It was _her_ voice. She had
recognized mine. I pushed past the big servant; in two steps I was at
the end of the passage; in one more I was in the back parlor.

She was there, standing alone by the side of a table. Seeing my changed
costume and altered face, she turned deadly pale, and stretched her hand
behind her mechanically, as if to take hold of a chair. I caught her
in my arms; but I was afraid to kiss her--she trembled so when I only
touched her.

"Frank!" she said, drawing her head back. "What is it? How did you find
out? For mercy's sake what does it mean?"

"It means, love, that I've come to take care of you for the rest of your
life and mine, if you will only let me. Don't tremble--there's nothing
to be afraid of! Only compose yourself, and I'll tell you why I am here
in this strange disguise. Come, come, Alicia!--don't look like that at
me. You called me Frank just now, for the first time. Would you have
done that, if you had disliked me or forgotten me?"

I saw her color beginning to come back--the old bright glow returning to
the dear dusky cheeks. If I had not seen them so near me, I might have
exercised some self-control--as it was, I lost my presence of mind
entirely, and kissed her.

She drew herself away half-frightened, half-confused--certainly not
offended, and, apparently, not very likely to faint--which was more than
I could have said of her when I first entered the room. Before she had
time to reflect on the peril and awkwardness of our position, I pressed
the first necessary questions on her rapidly, one after the other.

"Where is Mrs. Baggs?" I asked first.

Mrs. Baggs was the housekeeper.

Alicia pointed to the closed folding-doors. "In the front parlor; asleep
on the sofa."

"Have you any suspicion who the stranger was who called more than an
hour ago?"

"None. The servant told him we saw no visitors, and he went away,
without leaving his name."

"Have you heard from your father?"

She began to turn pale again, but controlled herself bravely, and
answered in a whisper:

"Mrs. Baggs had a short note from him this morning. It was not dated;
and it only said circumstances had happened which obliged him to leave
home suddenly, and that we were to wait here till be wrote again, most
likely in a few days."

"Now, Alicia," I said, as lightly as I could, "I have the highest
possible opinion of your courage, good-sense, and self-control; and I
shall expect you to keep up your reputation in my eyes, while you are
listening to what I have to tell you."

Saying these words, I took her by the hand and made her sit close by me;
then, breaking it to her as gently and gradually as possible, I told her
all that had happened at the red-brick house since the evening when
she left the dinner-table, and we exchanged our parting look at the
dining-room door.

It was almost as great a trial to me to speak as it was to her to hear.
She suffered so violently, felt such evident misery of shame and terror,
while I was relating the strange events which had occurred in her
absence, that I once or twice stopped in alarm, and almost repented my
boldness in telling her the truth. However, fair-dealing with her, cruel
as it might seem at the time, was the best and safest course for the
future. How could I expect her to put all her trust in me if I began
by deceiving her--if I fell into prevarications and excuses at the very
outset of our renewal of intercourse? I went on desperately to the end,
taking a hopeful view of the most hopeless circumstances, and making my
narrative as mercifully short as possible.

When I had done, the poor girl, in the extremity of her forlornness
and distress, forgot all the little maidenly conventionalities and
young-lady-like restraints of everyday life--and, in a burst of natural
grief and honest confiding helplessness, hid her face on my bosom, and
cried there as if she were a child again, and I was the mother to whom
she had been used to look for comfort.

I made no attempt to stop her tears--they were the safest and best vent
for the violent agitation under which she was suffering. I said nothing;
words, at such a ti me as that, would only have aggravated her distress.
All the questions I had to ask; all the proposals I had to make, must,
I felt, be put off--no matter at what risk--until some later and calmer
hour. There we sat together, with one long unsnuffed candle lighting
us smokily; with the discordantly-grotesque sound of the housekeeper's
snoring in the front room, mingling with the sobs of the weeping girl on
my bosom. No other noise, great or small, inside the house or out of it,
was audible. The summer night looked black and cloudy through the little
back window.

I was not much easier in my mind, now that the trial of breaking my bad
news to Alicia was over. That stranger who had called at the house an
hour before me, weighed on my spirits. It could not have been Doctor
Dulcifer. He would have gained admission. Could it be the Bow Street
runner, or Screw? I had lost sight of them, it is true; but had they
lost sight of me?

Alicia's grief gradually exhausted itself. She feebly raised her head,
and, turning it away from me, hid her face. I saw that she was not fit
for talking yet, and begged her to go upstairs to the drawing-room and
lie down a little. She looked apprehensively toward the folding-doors
that shut us off from the front parlor.

"Leave Mrs. Baggs to me," I said. "I want to have a few words with her;
and, as soon as you are gone, I'll make noise enough here to wake her."

Alicia looked at me inquiringly and amazedly. I did not speak again.
Time was now of terrible importance to us--I gently led her to the door.




CHAPTER XIV.

As soon as I was alone, I took from my pocket one of the handbills which
my excitable fellow-traveler had presented to me, so as to have it ready
for Mrs. Baggs the moment we stood face to face. Armed with this ominous
letter of introduction, I kicked a chair down against the folding-doors,
by way of giving a preliminary knock to arouse the housekeeper's
attention. The plan was immediately successful. Mrs. Baggs opened the
doors of communication violently. A slight smell of spirits entered
the room, and was followed close by the housekeeper herself, with an
indignant face and a disordered head-dress.

"What do you mean, sir? How dare you--" she began; then stopped aghast,
looking at me in speechless astonishment.

"I have been obliged to make a slight alteration in my personal
appearance, ma'am," I said. "But I am still Frank Softly."

"Don't talk to me about personal appearances, sir," cried Mrs.
Baggs recovering. "What do you mean by being here? Leave the house
immediately. I shall write to the doctor, Mr. Softly, this very night."

"He has no address you can direct to," I rejoined. "If you don't believe
me, read that." I gave her the handbill without another word of preface.

Mrs. Baggs looked at it--lost in an instant some of the fine color
plentifully diffused over her face by sleep and spirits--sat down in the
nearest chair with a thump that seemed to threaten the very foundations
of Number Two, Zion Place--and stared me hard in the face; the most
speechless and helpless elderly female I ever beheld.

"Take plenty of time to compose yourself ma'am," I said. "If you don't
see the doctor again soon, under the gallows, you will probably not have
the pleasure of meeting with him for some considerable time."

Mrs. Baggs smote both her hands distractedly on her knees, and whispered
a devout ejaculation to herself softly.

"Allow me to deal with you, ma'am, as a woman of the world," I went on.
"If you will give me half-an-hour's hearing, I will explain to you how
I come to know what I do; how I got here; and what I have to propose to
Miss Alicia and to you."

"If you have the feelings of a man, sir," said Mrs. Baggs, shaking her
head and raising her eyes to heaven, "you will remember that I have
nerves, and will not presume upon them."

As the old lady uttered the last words, I thought I saw her eyes turn
from heaven, and take the earthly direction of the sofa in the front
parlor. It struck me also that her lips looked rather dry. Upon these
two hints I spoke.

"Might I suggest some little stimulant?" I asked, with respectful
earnestness. "I have heard my grandmother (Lady Malkinshaw) say that, 'a
drop in time saves nine.'"

"You will find it under the sofa pillow," said Mrs. Baggs, with sudden
briskness. "'A drop in time saves nine'--my sentiments, if I may put
myself on a par with her ladyship. The liqueur-glass, Mr. Softly, is
in the backgammon-board. I hope her ladyship was well the last time you
heard from her? Suffers from her nerves, does she? Like me, again. In
the backgammon-board. Oh, this news, this awful news!"

I found the bottle of brandy in the place indicated, but no
liqueur-glass in the backgammon-board. There was, however, a wine-glass,
accidentally left on a chair by the sofa. Mrs. Baggs did not seem to
notice the difference when I brought it into the back room and filled it
with brandy.

"Take a toothful yourself," said Mrs. Baggs, lightly tossing off the
dram in a moment. "'A drop in time'--I can't help repeating it, it's
so nicely expressed. Still, with submission to her ladyship's better
judgment, Mr. Softly, the question seems now to arise, whether, if one
drop in time saves nine, two drops in time may not save eighteen." Here
Mrs. Baggs forgot her nerves and winked. I returned the wink and filled
the glass a second time. "Oh, this news, this awful news!" said Mrs.
Baggs, remembering her nerves again.

Just then I thought I heard footsteps in front of the house, but,
listening more attentively, found that it had begun to rain, and that I
had been deceived by the pattering of the first heavy drops against
the windows. However, the bare suspicion that the same stranger who had
called already might be watching the house now, was enough to startle
me very seriously, and to suggest the absolute necessity of occupying
no more precious time in paying attention to the vagaries of Mrs. Baggs'
nerves. It was also of some importance that I should speak to her while
she was sober enough to understand what I meant in a general way.

Feeling convinced that she was in imminent danger of becoming downright
drunk if I gave her another glass, I kept my hand on the bottle, and
forthwith told my story over again in a very abridged and unceremonious
form, and without allowing her one moment of leisure for comment on
my narrative, whether it might be of the weeping, winking, drinking,
groaning, or ejaculating kind. As I had anticipated, when I came to a
conclusion, and consequently allowed her an opportunity of saying a few
words, she affected to be extremely shocked and surprised at hearing of
the nature of her master's pursuits, and reproached me in terms of
the most vehement and virtuous indignation for incurring the guilt of
abetting them, even though I had done so from the very excusable motive
of saving my own life. Having a lively sense of the humorous, I was
necessarily rather amused by this; but I began to get a little surprised
as well, when we diverged to the subject of the doctor's escape, on
finding that Mrs. Baggs viewed the fact of his running away to some
hiding-place of his own in the light of a personal insult to his
faithful and attached housekeeper.

"It shows a want of confidence in me," said the old lady, "which I
may forgive, but can never forget. The sacrifices I have made for that
ungrateful man are not to be told in words. The very morning he sent
us away here, what did I do? Packed up the moment he said Go. I had my
preserves to pot, and the kitchen chimney to be swept, and the lock of
my box hampered into the bargain. Other women in my place would have
grumbled--I got up directly, as lively as any girl of eighteen you like
to mention. Says he, 'I want Alicia taken out of young Softly's way,
and you must do it.'---Says I, 'This very morning, sir?'--Says he, 'This
very morning.'--Says I, 'Where to?'--Says he, 'As far off as ever you
can go; coast of Wales--Crickgelly. I won't trust her nearer; young
Softly's too cunning, and she's too fond of him.'--'Any more orders,
sir?' says I.--'Yes; take some fancy name--Simkins, Johnson, Giles,
Jones, James,' says he, 'what you like bu t Dulcifer; for that scamp
Softly will move heaven and earth to trace her.'--'What else?' says
I.--'Nothing, but look sharp,' says he; 'and mind one thing, that she
sees no visitors, and posts no letters.' Before those last words had
been out of his wicked lips an hour, we were off. A nice job I had to
get her away--a nice job to stop her from writing letters to you--a nice
job to keep her here. But I did it; I followed my orders like a slave
in a plantation with a whip at his bare back. I've had rheumatics, weak
legs, bad nights, and miss in the sulks--all from obeying the doctor's
orders. And what is my reward? He turns coiner, and runs away without a
word to me beforehand, and writes me a trumpery note, without a date to
it, without a farthing of money in it, telling me nothing! Look at my
confidence in him, and then look at the way he's treated me in return.
What woman's nerves can stand that? Don't keep fidgeting with the
bottle! Pass it this way, Mr. Softly, or you'll break it, and drive me
distracted."

"He has no excuse, ma'am," I said. "But will you allow me to change the
subject, as I am pressed for time? You appear to be so well acquainted
with the favorable opinion which Miss Alicia and I entertain of each
other, that I hope it will be no fresh shock to your nerves, if I inform
you, in plain words, that I have come to Crickgelly to marry her."

"Marry her! marry--If you don't leave off fidgeting with the bottle, Mr.
Softly, and change the subject directly, I shall ring the bell."

"Hear me out, ma'am, and then ring if you like. If you persist, however,
in considering yourself still the confidential servant of a felon who is
now flying for his life, and if you decline allowing the young lady to
act as she wishes, I will not be so rude as to hint that--as she is of
age--she may walk out of this house with me, whenever she likes, without
your having the power to prevent her; but, I will politely ask instead,
what you would propose to do with her, in the straitened position as to
money in which she and you are likely to be placed? You can't find
her father to give her to; and, if you could, who would be the best
protector for her? The doctor, who is the principal criminal in the eye
of the law, or I, who am only the unwilling accomplice? He is known to
the Bow Street runners--I am not. There is a reward for the taking of
him, and none for the taking of me. He has no respectable relatives
and friends, I have plenty. Every way my chances are the best; and
consequently I am, every way, the fittest person to trust her to. Don't
you see that?"

Mrs. Baggs did not immediately answer. She snatched the bottle out of
my hands--drank off another dram, shook her head at me, and ejaculated
lamentably: "My nerves, my nerves! what a heart of stone he must have to
presume on my poor nerves!"

"Give me one minute more," I went on. "I propose to take you and Alicia
to-morrow morning to Scotland. Pray don't groan! I only suggest the
journey with a matrimonial object. In Scotland, Mrs. Baggs, if a man and
woman accept each other as husband and wife, before one witness, it is a
lawful marriage; and that kind of wedding is, as you see plainly enough,
the only safe refuge for a bridegroom in my situation. If you consent to
come with us to Scotland, and serve as witness to the marriage, I shall
be delighted to acknowledge my sense of your kindness in the eloquent
language of the Bank of England, as expressed to the world in general on
the surface of a five-pound note."

I cautiously snatched away the brandy bottle as I spoke, and was in the
drawing-room with it in an instant. As I suppose, Mrs. Baggs tried to
follow me, for I heard the door rattle, as if she had got out of her
chair, and suddenly slipped back into it again. I felt certain of her
deciding to help us, if she was only sober enough to reflect on what I
had said to her. The journey to Scotland was a tedious, and perhaps a
dangerous, undertaking. But I had no other alternative to choose.

In those uncivilized days, the Marriage Act had not been passed, and
there was no convenient hymeneal registrar in England to change a
vagabond runaway couple into a respectable man and wife at a moment's
notice. The trouble and expense of taking Mrs. Baggs with us, I
encountered, of course, solely out of regard for Alicia's natural
prejudices. She had led precisely that kind of life which makes
any woman but a bad one morbidly sensitive on the subject of small
proprieties. If she had been a girl with a recognized position in
society, I should have proposed to her to run away with me alone. As it
was, the very defenselessness of her situation gave her, in my opinion,
the right to expect from me even the absurdest sacrifices to the
narrowest conventionalities. Mrs. Baggs was not quite so sober in her
habits, perhaps, as matrons in general are expected to be; but, for my
particular purpose, this was only a slight blemish; it takes so little,
after all, to represent the abstract principle of propriety in the
short-sighted eye of the world.

As I reached the drawing-room door, I looked at my watch.

Nine o'clock! and nothing done yet to facilitate our escaping from
Crickgelly to the regions of civilized life the next morning. I was
pleased to hear, when I knocked at the door, that Alicia's voice sounded
firmer as she told me to come in. She was more confused than astonished
or frightened when I sat down by her on the sofa, and repeated the
principal topics of my conversion with Mrs. Baggs.

"Now, my own love," I said, in conclusion--suiting my gestures, it is
unnecessary to say, to the tenderness of my language--"there is not
the least doubt that Mrs. Baggs will end by agreeing to my proposals.
Nothing remains, therefore, but for you to give me the answer now, which
I have been waiting for ever since that last day when we met by the
riverside. I did not know then what the motive was for your silence and
distress. I know now, and I love you better after that knowledge than I
did before it."

Her head dropped into its former position on my bosom, and she murmured
a few words, but too faintly for me to hear them.

"You knew more about your father, then, than I did?" I whispered.

"Less than you have told me since," she interposed quickly, without
raising her face.

"Enough to convince you that he was breaking the laws," I suggested;
"and, to make you, as his daughter, shrink from saying 'yes' to me when
we sat together on the river bank?"

She did not answer. One of her arms, which was hanging over my shoulder,
stole round my neck, and clasped it gently.

"Since that time," I went on, "your father has compromised me. I am in
some danger, not much, from the law. I have no prospects that are not
of the most doubtful kind; and I have no excuse for asking you to share
them, except that I have fallen into my present misfortune through
trying to discover the obstacle that kept us apart. If there is any
protection in the world that you can turn to, less doubtful than mine, I
suppose I ought to say no more, and leave the house. But if there should
be none, surely I am not so very selfish in asking you to take your
chance with me? I honestly believe that I shall have little difficulty,
with ordinary caution, in escaping from pursuit, and finding a safe home
somewhere to begin life in again with new interests. Will you share
it with me, Alicia? I can try no fresh persuasions---I have no right,
perhaps, in my present situation to have addressed so many to you
already."

Her other arm stole round my neck; she laid her cheek against mine, and
whispered--

"Be kind to me, Frank--I have nobody in the world who loves me but you!"

I felt her tears on my face; my own eyes moistened as I tried to answer
her. We sat for some minutes in perfect silence--without moving, without
a thought beyond the moment. The rising of the wind, and the splashing
of the rain outside were the first sounds that stirred me into action
again.

I summoned my resolution, rose from the sofa, and in a few hasty words
told Alicia what I proposed for the next day, and mentioned the hour at
which I would come in the morning. As I had anticipated, she seemed
relieved and reassured at the prospect even of such slight sanction and
encouragement, on the part of another woman, as would be implied by the
companionship of Mrs. Baggs on the journey to Scotland.

The next and last difficulty I had to encounter was necessarily
connected with her father. He had never been very affectionate; and
he was now, for aught she or I knew to the contrary, parted from her
forever. Still, the instinctive recognition of his position made her
shrink, at the last moment, when she spoke of him, and thought of the
serious nature of her engagement with me. After some vain arguing and
remonstrating, I contrived to quiet her scruples, by promising that an
address should be left at Crickgelly, to which any second letter that
might arrive from the doctor could be forwarded. When I saw that this
prospect of being able to communicate with him, if he wrote or wished to
see her, had sufficiently composed her mind, I left the drawing-room.
It was vitally important that I should get back to the inn and make the
necessary arrangements for our departure the next morning, before the
primitive people of the place had retired to bed.

As I passed the back parlor door on my way out, I heard the voice of
Mrs. Baggs raised indignantly. The words "bottle!" "audacity!" and
"nerves!" reached my ear disjointedly. I called out "Good-by! till
to-morrow;" heard a responsive groan of disgust; then opened the front
door, and plunged out into the dark and rainy night.

It might have been the dropping of water from the cottage roofs while I
passed through the village, or the groundless alarm of my own suspicious
fancy, but I thought I was being followed as I walked back to the inn.
Two or three times I turned round abruptly. If twenty men had been at my
heels, it was too dark to see them. I went on to the inn.

The people there were not gone to bed; and I sent for the landlord to
consult with him about a conveyance. Perhaps it was my suspicious fancy
again; but I thought his manner was altered. He seemed half distrustful,
half afraid of me, when I asked him if there had been any signs, during
my absence, of those two gentlemen, for whom I had already inquired on
arriving at his door that evening. He gave an answer in the negative,
looking away from me while he spoke.

Thinking it advisable, on the whole, not to let him see that I noticed
a change in him, I proceeded at once to the question of the conveyance,
and was told that I could hire the landlord's light cart, in which he
was accustomed to drive to the market town. I appointed an hour for
starting the next day, and retired at once to my bedroom. There my
thoughts were enough. I was anxious about Screw and the Bow Street
runner. I was uncertain about the stranger who had called at Number Two,
Zion Place. I was in doubt even about the landlord of the inn. Never did
I know what real suffering from suspense was, until that night, Whatever
my apprehensions might have been, they were none of them realized the
next morning.

Nobody followed me on my way to Zion Place, and no stranger had called
there before me a second time, when I made inquiries on entering the
house. I found Alicia blushing, and Mrs. Baggs impenetrably wrapped up
in dignified sulkiness. After informing me with a lofty look that
she intended to go to Scotland with us, and to take my five-pound
note--partly under protest, and partly out of excessive affection for
Alicia--she retired to pack up. The time consumed in performing this
process, and the further delay occasioned by paying small outstanding
debts to tradespeople, and settling with the owner of the house,
detained us till nearly noon before we were ready to get into the
landlord's cart.

I looked behind me anxiously at starting, and often afterward on the
road; but never saw anything to excite my suspicions. In settling
matters with the landlord over night, I had arranged that we should be
driven to the nearest town at which a post-chaise could be obtained.
My resources were just as likely to hold out against the expenses of
posting, where public conveyances could not be obtained, as against the
expense of waiting privately at hotels, until the right coaches might
start. According to my calculations, my money would last till we got
to Scotland. After that, I had my watch, rings, shirtpin, and Mr.
Batterbury, to help in replenishing my purse. Anxious, therefore, as I
was about other things, money matters, for once in a way, did not cause
me the smallest uneasiness.




CHAPTER XV.

WE posted five-and-thirty miles, then stopped for a couple of hours to
rest, and wait for a night coach running northward.

On getting into this vehicle we were fortunate enough to find the fourth
inside place not occupied. Mrs. Baggs showed her sense of the freedom
from restraint thus obtained by tying a huge red comforter round her
head like a turban, and immediately falling fast asleep. This gave
Alicia and me full liberty to talk as we pleased. Our conversation was
for the most part of that particular kind which is not of the smallest
importance to any third person in the whole world. One portion of it,
however, was an exception to this general rule. It had a very positive
influence on my fortunes, and it is, therefore, I hope, of sufficient
importance to bear being communicated to the reader.

We had changed horses for the fourth time, had seated ourselves
comfortably in our places, and had heard Mrs. Baggs resume the kindred
occupations of sleeping and snoring, when Alicia whispered to me:

"I must have no secrets, now, from you--must I, Frank?"

"You must have anything you like, do anything you like, and say anything
you like. You must never ask leave--but only grant it!"

"Shall you always tell me that, Frank?"

I did not answer in words, but the conversation suffered a momentary
interruption. Of what nature, susceptible people will easily imagine. As
for the hard-hearted I don't write for them.

"My secret need not alarm you," Alicia went on, in tones that began to
sound rather sadly; "it is only about a tiny pasteboard box that I can
carry in the bosom of my dress. But it has got three diamonds in it,
Frank, and one beautiful ruby. Did you ever give me credit for having so
much that was valuable about me?--shall I give it you to keep for me?"

I remembered directly Old File's story of Mrs. Dulcifer's elopement, and
of the jewels she had taken with her. It was easy to guess, after what I
had heard, that the poor woman had secretly preserved some of her little
property for the benefit of her child.

"I have no present need of money, darling," I answered; "keep the box in
its present enviable position." I stopped there, saying nothing of the
thought that was really uppermost in my mind. If any unforeseen accident
placed me within the grip of the law, I should not now have the double
trial to endure of leaving my wife for a prison, and leaving her
helpless.

Morning dawned and found us still awake. The sun rose, Mrs. Baggs left
off snoring, and we arrived at the last stage before the coach stopped.

I got out to see about some tea for my traveling companions, and looked
up at the outside passengers. One of them seated in the dickey looked
down at me. He was a countryman in a smock-frock, with a green patch
over one of his eyes. Something in the expression of his uncovered eye
made me pause--reflect--turn away uneasily--and then look again at him
furtively. A sudden shudder ran through me from top to toe; my heart
sank; and my head began to feel giddy. The countryman in the dickey was
no other than the Bow Street runner in disguise.

I kept away from the coach till the fresh horses were on the point of
starting, for I was afraid to let Alicia see my face, after making that
fatal discovery. She noticed how pale I was when I got in. I made the
best excuse I could; and gently insisted on her trying to sleep a little
after being awake all night. She lay back in her corner; and Mrs. Baggs,
comforted with a morning dram in her tea, fell asleep again. I had thus
an hour's leisure before me to think what I should do next.

Screw was not in company with the runner this time. He must have managed
to identify me somewhere, and the officer doubtless knew my personal
appearance well enough now to follow and make sure of me without help.
That I was the man whom he was tracking could not be doubted: his
disguise and his position on the top of the coach proved it only too
plainly.

But why had he not seized me at once? Probably because he had some
ulterior purpose to serve, which would have been thwarted by my
immediate apprehension. What that purpose was I did my best to fathom,
and, as I thought, succeeded in the attempt. What I was to do when the
coach stopped was a more difficult point to settle. To give the runner
the slip, with two women to take care of, was simply impossible. To
treat him, as I had treated Screw at the red-brick house, was equally
out of the question, for he was certain to give me no chance of catching
him alone. To keep him in ignorance of the real object of my journey,
and thereby to delay his discovering himself and attempting to make me a
prisoner, seemed the only plan on the safety of which I could place the
smallest reliance. If I had ever had any idea of following the example
of other runaway lovers, and going to Gretna Green, I should now have
abandoned it. All roads in that direction would betray what the purpose
of my journey was if I took them. Some large town in Scotland would be
the safest destination that I could publicly advertise myself as
bound for. Why not boldly say that I was going with the two ladies to
Edinburgh?

Such was the plan of action which I now adopted.

To give any idea of the distracted condition of my mind at the time when
I was forming it, is simply impossible. As for doubting whether I ought
to marry at all under these dangerous circumstances, I must frankly
own that I was too selfishly and violently in love to look the question
fairly in the face at first. When I subsequently forced myself to
consider it, the most distinct project I could frame for overcoming all
difficulty was, to marry myself (the phrase is strictly descriptive of
the Scotch ceremony) at the first inn we came to, over the Border; to
hire a chaise, or take places in a public conveyance to Edinburgh, as
a blind; to let Alicia and Mrs. Baggs occupy those places; to remain
behind myself; and to trust to my audacity and cunning, when left alone,
to give the runner the slip. Writing of it now, in cool blood, this
seems as wild and hopeless a plan as ever was imagined. But, in the
confused and distracted state of all my faculties at that period, it
seemed quite easy to execute, and not in the least doubtful as to any
one of its probable results.

On reaching the town at which the coach stopped, we found ourselves
obliged to hire another chaise for a short distance, in order to get to
the starting-point of a second coach. Again we took inside places,
and again, at the first stages when I got down to look at the outside
passengers, there was the countryman with the green shade over his
eye. Whatever conveyance we traveled by on our northward road, we never
escaped him. He never attempted to speak to me, never seemed to notice
me, and never lost sight of me. On and on we went, over roads that
seemed interminable, and still the dreadful sword of justice hung
always, by its single hair, over my head. My haggard face, my feverish
hands, my confused manner, my inexpressible impatience, all belied the
excuses with which I desperately continued to ward off Alicia's growing
fears, and Mrs. Baggs's indignant suspicions. "Oh! Frank, something has
happened! For God's sake, tell me what!"--"Mr. Softly, I can see through
a deal board as far as most people. You are following the doctor's
wicked example, and showing a want of confidence in me." These were the
remonstrances of Alicia and the housekeeper.

At last we got out of England, and I was still a free man. The chaise
(we were posting again) brought us into a dirty town, and drew up at the
door of a shabby inn. A shock-headed girl received us.

"Are we in Scotland?" I asked.

"Mon! whar' else should ye be?" The accent relieved me of all doubt.

"A private room--something to eat, ready in an hour's time--chaise
afterward to the nearest place from which a coach runs to Edinburgh."
Giving these orders rapidly, I followed the girl with my traveling
companions into a stuffy little room. As soon as our attendant had left
us, I locked the door, put the key in my pocket, and took Alicia by the
hand.

"Now, Mrs. Baggs," said I, "bear witness--"

"You're not going to marry her now!" interposed Mrs. Baggs, indignantly.
"Bear witness, indeed! I won't bear witness till I've taken off my
bonnet, and put my hair tidy!"

"The ceremony won't take a minute," I answered; "and I'll give you your
five-pound note and open the door the moment it's over. Bear witness,"
I went on, drowning Mrs. Baggs's expostulations with the all-important
marriage-words, "that I take this woman, Alicia Dulcifer for my lawful
wedded wife."

"In sickness and in health, in poverty and wealth," broke in Mrs. Baggs,
determining to represent the clergyman as well as to be the witness.

"Alicia, dear," I said, interrupting in my turn, "repeat my words. Say
'I take this man, Francis Softly, for my lawful wedded husband.'"

She repeated the sentence, with her face very pale, with her dear hand
cold and trembling in mine.

"For better for worse," continued the indomitable Mrs. Baggs. "Little
enough of the Better, I'm afraid, and Lord knows how much of the Worse."

I stopped her again with the promised five-pound note, and opened the
room door. "Now, ma'am," I said, "go to your room; take off your bonnet,
and put your hair as tidy as you please."

Mrs. Baggs raised her eyes and hands to heaven, exclaimed "Disgraceful!"
and flounced out of the room in a passion. Such was my Scotch
marriage--as lawful a ceremony, remember, as the finest family wedding
at the largest parish church in all England.

An hour passed; and I had not yet summoned the cruel courage to
communicate my real situation to Alicia. The entry of the shock-headed
servant-girl to lay the cloth, followed by Mrs. Baggs, who was never out
of the way where eating and drinking appeared in prospect, helped me to
rouse myself. I resolved to go out for a few minutes to reconnoiter, and
make myself acquainted with any facilities for flight or hiding which
the situation of the house might present. No doubt the Bow Street runner
was lurking somewhere; but he must, as a matter of course, have
heard, or informed himself, of the orders I had given relating to our
conveyance on to Edinburgh; and, in that case, I was still no more in
danger of his avowing himself and capturing me, than I had been at any
previous period of our journey.

"I am going out for a moment, love, to see about the chaise," I said
to Alicia. She suddenly looked up at me with an anxious searching
expression. Was my face betraying anything of my real purpose? I hurried
to the door before she could ask me a single question.

The front of the inn stood nearly in the middle of the principal street
of the town. No chance of giving any one the slip in that direction; and
no sign, either, of the Bow Street runner. I sauntered round, with the
most unconcerned manner I could assume, to the back of the house, by the
inn yard. A door in one part of it stood half-open. Inside was a bit of
kitchen-garden, bounded by a paling; beyond that some backs of detached
houses; beyond them, again, a plot of weedy ground, a few wretched
cottages, and the open, heathery moor. Good enough for running away, but
terribly bad for hiding.

I returned disconsolately to the inn. Walking along the passage toward
the staircase, I suddenly heard footsteps behind me--turned round, and
saw the Bow Street runner (clothed again in his ordinary costume, and
accompanied by two strange men) standing between me and the door.

"Sorry to stop you from going to Edinburgh, Mr. Softly," he said. "But
you're wanted back at Barkingham. I've just found out what you have been
traveling all the way to Scotland for; and I take you prisoner, as one
of the coining gang. Take it easy, sir. I've got help, you see; and you
can't throttle three men, whatever you may have done at Barkingham with
one."

He handcuffed me as he spoke. Resistance was hopeless. I could only make
an appeal to his mercy, on Alicia's account.

"Give me ten minutes," I said, "to break what has happened to my wife.
We were only married an hour ago. If she knows this suddenly, it may be
the death of her."

"You've led me a nice dance on a wrong scent," answered the runner,
sulkily. "But I never was a hard man where women are concerned. Go
upstairs, and leave the door open, so that I can see in through it if I
like. Hold your hat over your wrists, if you don't want her to see the
handcuffs."

I ascended the first flight of stairs, and my heart gave a sudden bound
as if it would burst. I stopped, speechless and helpless, at the sight
of Alicia, standing alone on the landing. My first look at her face told
me she had heard all that had passed in the passage. She passionately
struck the hat with which I had been trying to hide the handcuffs out
of my fingers, and clasped me in her arms with such sudden and desperate
energy that she absolutely hurt me.

"I was afraid of something, Frank," she whispered. "I followed you a
little way. I stopped here; I have heard everything. Don't let us be
parted! I am stronger than you think me. I won't be frightened. I won't
cry. I won't trouble anybody, if that man will only take me with you!"

It is best for my sake, if not for the reader's, to hurry over the scene
that followed.

It ended with as little additional wretchedness as could be expected.
The runner was resolute about keeping me handcuffed, and taking me
back, without a moment's unnecessary waste of time to Barkingham; but he
relented on other points.

Where he was obliged to order a private conveyance, there was no
objection to Alicia and Mrs. Baggs following it. Where we got into a
coach, there was no harm in their hiring two inside places. I gave my
watch, rings, and last guinea to Alicia, enjoining her, on no account,
to let her box of jewels see the light until we could get proper advice
on the best means of turning them to account. She listened to these and
other directions with a calmness that astonished me.

"You shan't say, my dear, that your wife has helped to make you uneasy
by so much as a word or a look," she whispered to me as we left the inn.

And she kept the hard promise implied in that one short sentence
throughout the journey. Once only did I see her lose her
self-possession. At starting on our way south, Mrs. Baggs--taking the
same incomprehensible personal offense at my misfortune which she
had previously taken at the doctor's--upbraided me with my want of
confidence in her, and declared that it was the main cause of all my
present trouble. Alicia turned on her as she was uttering the words,
with a look and a warning that silenced her in an instant:

"If you say another syllable that isn't kind to him, you shall find your
way back by yourself!"

The words may not seem of much importance to others; but I thought, as
I overheard them, that they justified every sacrifice I had made for my
wife's sake.




CHAPTER XVI.

ON our way back I received from the runner some explanation of his
apparently unaccountable proceedings in reference to myself.

To begin at the beginning, it turned out that the first act of the
officers, on their release from the workroom in the red-brick house,
was to institute a careful search for papers in the doctor's study and
bedroom. Among the other documents that he had not had time to destroy,
was a letter to him from Alicia, which they took from one of the pockets
of his dressing-gown. Finding, from the report of the men who had
followed the gig, that he had distanced all pursuit, and having
therefore no direct clew to his whereabout, they had been obliged to
hunt after him in various directions, on pure speculation. Alicia's
letter to her father gave the address of the house at Crickgelly; and to
this the runner repaired, on the chance of intercepting or discovering
any communications which the doctor might make to his daughter, Screw
being taken with the officer to identify the young lady. After leaving
the last coach, they posted to within a mile of Crickgelly, and then
walked into the village, in order to excite no special attention,
should the doctor be lurking in the neighborhood. The runner had tried
ineffectually to gain admission as a visitor at Zion Place. After having
the door shut on him, he and Screw had watched the house and village,
and had seen me approach Number Two. Their suspicions were directly
excited.

Thus far, Screw had not recognized, nor even observed me; but he
immediately identified me by my voice, while I was parleying with the
stupid servant at the door. The runner, hearing who I was, reasonably
enough concluded that I must be the recognized medium of communication
between the doctor and his daughter, especially when he found that I was
admitted, instantly after calling, past the servant, to some one inside
the house.

Leaving Screw on the watch, he went to the inn, discovered himself
privately to the landlord, and made sure (in more ways than one, as
I conjectured) of knowing when, and in what direction, I should leave
Crickgelly. On finding that I was to leave it the next morning, with
Alicia and Mrs. Baggs, he immediately suspected that I was charged with
the duty of taking the daughter to, or near, the place chosen for
the father's retreat; and had therefore abstained from interfering
prematurely with my movements. Knowing whither we were bound in the
cart, he had ridden after us, well out of sight, with his countryman's
disguise ready for use in the saddle-bags--Screw, in case of any
mistakes or mystifications, being left behind on the watch at
Crickgelly.

The possibility that I might be running away with Alicia had suggested
itself to him; but he dismissed it as improbable, first when he saw
that Mrs. Baggs accompanied us, and again, when, on nearing Scotland, he
found that we did not take the road to Gretna Green. He acknowledged, in
conclusion, that he should have followed us to Edinburgh, or even to
the Continent itself, on the chance of our leading him to the doctor's
retreat, but for the servant girl at the inn, who had listened outside
the door while our brief marriage ceremony was proceeding, and from
whom, with great trouble and delay, he had extracted all the information
he required. A further loss of half an hour's time had occurred while
he was getting the necessary help to assist him, in the event of my
resisting, or trying to give him the slip, in making me a prisoner.
These small facts accounted for the hour's respite we had enjoyed at the
inn, and terminated the runner's narrative of his own proceedings.

On arriving at our destination I was, of course, immediately taken to
the jail.

Alicia, by my advice, engaged a modest lodging in a suburb of
Barkingham. In the days of the red-brick house, she had seldom been seen
in the town, and she was not at all known by sight in the suburb. We
arranged that she was to visit me as often as the authorities would let
her. She had no companion, and wanted none. Mrs. Baggs, who had never
forgiven the rebuke administered to her at the starting-point of our
journey, left us at the close of it. Her leave-taking was dignified and
pathetic. She kindly informed Alicia that she wished her well, though
she could not conscientiously look upon her as a lawful married woman;
and she begged me (in case I got off), the next time I met with a
respectable person who was kind to me, to profit by remembering my past
errors, and to treat my next benefactress with more confidence than I
had treated her.

My first business in the prison was to write to Mr. Batterbury.

I had a magnificent ease to present to him, this time. Although I
believed myself, and had succeeded in persuading Alicia, that I was sure
of being recommended to mercy, it was not the less the fact that I was
charged with an offense still punishable by death, in the then barbarous
state of the law. I delicately stated just enough of my case to make
one thing clear to the mind of Mr. Batterbury. My affectionate sister's
interest in the contingent reversion was now ( unless Lady Malkinshaw
perversely and suddenly expired) actually threatened by the Gallows!

While calmly awaiting the answer, I was by no means without subjects
to occupy my attention when Alicia was not at the prison. There was
my fellow-workman--Mill--(the first member of our society betrayed by
Screw) to compare notes with; and there was a certain prisoner who
had been transported, and who had some very important and interesting
particulars to communicate, relative to life and its chances in our
felon-settlements at the Antipodes. I talked a great deal with this man;
for I felt that his experience might be of the greatest possible benefit
to me.

Mr. Batterbury's answer was speedy, short, and punctual. I had shattered
his nervous system forever, he wrote, but had only stimulated his
devotion to my family, and his Christian readiness to look pityingly on
my transgressions. He had engaged the leader of the circuit to defend
me; and he would have come to see me, but for Mrs. Batterbury; who had
implored him not to expose himself to agitation. Of Lady Malkinshaw the
letter said nothing; but I afterward discovered that she was then at
Cheltenham, drinking the waters and playing whist in the rudest health
and spirits.

It is a bold thing to say, but nothing will ever persuade me that
Society has not a sneaking kindness for a Rogue.

For example, my father never had half the attention shown to him in his
own house, which was shown to me in my prison. I have seen High
Sheriffs in the great world, whom my father went to see, give him two
fingers--the High Sheriff of Barkinghamshire came to see me, and shook
hands cordially. Nobody ever wanted my father's autograph--dozens of
people asked for mine. Nobody ever put my father's portrait in the
frontispiece of a magazine, or described his personal appearance
and manners with anxious elaboration, in the large type of a great
newspaper--I enjoyed both those honors. Three official individuals
politely begged me to be sure and make complaints if my position was
not perfectly comfortable. No official individual ever troubled his head
whether my father was comfortable or not. When the day of my trial came,
the court was thronged by my lovely countrywomen, who stood up panting
in the crowd and crushing their beautiful dresses, rather than miss the
pleasure of seeing the dear Rogue in the dock. When my father once stood
on the lecturer's rostrum, and delivered his excellent discourse, called
"Medical Hints to Maids and Mothers on Tight Lacing and Teething," the
benches were left empty by the ungrateful women of England, who were not
in the slightest degree anxious to feast their eyes on the sight of
a learned adviser and respectable man. If these facts led to one
inevitable conclusion, it is not my fault. We Rogues are the spoiled
children of Society. We may not be openly acknowledged as Pets, but we
all know, by pleasant experience, that we are treated like them.

The trial was deeply affecting. My defense--or rather my
barrister's--was the simple truth. It was impossible to overthrow
the facts against us; so we honestly owned that I got into the scrape
through love for Alicia. My counsel turned this to the best possible
sentimental account. He cried; the ladies cried; the jury cried; the
judge cried; and Mr. Batterbury, who had desperately come to see the
trial, and know the worst, sobbed with such prominent vehemence, that I
believe him, to this day, to have greatly influenced the verdict. I
was strongly recommended to mercy and got off with fourteen years'
transportation. The unfortunate Mill, who was tried after me, with a
mere dry-eyed barrister to defend him, was hanged.

POSTSCRIPT.

WITH the record of my sentence of transportation, my life as a Rogue
ends, and my existence as a respectable man begins. I am sorry to say
anything which may disturb popular delusions on the subject of poetical
justice, but this is strictly the truth.

My first anxiety was about my wife's future.

Mr. Batterbury gave me no chance of asking his advice after the trial.
The moment sentence had been pronounced, he allowed himself to be helped
out of court in a melancholy state of prostration, and the next morning
he left for London. I suspect he was afraid to face me, and nervously
impatient, besides, to tell Annabella that he had saved the legacy
again by another alarming sacrifice. My father and mother, to whom I had
written on the subject of Alicia, were no more to be depended on than
Mr. Batterbury. My father, in answering my letter, told me that he
conscientiously believed he had done enough in forgiving me for throwing
away an excellent education, and disgracing a respectable name. He added
that he had not allowed my letter for my mother to reach her, out
of pitying regard for her broken health and spirits; and he ended by
telling me (what was perhaps very true) that the wife of such a son as
I had been, had no claim upon her father-in-law's protection and help.
There was an end, then, of any hope of finding resources for Alicia
among the members of my own family.

The next thing was to discover a means of providing for her without
assistance. I had formed a project for this, after meditating over my
conversations with the returned transport in Barkingham jail, and I had
taken a reliable opinion on the chances of successfully executing my
design from the solicitor who had prepared my defense.

Alicia herself was so earnestly in favor of assisting in my experiment,
that she declared she would prefer death to its abandonment.
Accordingly, the necessary preliminaries were arranged; and, when we
parted, it was some mitigation of our grief to know that there was a
time appointed for meeting again. Alicia was to lodge with a distant
relative of her mother's in a suburb of London; was to concert measures
with this relative on the best method of turning her jewels into money;
and was to follow her convict husband to the Antipodes, under a feigned
name, in six months' time.

If my family had not abandoned me, I need not have thus left her to help
herself. As it was, I had no choice. One consolation supported me at
parting--she was in no danger of persecution from her father. A second
letter from him had arrived at Crickgelly, and had been forwarded to the
address I had left for it. It was dated Hamburg, and briefly told her to
remain at Crickgelly, and expect fresh instructions, explanations, and
a supply of money, as soon as he had settled the important business
matters which had taken him abroad. His daughter answered the letter,
telling him of her marriage, and giving him an address at a post-office
to write to, if he chose to reply to her communication. There the matter
rested.

What was I to do on my side? Nothing but establish a reputation for mild
behavior. I began to manufacture a character for myself for the first
days of our voyage out in the convict-ship; and I landed at the penal
settlement with the reputation of being the meekest and most biddable of
felonious mankind.

After a short probationary experience of such low convict employments
as lime-burning and road-mending, I was advanced to occupations more in
harmony with my education. Whatever I did, I never neglected the first
great obligation of making myself agreeable and amusing to everybody. My
social reputation as a good fellow began to stand as high at one end of
the world as ever it stood at the other. The months passed more
quickly than I had dared to hope. The expiration of my first year of
transportation was approaching, and already pleasant hints of my being
soon assigned to private service began to reach my ears. This was the
first of the many ends I was now working for; and the next pleasant
realization of my hopes that I had to expect, was the arrival of Alicia.

She came, a month later than I had anticipated; safe and blooming,
with five hundred pounds as the produce of her jewels, and with the
old Crickgelly alias (changed from Miss to Mrs. Giles), to prevent any
suspicions of the connection between us.

Her story (concocted by me before I left England) was, that she was a
widow lady, who had come to settle in Australia, and make the most of
her little property in the New World. One of the first things Mrs. Giles
wanted was necessarily a trustworthy servant, and she had to make her
choice of one among the convicts of good character, to be assigned to
private service. Being one of that honorable body myself at the time,
it is needless to say that I was the fortunate man on whom Mrs. Giles's
choice fell. The first situation I got in Australia was as servant to my
own wife.

Alicia made a very indulgent mistress.

If she had been mischievously inclined, she might, by application to a
magistrate, have had me flogged or set to work in chains on the roads,
whenever I became idle or insubordinate, which happened occasionally.
But instead of complaining, the kind creature kissed and made much of
her footman by stealth, after his day's work. She allowed him no female
followers, and only employed one woman-servant occasionally, who was
both old and ugly. The name of the footman was Dear in private, and
Francis in company; and when the widowed mistress, upstairs, refused
eligible offers of marriage (which was pretty often), the favored
domestic in the kitchen was always informed of it, and asked, with the
sweetest humility, if he approved of the proceeding.

Not to dwell on this anomalous period of my existence, let me say
briefly that my new position with my wife was of the greatest advantage
in enabling me to direct in secret the profitable uses to which her
little fortune was put.

We began in this way with an excellent speculation in cattle--buying
them for shillings and selling them for pounds. With the profits thus
obtained, we next tried our hands at houses--first buying in a small
way, then boldly building, and letting again and selling to great
advantage. While these speculations were in progress, my behavior in
my wife's service was so exemplary, and she gave me so excellent a
character when the usual official inquiries were instituted, that I
soon got the next privilege accorded to persons in my situation--a
ticket-of-leave. By the time this had been again exchanged for a
conditional pardon (which allowed me to go about where I pleased in
Australia, and to trade in my own name like any unconvicted merchant)
our house-property had increased enormously, our land had been sold for
public buildings, and we had shares in the famous Emancipist's Bank,
which produced quite a little income of themselves.

There was now no need to keep the mask on any longer.

I went through the superfluous ceremony of a second marriage with
Alicia; took stores in the city; built a villa in the country; and
here I am at this present moment of writing, a convict aristocrat--a
prosperous, wealthy, highly respectable mercantile man, with two years
of my sentence of transportation still to expire. I have a barouche and
two bay horses, a coachman and page in neat liveries, three charming
children, and a French governess, a boudoir and lady's-maid for my wife.
She is as handsome as ever, but getting a little fat. So am I, as a
worthy friend remarked when I recently appeared holding the plate, at
our last charity sermon.

What would my surviving relatives and associates in England say, if they
could see me now? I have heard of them at different times and through
various channels. Lady Malkinshaw, after living to the verge of
a hundred, and surviving all sorts of accidents, died quietly one
afternoon, in her chair, with an empty dish before her, and without
giving the slightest notice to anybody. Mr. Batterbury, having
sacrificed so much to his wife's reversion, profited nothing by its
falling in at last. His quarrels with my amiable sister--which took
their rise from his interested charities toward me--ended in producing a
separation. And, far from saving anything by Annabella's inheritance of
her pin-money, he had a positive loss to put up with, in the shape
of some hundreds extracted yearly from his income, as alimony to his
uncongenial wife. He is said to make use of shocking language whenever
my name is mentioned, and to wish that he had been carried off by the
yellow fever before he ever set eyes on the Softly family.

My father has retired from practice. He and my mother have gone to live
in the country, near the mansion of the only marquis with whom my father
was actually and personally acquainted in his professional days. The
marquis asks him to dinner once a year, and leaves a card for my mother
before he returns to town for the season. A portrait of Lady Malkinshaw
hangs in the dining-room. In this way, my parents are ending their days
contentedly. I can honestly say that I am glad to hear it.

Doctor Dulcifer, when I last heard of him, was editing a newspaper in
America. Old File, who shared his flight, still shares his fortunes,
being publisher of his newspaper. Young File resumed coining operations
in London; and, having braved his fate a second time, threaded his way,
in due course, up to the steps of the scaffold. Screw carries on the
profitable trade of informer, in London. The dismal disappearance of
Mill I have already recorded.

So much on the subject of my relatives and associates. On the subject
of myself, I might still write on at considerable length. But while the
libelous title of "A ROGUE'S LIFE" stares me in the face at the top
of the page, how can I, as a rich and reputable man, be expected to
communicate any further autobiographical particulars, in this place,
to a discerning public of readers? No, no, my friends! I am no longer
interesting--I am only respectable like yourselves. It is time to say
"Good-by."






LETTER OF DEDICATION.

TO CHARLES JAMES WARD, ESQ.

IT has long been one of my pleasantest anticipations to look forward to
the time when I might offer to you, my old and dear friend, some such
acknowledgment of the value I place on your affection for me, and of my
grateful sense of the many acts of kindness by which that affection
has been proved, as I now gladly offer in this place. In dedicating the
present work to you, I fulfil therefore a purpose which, for some time
past, I have sincerely desired to achieve; and, more than that, I gain
for myself the satisfaction of knowing that there is one page, at least,
of my book, on which I shall always look with unalloyed pleasure--the
page that bears your name.

I have founded the main event out of which this story springs, on a
fact within my own knowledge. In afterwards shaping the course of the
narrative thus suggested, I have guided it, as often as I could, where
I knew by my own experience, or by experience related to me by others,
that it would touch on something real and true in its progress. My idea
was, that the more of the Actual I could garner up as a text to speak
from, the more certain I might feel of the genuineness and value of the
Ideal which was sure to spring out of it. Fancy and Imagination, Grace
and Beauty, all those qualities which are to the work of Art what scent
and colour are to the flower, can only grow towards heaven by taking
root in earth. Is not the noblest poetry of prose fiction the poetry of
every-day truth?

Directing my characters and my story, then, towards the light of Reality
wherever I could find it, I have not hesitated to violate some of
the conventionalities of sentimental fiction. For instance, the first
love-meeting of two of the personages in this book, occurs (where the
real love-meeting from which it is drawn, occurred) in the very last
place and under the very last circumstances which the artifices of
sentimental writing would sanction. Will my lovers excite ridicule
instead of interest, because I have truly represented them as seeing
each other where hundreds of other lovers have first seen each other,
as hundreds of people will readily admit when they read the passage to
which I refer? I am sanguine enough to think not.

So again, in certain parts of this book where I have attempted to excite
the suspense or pity of the reader, I have admitted as perfectly fit
accessories to the scene the most ordinary street-sounds that could be
heard, and the most ordinary street-events that could occur, at the time
and in the place represented--believing that by adding to truth, they
were adding to tragedy--adding by all the force of fair contrast--adding
as no artifices of mere writing possibly could add, let them be ever so
cunningly introduced by ever so crafty a hand.

Allow me to dwell a moment longer on the story which these pages
contain.

Believing that the Novel and the Play are twin-sisters in the family
of Fiction; that the one is a drama narrated, as the other is a drama
acted; and that all the strong and deep emotions which the Play-writer
is privileged to excite, the Novel-writer is privileged to excite also,
I have not thought it either politic or necessary, while adhering to
realities, to adhere to every-day realities only. In other words, I have
not stooped so low as to assure myself of the reader's belief in the
probability of my story, by never once calling on him for the exercise
of his faith. Those extraordinary accidents and events which happen to
few men, seemed to me to be as legitimate materials for fiction to
work with--when there was a good object in using them--as the ordinary
accidents and events which may, and do, happen to us all. By appealing
to genuine sources of interest _within_ the reader's own experience, I
could certainly gain his attention to begin with; but it would be only
by appealing to other sources (as genuine in their way) _beyond_ his
own experience, that I could hope to fix his interest and excite his
suspense, to occupy his deeper feelings, or to stir his nobler thoughts.

In writing thus--briefly and very generally--(for I must not delay
you too long from the story), I can but repeat, though I hope almost
unnecessarily, that I am now only speaking of what I have tried to do.
Between the purpose hinted at here, and the execution of that purpose
contained in the succeeding pages, lies the broad line of separation
which distinguishes between the will and the deed. How far I may fall
short of another man's standard, remains to be discovered. How far I
have fallen short of my own, I know painfully well.

One word more on the manner in which the purpose of the following pages
is worked out--and I have done.

Nobody who admits that the business of fiction is to exhibit human life,
can deny that scenes of misery and crime must of necessity, while human
nature remains what it is, form part of that exhibition. Nobody can
assert that such scenes are unproductive of useful results, when they
are turned to a plainly and purely moral purpose. If I am asked why I
have written certain scenes in this book, my answer is to be found in
the universally-accepted truth which the preceding words express. I have
a right to appeal to that truth; for I guided myself by it throughout.
In deriving the lesson which the following pages contain, from those
examples of error and crime which would most strikingly and naturally
teach it, I determined to do justice to the honesty of my object by
speaking out. In drawing the two characters, whose actions bring about
the darker scenes of my story, I did not forget that it was my duty,
while striving to portray them naturally, to put them to a good moral
use; and at some sacrifice, in certain places, of dramatic effect
(though I trust with no sacrifice of truth to Nature), I have shown the
conduct of the vile, as always, in a greater or less degree, associated
with something that is selfish, contemptible, or cruel in motive.
Whether any of my better characters may succeed in endearing themselves
to the reader, I know not: but this I do certainly know:--that I shall
in no instance cheat him out of his sympathies in favour of the bad.

To those persons who dissent from the broad principles here adverted to;
who deny that it is the novelist's vocation to do more than merely amuse
them; who shrink from all honest and serious reference, in books,
to subjects which they think of in private and talk of in public
everywhere; who see covert implications where nothing is implied, and
improper allusions where nothing improper is alluded to; whose innocence
is in the word, and not in the thought; whose morality stops at the
tongue, and never gets on to the heart--to those persons, I should
consider it loss of time, and worse, to offer any further explanation of
my motives, than the sufficient explanation which I have given already.
I do not address myself to them in this book, and shall never think of
addressing myself to them in any other.

                         *****

Those words formed part of the original introduction to this novel. I
wrote them nearly ten years since; and what I said then, I say now.

"Basil" was the second work of fiction which I produced. On its
appearance, it was condemned off-hand, by a certain class of readers, as
an outrage on their sense of propriety. Conscious of having designed
and written, my story with the strictest regard to true delicacy, as
distinguished from false--I allowed the prurient misinterpretation of
certain perfectly innocent passages in this book to assert itself as
offensively as it pleased, without troubling myself to protest against
an expression of opinion which aroused in me no other feeling than
a feeling of contempt. I knew that "Basil" had nothing to fear from
pure-minded readers; and I left these pages to stand or fall on such
merits as they possessed. Slowly and surely, my story forced its way
through all adverse criticism, to a place in the public favour which
it has never lost since. Some of the most valued friends I now possess,
were made for me by "Basil." Some of the most gratifying recognitions of
my labours which I have received, from readers personally strangers to
me, have been recognitions of the purity of this story, from the first
page to the last. All the indulgence I need now ask for "Basil," is
indulgence for literary defects, which are the result of inexperience;
which no correction can wholly remove; and which no one sees more
plainly, after a lapse of ten years, than the writer himself.

I have only to add, that the present edition of this book is the first
which has had the benefit of my careful revision. While the incidents of
the story remain exactly what they were, the language in which they are
told has been, I hope, in many cases greatly altered for the better.


WILKIE COLLINS.

Harley Street, London, July, 1862.





BASIL.




PART I.


I.

WHAT am I now about to write?

The history of little more than the events of one year, out of the
twenty-four years of my life.

Why do I undertake such an employment as this?

Perhaps, because I think that my narrative may do good; because I hope
that, one day, it may be put to some warning use. I am now about to
relate the story of an error, innocent in its beginning, guilty in its
progress, fatal in its results; and I would fain hope that my plain
and true record will show that this error was not committed altogether
without excuse. When these pages are found after my death, they will
perhaps be calmly read and gently judged, as relics solemnized by the
atoning shadows of the grave. Then, the hard sentence against me may
be repented of; the children of the next generation of our house may
be taught to speak charitably of my memory, and may often, of their own
accord, think of me kindly in the thoughtful watches of the night.

Prompted by these motives, and by others which I feel, but cannot
analyse, I now begin my self-imposed occupation. Hidden amid the far
hills of the far West of England, surrounded only by the few simple
inhabitants of a fishing hamlet on the Cornish coast, there is little
fear that my attention will be distracted from my task; and as
little chance that any indolence on my part will delay its speedy
accomplishment. I live under a threat of impending hostility, which may
descend and overwhelm me, I know not how soon, or in what manner. An
enemy, determined and deadly, patient alike to wait days or years for
his opportunity, is ever lurking after me in the dark. In entering on my
new employment, I cannot say of my time, that it may be mine for another
hour; of my life, that it may last till evening.

Thus it is as no leisure work that I begin my narrative--and begin it,
too, on my birthday! On this day I complete my twenty-fourth year; the
first new year of my life which has not been greeted by a single kind
word, or a single loving wish. But one look of welcome can still find me
in my solitude--the lovely morning look of nature, as I now see it from
the casement of my room. Brighter and brighter shines out the lusty sun
from banks of purple, rainy cloud; fishermen are spreading their nets
to dry on the lower declivities of the rocks; children are playing round
the boats drawn up on the beach; the sea-breeze blows fresh and pure
towards the shore----all objects are brilliant to look on, all sounds
are pleasant to hear, as my pen traces the first lines which open the
story of my life.

II.

I am the second son of an English gentleman of large fortune. Our family
is, I believe, one of the most ancient in this country. On my father's
side, it dates back beyond the Conquest; on my mother's, it is not so
old, but the pedigree is nobler. Besides my elder brother, I have one
sister, younger than myself. My mother died shortly after giving birth
to her last child.

Circumstances which will appear hereafter, have forced me to abandon my
father's name. I have been obliged in honour to resign it; and in honour
I abstain from mentioning it here. Accordingly, at the head of these
pages, I have only placed my Christian name--not considering it of any
importance to add the surname which I have assumed; and which I may,
perhaps, be obliged to change for some other, at no very distant period.
It will now, I hope, be understood from the outset, why I never mention
my brother and sister but by their Christian names; why a blank occurs
wherever my father's name should appear; why my own is kept concealed in
this narrative, as it is kept concealed in the world.

The story of my boyhood and youth has little to interest--nothing that
is new. My education was the education of hundreds of others in my rank
of life. I was first taught at a public school, and then went to college
to complete what is termed "a liberal education."

My life at college has not left me a single pleasant recollection. I
found sycophancy established there, as a principle of action; flaunting
on the lord's gold tassel in the street; enthroned on the lord's dais in
the dining-room. The most learned student in my college--the man whose
life was most exemplary, whose acquirements were most admirable--was
shown me sitting, as a commoner, in the lowest place. The heir to an
Earldom, who had failed at the last examination, was pointed out a few
minutes afterwards, dining in solitary grandeur at a raised table, above
the reverend scholars who had turned him back as a dunce. I had just
arrived at the University, and had just been congratulated on entering
"a venerable seminary of learning and religion."

Trite and common-place though it be, I mention this circumstance
attending my introduction to college, because it formed the first cause
which tended to diminish my faith in the institution to which I was
attached. I soon grew to regard my university training as a sort of
necessary evil, to be patiently submitted to. I read for no honours,
and joined no particular set of men. I studied the literature of France,
Italy, and Germany; just kept up my classical knowledge sufficiently
to take my degree; and left college with no other reputation than a
reputation for indolence and reserve.

When I returned home, it was thought necessary, as I was a younger son,
and could inherit none of the landed property of the family, except in
the case of my brother's dying without children, that I should belong
to a profession. My father had the patronage of some valuable "livings,"
and good interest with more than one member of the government. The
church, the army, the navy, and, in the last instance, the bar, were
offered me to choose from. I selected the last.

My father appeared to be a little astonished at my choice; but he made
no remark on it, except simply telling me not to forget that the bar was
a good stepping-stone to parliament. My real ambition, however, was, not
to make a name in parliament, but a name in literature. I had already
engaged myself in the hard, but glorious service of the pen; and I was
determined to persevere. The profession which offered me the greatest
facilities for pursuing my project, was the profession which I was ready
to prefer. So I chose the bar.

Thus, I entered life under the fairest auspices. Though a younger son, I
knew that my father's wealth, exclusive of his landed property, secured
me an independent income far beyond my wants. I had no extravagant
habits; no tastes that I could not gratify as soon as formed; no cares
or responsibilities of any kind. I might practise my profession or
not, just as I chose. I could devote myself wholly and unreservedly to
literature, knowing that, in my case, the struggle for fame could never
be identical--terribly, though gloriously identical--with the struggle
for bread. For me, the morning sunshine of life was sunshine without a
cloud!

I might attempt, in this place, to sketch my own character as it was at
that time. But what man can say--I will sound the depth of my own vices,
and measure the height of my own virtues; and be as good as his word? We
can neither know nor judge ourselves; others may judge, but cannot know
us: God alone judges and knows too. Let my character appear--as far as
any human character can appear in its integrity, in this world--in my
actions, when I describe the one eventful passage in my life which forms
the basis of this narrative. In the mean time, it is first necessary
that I should say more about the members of my family. Two of them, at
least, will be found important to the progress of events in these
pages. I make no attempt to judge their characters: I only describe
them--whether rightly or wrongly, I know not--as they appeared to me.

III.

I always considered my father--I speak of him in the past tense, because
we are now separated for ever; because he is henceforth as dead to me
as if the grave had closed over him--I always considered my father to be
the proudest man I ever knew; the proudest man I ever heard of. His
was not that conventional pride, which the popular notions are fond of
characterising by a stiff, stately carriage; by a rigid expression of
features; by a hard, severe intonation of voice; by set speeches of
contempt for poverty and rags, and rhapsodical braggadocio about rank
and breeding. My father's pride had nothing of this about it. It was
that quiet, negative, courteous, inbred pride, which only the closest
observation could detect; which no ordinary observers ever detected at
all.

Who that observed him in communication with any of the farmers on any of
his estates--who that saw the manner in which he lifted his hat, when
he accidentally met any of those farmers' wives--who that noticed his
hearty welcome to the man of the people, when that man happened to be a
man of genius--would have thought him proud? On such occasions as these,
if he had any pride, it was impossible to detect it. But seeing him
when, for instance, an author and a new-made peer of no ancestry entered
his house together--observing merely the entirely different manner in
which he shook hands with each--remarking that the polite cordiality
was all for the man of letters, who did not contest his family rank with
him, and the polite formality all for the man of title, who did--you
discovered where and how he was proud in an instant. Here lay his
fretful point. The aristocracy of rank, as separate from the aristocracy
of ancestry, was no aristocracy for _him._ He was jealous of it; he
hated it. Commoner though he was, he considered himself the social
superior of any man, from a baronet up to a duke, whose family was less
ancient than his own.

Among a host of instances of this peculiar pride of his which I could
cite, I remember one, characteristic enough to be taken as a sample of
all the rest. It happened when I was quite a child, and was told me by
one of my uncles now dead--who witnessed the circumstance himself, and
always made a good story of it to the end of his life.

A merchant of enormous wealth, who had recently been raised to the
peerage, was staying at one of our country houses. His daughter, my
uncle, and an Italian Abbe were the only guests besides. The merchant
was a portly, purple-faced man, who bore his new honours with a curious
mixture of assumed pomposity and natural good-humour. The Abbe was
dwarfish and deformed, lean, sallow, sharp-featured, with bright
bird-like eyes, and a low, liquid voice. He was a political refugee,
dependent for the bread he ate, on the money he received for teaching
languages. He might have been a beggar from the streets; and still my
father would have treated him as the principal guest in the house, for
this all-sufficient reason--he was a direct descendant of one of the
oldest of those famous Roman families whose names are part of the
history of the Civil Wars in Italy.

On the first day, the party assembled for dinner comprised the
merchant's daughter, my mother, an old lady who had once been her
governess, and had always lived with her since her marriage, the new
Lord, the Abbe, my father, and my uncle. When dinner was announced,
the peer advanced in new-blown dignity, to offer his arm as a matter of
course to my mother. My father's pale face flushed crimson in a moment.
He touched the magnificent merchant-lord on the arm, and pointed
significantly, with a low bow, towards the decrepit old lady who had
once been my mother's governess. Then walking to the other end of the
room, where the penniless Abbe was looking over a book in a corner,
he gravely and courteously led the little, deformed, limping
language-master, clad in a long, threadbare, black coat, up to my mother
(whose shoulder the Abbe's head hardly reached), held the door open
for them to pass out first, with his own hand; politely invited the new
nobleman, who stood half-paralysed between confusion and astonishment,
to follow with the tottering old lady on his arm; and then returned to
lead the peer's daughter down to dinner himself. He only resumed his
wonted expression and manner, when he had seen the little Abbe--the
squalid, half-starved representative of mighty barons of the olden
time--seated at the highest place of the table by my mother's side.

It was by such accidental circumstances as these that you discovered how
far he was proud. He never boasted of his ancestors; he never even spoke
of them, except when he was questioned on the subject; but he never
forgot them. They were the very breath of his life; the deities of his
social worship: the family treasures to be held precious beyond all
lands and all wealth, all ambitions and all glories, by his children and
his children's children to the end of their race.

In home-life he performed his duties towards his family honourably,
delicately, and kindly. I believe in his own way he loved us all; but
we, his descendants, had to share his heart with his ancestors--we were
his household property as well as his children. Every fair liberty was
given to us; every fair indulgence was granted to us. He never displayed
any suspicion, or any undue severity. We were taught by his direction,
that to disgrace our family, either by word or action, was the one fatal
crime which could never be forgotten and never be pardoned. We were
formed, under his superintendence, in principles of religion, honour,
and industry; and the rest was left to our own moral sense, to our own
comprehension of the duties and privileges of our station. There was no
one point in his conduct towards any of us that we could complain of;
and yet there was something always incomplete in our domestic relations.

It may seem incomprehensible, even ridiculous, to some persons, but it
is nevertheless true, that we were none of us ever on intimate terms
with him. I mean by this, that he was a father to us, but never a
companion. There was something in his manner, his quiet and unchanging
manner, which kept us almost unconsciously restrained. I never in my
life felt less at my ease--I knew not why at the time--than when I
occasionally dined alone with him. I never confided to him my schemes
for amusement as a boy, or mentioned more than generally my ambitious
hopes, as a young man. It was not that he would have received such
confidences with ridicule or severity, he was incapable of it; but that
he seemed above them, unfitted to enter into them, too far removed by
his own thoughts from such thoughts as ours. Thus, all holiday councils
were held with old servants; thus, my first pages of manuscript, when
I first tried authorship, were read by my sister, and never penetrated
into my father's study.

Again, his mode of testifying displeasure towards my brother or myself,
had something terrible in its calmness, something that we never forgot,
and always dreaded as the worst calamity that could befall us.

Whenever, as boys, we committed some boyish fault, he never displayed
outwardly any irritation--he simply altered his manner towards us
altogether. We were not soundly lectured, or vehemently threatened, or
positively punished in anyway; but, when we came in contact with him,
we were treated with a cold, contemptuous politeness (especially if our
fault showed a tendency to anything mean or ungentlemanlike) which
cut us to the heart. On these occasions, we were not addressed by our
Christian names; if we accidentally met him out of doors, he was sure to
turn aside and avoid us; if we asked a question, it was answered in the
briefest possible manner, as if we had been strangers. His whole
course of conduct said, as though in so many words--You have rendered
yourselves unfit to associate with your father; and he is now making you
feel that unfitness as deeply as he does. We were left in this domestic
purgatory for days, sometimes for weeks together. To our boyish feelings
(to mine especially) there was no ignominy like it, while it lasted.

I know not on what terms my father lived with my mother. Towards my
sister, his demeanour always exhibited something of the old-fashioned,
affectionate gallantry of a former age. He paid her the same attention
that he would have paid to the highest lady in the land. He led her
into the dining-room, when we were alone, exactly as he would have led a
duchess into a banqueting-hall. He would allow us, as boys, to quit the
breakfast-table before he had risen himself; but never before she had
left it. If a servant failed in duty towards _him,_ the servant was
often forgiven; if towards _her,_ the servant was sent away on the
spot. His daughter was in his eyes the representative of her mother: the
mistress of his house, as well as his child. It was curious to see the
mixture of high-bred courtesy and fatherly love in his manner, as he
just gently touched her forehead with his lips, when he first saw her in
the morning.

In person, my father was of not more than middle height. He was very
slenderly and delicately made; his head small, and well set on his
shoulders--his forehead more broad than lofty--his complexion singularly
pale, except in moments of agitation, when I have already noticed its
tendency to flush all over in an instant. His eyes, large and gray,
had something commanding in their look; they gave a certain unchanging
firmness and dignity to his expression, not often met with. They
betrayed his birth and breeding, his old ancestral prejudices, his
chivalrous sense of honour, in every glance. It required, indeed, all
the masculine energy of look about the upper part of his face, to redeem
the lower part from an appearance of effeminacy, so delicately was it
moulded in its fine Norman outline. His smile was remarkable for its
sweetness--it was almost like a woman's smile. In speaking, too, his
lips often trembled as women's do. If he ever laughed, as a young
man, his laugh must have been very clear and musical; but since I can
recollect him, I never heard it. In his happiest moments, in the gayest
society, I have only seen him smile.

There were other characteristics of my father's disposition and manner,
which I might mention; but they will appear to greater advantage,
perhaps, hereafter, connected with circumstances which especially called
them forth.

IV.

When a family is possessed of large landed property, the individual of
that family who shows least interest in its welfare; who is least fond
of home, least connected by his own sympathies with his relatives, least
ready to learn his duties or admit his responsibilities, is often that
very individual who is to succeed to the family inheritance--the eldest
son.

My brother Ralph was no exception to this remark. We were educated
together. After our education was completed, I never saw him, except
for short periods. He was almost always on the continent, for some years
after he left college. And when he returned definitely to England, he
did not return to live under our roof. Both in town and country he was
our visitor, not our inmate.

I recollect him at school--stronger, taller, handsomer than I was; far
beyond me in popularity among the little community we lived with; the
first to lead a daring exploit, the last to abandon it; now at the
bottom of the class, now at the top--just that sort of gay, boisterous,
fine-looking, dare-devil boy, whom old people would instinctively turn
round and smile after, as they passed him by in a morning walk.

Then, at college, he became illustrious among rowers and cricketers,
renowned as a pistol shot, dreaded as a singlestick player. No wine
parties in the university were such wine parties as his; tradesmen gave
him the first choice of everything that was new; young ladies in the
town fell in love with him by dozens; young tutors with a tendency to
dandyism, copied the cut of his coat and the tie of his cravat; even the
awful heads of houses looked leniently on his delinquencies. The gay,
hearty, handsome young English gentleman carried a charm about him that
subdued everybody. Though I was his favourite butt, both at school
and college, I never quarrelled with him in my life. I always let him
ridicule my dress, manners, and habits in his own reckless, boisterous
way, as if it had been a part of his birthright privilege to laugh at me
as much as he chose.

Thus far, my father had no worse anxieties about him than those
occasioned by his high spirits and his heavy debts. But when he returned
home--when the debts had been paid, and it was next thought necessary
to drill the free, careless energies into something like useful
discipline--then my father's trials and difficulties began in earnest.

It was impossible to make Ralph comprehend and appreciate his position,
as he was desired to comprehend and appreciate it. The steward gave up
in despair all attempts to enlighten him about the extent, value, and
management of the estates he was to inherit. A vigorous effort was
made to inspire him with ambition; to get him to go into parliament. He
laughed at the idea. A commission in the Guards was next offered to
him. He refused it, because he would never be buttoned up in a red
coat; because he would submit to no restraints, fashionable or military;
because in short, he was determined to be his own master. My father
talked to him by the hour together, about his duties and his prospects,
the cultivation of his mind, and the example of his ancestors; and
talked in vain. He yawned and fidgetted over the emblazoned pages of his
own family pedigree, whenever they were opened before him.

In the country, he cared for nothing but hunting and shooting--it was as
difficult to make him go to a grand county dinner-party, as to make him
go to church. In town, he haunted the theatres, behind the scenes as
well as before; entertained actors and actresses at Richmond; ascended
in balloons at Vauxhall; went about with detective policemen, seeing
life among pickpockets and housebreakers; belonged to a whist club,
a supper club, a catch club, a boxing club, a picnic club, an amateur
theatrical club; and, in short, lived such a careless, convivial life,
that my father, outraged in every one of his family prejudices and
family refinements, almost ceased to speak to him, and saw him as rarely
as possible. Occasionally, my sister's interference reconciled them
again for a short time; her influence, gentle as it was, was always
powerfully felt for good, but she could not change my brother's nature.
Persuade and entreat as anxiously as she might, he was always sure to
forfeit the paternal favour again, a few days after he had been restored
to it.

At last, matters were brought to their climax by an awkward love
adventure of Ralph's with one of our tenants' daughters. My father
acted with his usual decision on the occasion. He determined to apply
a desperate remedy: to let the refractory eldest son run through his
career in freedom, abroad, until he had well wearied himself, and could
return home a sobered man. Accordingly, he procured for my brother
an attache's place in a foreign embassy, and insisted on his leaving
England forthwith. For once in a way, Ralph was docile. He knew and
cared nothing about diplomacy; but he liked the idea of living on the
continent, so he took his leave of home with his best grace. My father
saw him depart, with ill-concealed agitation and apprehension; although
he affected to feel satisfied that, flighty and idle as Ralph was, he
was incapable of voluntarily dishonouring his family, even in his most
reckless moods.

After this, we heard little from my brother. His letters were few and
short, and generally ended with petitions for money. The only important
news of him that reached us, reached us through public channels.

He was making quite a continental reputation--a reputation, the bare
mention of which made my father wince. He had fought a duel; he had
imported a new dance from Hungary; he had contrived to get the smallest
groom that ever was seen behind a cabriolet; he had carried off the
reigning beauty among the opera-dancers of the day from all competitors;
a great French cook had composed a great French dish, and christened
it by his name; he was understood to be the "unknown friend," to whom
a literary Polish countess had dedicated her "Letters against the
restraint of the Marriage Tie;" a female German metaphysician, sixty
years old, had fallen (Platonically) in love with him, and had taken to
writing erotic romances in her old age. Such were some of the rumours
that reached my father's ears on the subject of his son and heir!

After a long absence, he came home on a visit. How well I remember
the astonishment he produced in the whole household! He had become a
foreigner in manners and appearance. His mustachios were magnificent;
miniature toys in gold and jewellery hung in clusters from his
watch-chain; his shirt-front was a perfect filigree of lace and cambric.
He brought with him his own boxes of choice liqueurs and perfumes; his
own smart, impudent, French valet; his own travelling bookcase of French
novels, which he opened with his own golden key. He drank nothing but
chocolate in the morning; he had long interviews with the cook, and
revolutionized our dinner table. All the French newspapers were sent to
him by a London agent. He altered the arrangements of his bed-room; no
servant but his own valet was permitted to enter it. Family portraits
that hung there, were turned to the walls, and portraits of French
actresses and Italian singers were stuck to the back of the canvasses.
Then he displaced a beautiful little ebony cabinet which had been in the
family three hundred years; and set up in its stead a Cyprian temple of
his own, in miniature, with crystal doors, behind which hung locks
of hair, rings, notes written on blush-coloured paper, and other
love-tokens kept as sentimental relics. His influence became
all-pervading among us. He seemed to communicate to the house the change
that had taken place in himself, from the reckless, racketty young
Englishman to the super-exquisite foreign dandy. It was as if the
fiery, effervescent atmosphere of the Boulevards of Paris had insolently
penetrated into the old English mansion, and ruffled and infected its
quiet native air, to the remotest corners of the place.

My father was even more dismayed than displeased by the alteration in
my brother's habits and manners--the eldest son was now farther from
his ideal of what an eldest son should be, than ever. As for friends and
neighbours, Ralph was heartily feared and disliked by them, before
he had been in the house a week. He had an ironically patient way of
listening to their conversation; an ironically respectful manner of
demolishing their old-fashioned opinions, and correcting their slightest
mistakes, which secretly aggravated them beyond endurance. It was worse
still, when my father, in despair, tried to tempt him into marriage,
as the one final chance of working his reform; and invited half the
marriageable young ladies of our acquaintance to the house, for his
especial benefit.

Ralph had never shown much fondness at home, for the refinements of
good female society. Abroad, he had lived as exclusively as he possibly
could, among women whose characters ranged downwards by infinitesimal
degrees, from the mysteriously doubtful to the notoriously bad. The
highly-bred, highly-refined, highly-accomplished young English beauties
had no charm for him. He detected at once the domestic conspiracy of
which he was destined to become the victim. He often came up-stairs, at
night, into my bed-room; and while he was amusing himself by derisively
kicking about my simple clothes and simple toilette apparatus; while he
was laughing in his old careless way at my quiet habits and monotonous
life, used to slip in, parenthetically, all sorts of sarcasms about our
young lady guests. To him, their manners were horribly inanimate; their
innocence, hypocrisy of education. Pure complexions and regular features
were very well, he said, as far as they went; but when a girl could not
walk properly, when she shook hands with you with cold fingers, when
having good eyes she could not make a stimulating use of them, then it
was time to sentence the regular features and pure complexions to be
taken back forthwith to the nursery from which they came. For _his_
part, he missed the conversation of his witty Polish Countess, and
longed for another pancake-supper with his favourite _grisettes._

The failure of my father's last experiment with Ralph soon became
apparent. Watchful and experienced mothers began to suspect that my
brother's method of flirtation was dangerous, and his style of waltzing
improper. One or two ultra-cautious parents, alarmed by the laxity of
his manners and opinions, removed their daughters out of harm's way,
by shortening their visits. The rest were spared any such necessity. My
father suddenly discovered that Ralph was devoting himself rather too
significantly to a young married woman who was staying in the house. The
same day he had a long private interview with my brother. What passed
between them, I know not; but it must have been something serious.
Ralph came out of my father's private study, very pale and very
silent; ordered his luggage to be packed directly; and the next morning
departed, with his French valet, and his multifarious French goods and
chattels, for the continent.

Another interval passed; and then we had another short visit from him.
He was still unaltered. My father's temper suffered under this second
disappointment. He became more fretful and silent; more apt to take
offence than had been his wont. I particularly mention the change thus
produced in his disposition, because that change was destined, at no
very distant period, to act fatally upon me.

On this last occasion, also, there was another serious disagreement
between father and son; and Ralph left England again in much the same
way that he had left it before.

Shortly after that second departure, we heard that he had altered
his manner of life. He had contracted, what would be termed in the
continental code of morals, a reformatory attachment to a woman older
than himself, who was living separated from her husband, when he met
with her. It was this lady's lofty ambition to be Mentor and mistress,
both together! And she soon proved herself to be well qualified for her
courageous undertaking. To the astonishment of everyone who knew
him, Ralph suddenly turned economical; and, soon afterwards, actually
resigned his post at the embassy, to be out of the way of temptation!
Since that, he has returned to England; has devoted himself to
collecting snuff-boxes and learning the violin; and is now living
quietly in the suburbs of London, still under the inspection of the
resolute female missionary who first worked his reform.

Whether he will ever become the high-minded, high-principled country
gentleman, that my father has always desired to see him, it is useless
for me to guess. On the domains which he is to inherit, I shall never
perhaps set foot again: in the halls where he will one day preside as
master, I shall never more be sheltered. Let me now quit the subject of
my elder brother, and turn to a theme which is nearer to my heart; dear
to me as the last remembrance left that I can love; precious beyond all
treasures in my solitude and my exile from home.

My sister!--well may I linger over your beloved name in such a record
as this. A little farther on, and the darkness of crime and grief will
encompass me; here, my recollections of you kindle like a pure light
before my eyes--doubly pure by contrast with what lies beyond. May your
kind eyes, love, be the first that fall on these pages, when the writer
has parted from them for ever! May your tender hand be the first that
touches these leaves, when mine is cold! Backward in my narrative,
Clara, wherever I have but casually mentioned my sister, the pen has
trembled and stood still. At this place, where all my remembrances of
you throng upon me unrestrained, the tears gather fast and thick beyond
control; and for the first time since I began my task, my courage and my
calmness fail me.

It is useless to persevere longer. My hand trembles; my eyes grow dimmer
and dimmer. I must close my labours for the day, and go forth to gather
strength and resolution for to-morrow on the hill-tops that overlook the
sea.

V.

My sister Clara is four years younger than I am. In form of face, in
complexion, and--except the eyes--in features, she bears a striking
resemblance to my father. Her expressions however, must be very like
what my mother's was. Whenever I have looked at her in her silent and
thoughtful moments, she has always appeared to freshen, and even to
increase, my vague, childish recollections of our lost mother. Her
eyes have that slight tinge of melancholy in their tenderness, and that
peculiar softness in their repose, which is only seen in blue eyes. Her
complexion, pale as my father's when she is neither speaking nor moving,
has in a far greater degree than his the tendency to flush, not merely
in moments of agitation, but even when she is walking, or talking on any
subject that interests her. Without this peculiarity her paleness would
be a defect. With it, the absence of any colour in her complexion but
the fugitive uncertain colour which I have described, would to some eyes
debar her from any claims to beauty. And a beauty perhaps she is not--at
least, in the ordinary acceptation of the term.

The lower part of her face is rather too small for the upper, her figure
is too slight, the sensitiveness of her nervous organization is too
constantly visible in her actions and her looks. She would not fix
attention and admiration in a box at the opera; very few men passing her
in the street would turn round to look after her; very few women
would regard her with that slightingly attentive stare, that steady
depreciating scrutiny, which a dashing decided beauty so often receives
(and so often triumphs in receiving) from her personal inferiors among
her own sex. The greatest charms that my sister has on the surface, come
from beneath it.

When you really knew her, when she spoke to you freely, as to a
friend--then, the attraction of her voice, her smile her manner,
impressed you indescribably. Her slightest words and her commonest
actions interested and delighted you, you knew not why. There was
a beauty about her unassuming simplicity, her natural--exquisitely
natural--kindness of heart, and word, and manner, which preserved
its own unobtrusive influence over you, in spite of all other rival
influences, be they what they might. You missed and thought of her,
when you were fresh from the society of the most beautiful and the most
brilliant women. You remembered a few kind, pleasant words of hers when
you forgot the wit of the wittiest ladies, the learning of the most
learned. The influence thus possessed, and unconsciously possessed,
by my sister over every one with whom she came in contact--over men
especially--may, I think be very simply accounted for, in very few
sentences.

We live in an age when too many women appear to be ambitious of morally
unsexing themselves before society, by aping the language and the
manners of men--especially in reference to that miserable modern
dandyism of demeanour, which aims at repressing all betrayal of warmth
of feeling; which abstains from displaying any enthusiasm on any
subject whatever; which, in short, labours to make the fashionable
imperturbability of the face the faithful reflection of the fashionable
imperturbability of the mind. Women of this exclusively modern
order, like to use slang expressions in their conversation; assume
a bastard-masculine abruptness in their manners, a bastard-masculine
licence in their opinions; affect to ridicule those outward developments
of feeling which pass under the general appellation of "sentiment."
Nothing impresses, agitates, amuses, or delights them in a hearty,
natural, womanly way. Sympathy looks ironical, if they ever show it:
love seems to be an affair of calculation, or mockery, or contemptuous
sufferance, if they ever feel it.

To women such as these, my sister Clara presented as complete a contrast
as could well be conceived. In this contrast lay the secret of her
influence, of the voluntary tribute of love and admiration which
followed her wherever she went.

Few men have not their secret moments of deep feeling--moments when,
amid the wretched trivialities and hypocrisies of modern society, the
image will present itself to their minds of some woman, fresh,
innocent, gentle, sincere; some woman whose emotions are still warm and
impressible, whose affections and sympathies can still appear in her
actions, and give the colour to her thoughts; some woman in whom we
could put as perfect faith and trust, as if we were children; whom we
despair of finding near the hardening influences of the world; whom we
could scarcely venture to look for, except in solitary places far away
in the country; in little rural shrines, shut up from society, among
woods and fields, and lonesome boundary-hills. When any women happen to
realise, or nearly to realise, such an image as this, they possess that
universal influence which no rivalry can ever approach. On them really
depends, and by then is really preserved, that claim upon the sincere
respect and admiration of men, on which the power of the whole sex is
based--the power so often assumed by the many, so rarely possessed but
by the few.

It was thus with my sister. Thus, wherever she went, though without
either the inclination, or the ambition to shine, she eclipsed women
who were her superiors in beauty, in accomplishments, in brilliancy of
manners and conversation--conquering by no other weapon than the purely
feminine charm of everything she said, and everything she did.

But it was not amid the gaiety and grandeur of a London season that her
character was displayed to the greatest advantage. It was when she was
living where she loved to live, in the old country-house, among the old
friends and old servants who would every one of them have died a hundred
deaths for her sake, that you could study and love her best. Then, the
charm there was in the mere presence of the kind, gentle, happy young
English girl, who could enter into everybody's interests, and be
grateful for everybody's love, possessed its best and brightest
influence. At picnics, lawn-parties, little country gatherings of all
sorts, she was, in her own quiet, natural manner, always the presiding
spirit of general comfort and general friendship. Even the rigid laws
of country punctilio relaxed before her unaffected cheerfulness and
irresistible good-nature. She always contrived--nobody ever knew
how--to lure the most formal people into forgetting their formality,
and becoming natural for the rest of the day. Even a heavy-headed,
lumbering, silent country squire was not too much for her. She managed
to make him feel at his ease, when no one else would undertake the task;
she could listen patiently to his confused speeches about dogs, horses,
and the state of the crops, when other conversations were proceeding in
which she was really interested; she could receive any little
grateful attention that he wished to pay her--no matter how awkward or
ill-timed--as she received attentions from any one else, with a manner
which showed she considered it as a favour granted to her sex, not as a
right accorded to it.

So, again, she always succeeded in diminishing the long list of those
pitiful affronts and offences, which play such important parts in the
social drama of country society. She was a perfect Apostle-errant of
the order of Reconciliation; and wherever she went, cast out the devil
Sulkiness from all his strongholds--the lofty and the lowly alike. Our
good rector used to call her his Volunteer Curate; and declare that
she preached by a timely word, or a persuasive look, the best practical
sermons on the blessings of peace-making that were ever composed.

With all this untiring good-nature, with all this resolute industry
in the task of making every one happy whom she approached, there was
mingled some indescribable influence, which invariably preserved her
from the presumption, even of the most presuming people. I never knew
anybody venturesome enough--either by word or look--to take a liberty
with her. There was something about her which inspired respect as well
as love. My father, following the bent of his peculiar and favourite
ideas, always thought it was the look of her race in her eyes, the
ascendancy of her race in her manners. I believe it to have proceeded
from a simpler and a better cause. There is a goodness of heart, which
carries the shield of its purity over the open hand of its kindness: and
that goodness was hers.

To my father, she was more, I believe, than he himself ever imagined--or
will ever know, unless he should lose her. He was often, in his
intercourse with the world, wounded severely enough in his peculiar
prejudices and peculiar refinements--he was always sure to find the
first respected, and the last partaken by _her._ He could trust in her
implicitly, he could feel assured that she was not only willing, but
able, to share and relieve his domestic troubles and anxieties. If he
had been less fretfully anxious about his eldest son; if he had wisely
distrusted from the first his own powers of persuading and reforming,
and had allowed Clara to exercise her influence over Ralph more
constantly and more completely than he really did, I am persuaded that
the long-expected epoch of my brother's transformation would have really
arrived by this time, or even before it.

The strong and deep feelings of my sister's nature lay far below the
surface--for a woman, too far below it. Suffering was, for her, silent,
secret, long enduring; often almost entirely void of outward vent or
development. I never remember seeing her in tears, except on rare and
very serious occasions. Unless you looked at her narrowly, you would
judge her to be little sensitive to ordinary griefs and troubles. At
such times, her eyes only grew dimmer and less animated than usual; the
paleness of her complexion became rather more marked; her lips closed
and trembled involuntarily--but this was all: there was no sighing,
no weeping, no speaking even. And yet she suffered acutely. The very
strength of her emotions was in their silence and their secresy. I, of
all others--I, guilty of infecting with my anguish the pure heart that
loved me--ought to know this best!

How long I might linger over all that she has done for _me!_ As I now
approach nearer and nearer to the pages which are to reveal my fatal
story, so I am more and more tempted to delay over those better and
purer remembrances of my sister which now occupy my mind. The first
little presents--innocent girlish presents--which she secretly sent to
me at school; the first sweet days of our uninterrupted intercourse,
when the close of my college life restored me to home; her first
inestimable sympathies with my first fugitive vanities of embryo
authorship, are thronging back fast and fondly on my thoughts, while I
now write.

But these memories must be calmed and disciplined. I must be collected
and impartial over my narrative--if it be only to make that narrative
show fairly and truly, without suppression or exaggeration, all that I
have owed to her.

Not merely all that I _have_ owed to her; but all that I owe to her
now. Though I may never see her again, but in my thoughts; still she
influences, comforts, cheers me on to hope, as if she were already the
guardian spirit of the cottage where I live. Even in my worst moments of
despair, I can still remember that Clara is thinking of me and sorrowing
for me: I can still feel that remembrance, as an invisible hand of mercy
which supports me, sinking; which raises me, fallen; which may yet lead
me safely and tenderly to my hard journey's end.

VI.

I have now completed all the preliminary notices of my near relatives,
which it is necessary to present in these pages; and may proceed at once
to the more immediate subject of my narrative.

Imagine to yourself that my father and my sister have been living for
some months at our London residence; and that I have recently joined
them, after having enjoyed a short tour on the continent.

My father is engaged in his parliamentary duties. We see very little of
him. Committees absorb his mornings--debates his evenings. When he has
a day of leisure occasionally, he passes it in his study, devoted to his
own affairs. He goes very little into society--a political dinner, or a
scientific meeting are the only social relaxations that tempt him.

My sister leads a life which is not much in accordance with her simple
tastes. She is wearied of balls, operas, flower-shows, and all other
London gaieties besides; and heartily longs to be driving about the
green lanes again in her own little poney-chaise, and distributing
plum-cake prizes to the good children at the Rector's Infant School.
But the female friend who happens to be staying with her, is fond of
excitement; my father expects her to accept the invitations which he is
obliged to decline; so she gives up her own tastes and inclinations as
usual, and goes into hot rooms among crowds of fine people, hearing the
same glib compliments, and the same polite inquiries, night after night,
until, patient as she is, she heartily wishes that her fashionable
friends all lived in some opposite quarter of the globe, the farther
away the better.

My arrival from the continent is the most welcome of events to her. It
gives a new object and a new impulse to her London life.

I am engaged in writing a historical romance--indeed, it is principally
to examine the localities in the country where my story is laid, that I
have been abroad. Clara has read the first half-dozen finished chapters,
in manuscript, and augurs wonderful success for my fiction when it is
published. She is determined to arrange my study with her own hands; to
dust my books, and sort my papers herself. She knows that I am already
as fretful and precise about my literary goods and chattels, as
indignant at any interference of housemaids and dusters with my library
treasures, as if I were a veteran author of twenty years' standing; and
she is resolved to spare me every apprehension on this score, by taking
all the arrangements of my study on herself, and keeping the key of the
door when I am not in need of it.

We have our London amusements, too, as well as our London employments.
But the pleasantest of our relaxations are, after all, procured for
us by our horses. We ride every day--sometimes with friends, sometimes
alone together. On these latter occasions, we generally turn our horses'
heads away from the parks, and seek what country sights we can get
in the neighbourhood of London. The northern roads are generally our
favourite ride.

Sometimes we penetrate so far that we can bait our horses at a little
inn which reminds me of the inns near our country home. I see the same
sanded parlour, decorated with the same old sporting prints, furnished
with the same battered, deep-coloured mahogany table, and polished elm
tree chairs, that I remember in our own village inn. Clara, also, finds
bits of common, out of doors, that look like _our_ common; and trees
that might have been transplanted expressly for her, from _our_ park.

These excursions we keep a secret, we like to enjoy them entirely by
ourselves. Besides, if my father knew that his daughter was drinking
the landlady's fresh milk, and his son the landlord's old ale, in the
parlour of a suburban roadside inn, he would, I believe, be apt to
suspect that both his children had fairly taken leave of their senses.

Evening parties I frequent almost as rarely as my father. Clara's good
nature is called into requisition to do duty for me, as well as for
him. She has little respite in the task. Old lady relatives and friends,
always ready to take care of her, leave her no excuse for staying
at home. Sometimes I am shamed into accompanying her a little more
frequently than usual; but my old indolence in these matters soon
possesses me again. I have contracted a bad habit of writing at night--I
read almost incessantly in the day time. It is only because I am fond of
riding, that I am ever willing to interrupt my studies, and ever ready
to go out at all.

Such were my domestic habits, such my regular occupations and
amusements, when a mere accident changed every purpose of my life, and
altered me irretrievably from what I was then, to what I am now.

It happened thus:

VII.

I had just received my quarter's allowance of pocket-money, and had gone
into the city to cash the cheque at my father's bankers.

The money paid, I debated for a moment how I should return homewards.
First I thought of walking: then of taking a cab. While I was
considering this frivolous point, an omnibus passed me, going westward.
In the idle impulse of the moment, I hailed it, and got in.

It was something more than an idle impulse though. If I had at that time
no other qualification for the literary career on which I was entering,
I certainly had this one--an aptitude for discovering points of
character in others: and its natural result, an unfailing delight in
studying characters of all kinds, wherever I could meet with them.

I had often before ridden in omnibuses to amuse myself by observing the
passengers. An omnibus has always appeared to me, to be a perambulatory
exhibition-room of the eccentricities of human nature. I know not any
other sphere in which persons of all classes and all temperaments are so
oddly collected together, and so immediately contrasted and confronted
with each other. To watch merely the different methods of getting into
the vehicle, and taking their seats, adopted by different people, is to
study no incomplete commentary on the infinitesimal varieties of human
character--as various even as the varieties of the human face.

Thus, in addition to the idle impulse, there was the idea of amusement
in my thoughts, as I stopped the public vehicle, and added one to the
number of the conductor's passengers.

There were five persons in the omnibus when I entered it. Two
middle-aged ladies, dressed with amazing splendour in silks and satins,
wearing straw-coloured kid gloves, and carrying highly-scented pocket
handkerchiefs, sat apart at the end of the vehicle; trying to look as if
they occupied it under protest, and preserving the most stately
gravity and silence. They evidently felt that their magnificent outward
adornments were exhibited in a very unworthy locality, and among a very
uncongenial company.

One side, close to the door, was occupied by a lean, withered old man,
very shabbily dressed in black, who sat eternally mumbling something
between his toothless jaws. Occasionally, to the evident disgust of
the genteel ladies, he wiped his bald head and wrinkled forehead with a
ragged blue cotton handkerchief, which he kept in the crown of his hat.

Opposite to this ancient sat a dignified gentleman and a sickly
vacant-looking little girl. Every event of that day is so indelibly
marked on my memory, that I remember, not only this man's pompous look
and manner, but even the words he addressed to the poor squalid little
creature by his side. When I entered the omnibus, he was telling her
in a loud voice how she ought to dispose of her frock and her feet when
people got into the vehicle, and when they got out. He then impressed on
her the necessity in future life, when she grew up, of always having
the price of her fare ready before it was wanted, to prevent unnecessary
delay. Having delivered himself of this good advice, he began to hum,
keeping time by drumming with his thick Malacca cane. He was still
proceeding with this amusement--producing some of the most acutely
unmusical sounds I ever heard--when the omnibus stopped to give
admission to two ladies. The first who got in was an elderly
person--pale and depressed--evidently in delicate health. The second was
a young girl.



Among the workings of the hidden life within us which we may experience
but cannot explain, are there any more remarkable than those mysterious
moral influences constantly exercised, either for attraction or
repulsion, by one human being over another? In the simplest, as in the
most important affairs of life, how startling, how irresistible is their
power! How often we feel and know, either pleasurably or painfully, that
another is looking on us, before we have ascertained the fact with our
own eyes! How often we prophesy truly to ourselves the approach of a
friend or enemy, just before either have really appeared! How strangely
and abruptly we become convinced, at a first introduction, that we shall
secretly love this person and loathe that, before experience has guided
us with a single fact in relation to their characters!

I have said that the two additional passengers who entered the vehicle
in which I was riding, were, one of them, an elderly lady; the other, a
young girl. As soon as the latter had seated herself nearly opposite
to me, by her companion's side, I felt her influence on me directly--an
influence that I cannot describe--an influence which I had never
experienced in my life before, which I shall never experience again.

I had helped to hand her in, as she passed me; merely touching her arm
for a moment. But how the sense of that touch was prolonged! I felt it
thrilling through me--thrilling in every nerve, in every pulsation of my
fast-throbbing heart.

Had I the same influence over her? Or was it I that received, and she
that conferred, only? I was yet destined to discover; but not then--not
for a long, long time.

Her veil was down when I first saw her. Her features and her expression
were but indistinctly visible to me. I could just vaguely perceive that
she was young and beautiful; but, beyond this, though I might imagine
much, I could see little.

From the time when she entered the omnibus, I have no recollection of
anything more that occurred in it. I neither remember what passengers
got out, or what passengers got in. My powers of observation, hitherto
active enough, had now wholly deserted me. Strange! that the capricious
rule of chance should sway the action of our faculties that a trifle
should set in motion the whole complicated machinery of their exercise,
and a trifle suspend it.

We had been moving onward for some little time, when the girl's
companion addressed an observation to her. She heard it imperfectly,
and lifted her veil while it was being repeated. How painfully my heart
beat! I could almost hear it--as her face was, for the first time,
freely and fairly disclosed!

She was dark. Her hair, eyes, and complexion were darker than usual in
English women. The form, the look altogether, of her face, coupled
with what I could see of her figure, made me guess her age to be about
twenty. There was the appearance of maturity already in the shape of
her features; but their expression still remained girlish, unformed,
unsettled. The fire in her large dark eyes, when she spoke, was latent.
Their languor, when she was silent--that voluptuous languor of black
eyes--was still fugitive and unsteady. The smile about her full lips (to
other eyes, they might have looked _too_ full) struggled to be
eloquent, yet dared not. Among women, there always seems something left
incomplete--a moral creation to be superinduced on the physical--which
love alone can develop, and which maternity perfects still further, when
developed. I thought, as I looked on her, how the passing colour would
fix itself brilliantly on her round, olive cheek; how the expression
that still hesitated to declare itself, would speak out at last, would
shine forth in the full luxury of its beauty, when she heard the first
words, received the first kiss, from the man she loved!

While I still looked at her, as she sat opposite speaking to her
companion, our eyes met. It was only for a moment--but the sensation of
a moment often makes the thought of a life; and that one little instant
made the new life of my heart. She put down her veil again immediately;
her lips moved involuntarily as she lowered it: I thought I could
discern, through the lace, that the slight movement ripened to a smile.

Still there was enough left to see--enough to charm. There was the
little rim of delicate white lace, encircling the lovely, dusky throat;
there was the figure visible, where the shawl had fallen open, slender,
but already well developed in its slenderness, and exquisitely supple;
there was the waist, naturally low, and left to its natural place and
natural size; there were the little millinery and jewellery ornaments
that she wore--simple and common-place enough in themselves--yet each
a beauty, each a treasure, on _her._ There was all this to behold, all
this to dwell on, in spite of the veil. The veil! how little of the
woman does it hide, when the man really loves her!

We had nearly arrived at the last point to which the omnibus would take
us, when she and her companion got out. I followed them, cautiously and
at some distance.

She was tall--tall at least for a woman. There were not many people in
the road along which we were proceeding; but even if there had been,
far behind as I was walking, I should never have lost her--never have
mistaken any one else for her. Already, strangers though we were, I felt
that I should know her, almost at any distance, only by her walk.

They went on, until we reached a suburb of new houses, intermingled with
wretched patches of waste land, half built over. Unfinished streets,
unfinished crescents, unfinished squares, unfinished shops, unfinished
gardens, surrounded us. At last they stopped at a new square, and rang
the bell at one of the newest of the new houses. The door was opened,
and she and her companion disappeared. The house was partly detached.
It bore no number; but was distinguished as North Villa. The
square--unfinished like everything else in the neighbourhood--was called
Hollyoake Square.

I noticed nothing else about the place at that time. Its newness and
desolateness of appearance revolted me, just then. I had satisfied
myself about the locality of the house, and I knew that it was her home;
for I had approached sufficiently near, when the door was opened, to
hear her inquire if anybody had called in her absence. For the present,
this was enough. My sensations wanted repose; my thoughts wanted
collecting. I left Hollyoake Square at once, and walked into the
Regent's Park, the northern portion of which was close at hand.

Was I in love?--in love with a girl whom I had accidentally met in an
omnibus? Or, was I merely indulging a momentary caprice--merely feeling
a young man's hot, hasty admiration for a beautiful face? These
were questions which I could not then decide. My ideas were in utter
confusion, all my thoughts ran astray. I walked on, dreaming in full
day--I had no distinct impressions, except of the stranger beauty whom
I had just seen. The more I tried to collect myself, to resume the easy,
equable feelings with which I had set forth in the morning, the less
self-possessed I became. There are two emergencies in which the wisest
man may try to reason himself back from impulse to principle; and try
in vain:--the one when a woman has attracted him for the first time; the
other, when, for the first time, also, she has happened to offend him.

I know not how long I had been walking in the park, thus absorbed yet
not thinking, when the clock of a neighbouring church struck three,
and roused me to the remembrance that I had engaged to ride out with
my sister at two o'clock. It would be nearly half-an-hour more before
I could reach home. Never had any former appointment of mine with Clara
been thus forgotten! Love had not yet turned me selfish, as it turns all
men, and even all women, more or less. I felt both sorrow and shame at
the neglect of which I had been guilty; and hastened homeward.

The groom, looking unutterably weary and discontented, was still leading
my horse up and down before the house. My sister's horse had been sent
back to the stables. I went in; and heard that, after waiting for me an
hour, Clara had gone out with some friends, and would not be back before
dinner.

No one was in the house but the servants. The place looked dull, empty,
inexpressibly miserable to me; the distant roll of carriages along the
surrounding streets had a heavy boding sound; the opening and shutting
of doors in the domestic offices below, startled and irritated me; the
London air seemed denser to breathe than it had ever seemed before.
I walked up and down one of the rooms, fretful and irresolute. Once
I directed my steps towards my study; but retraced them before I had
entered it. Reading or writing was out of the question at that moment.

I felt the secret inclination strengthening within me to return to
Hollyoake Square; to try to see the girl again, or at least to ascertain
who she was. I strove--yes, I can honestly say, strove to repress the
desire. I tried to laugh it off, as idle and ridiculous; to think of my
sister, of the book I was writing, of anything but the one subject that
pressed stronger and stronger on me, the harder I struggled against
it. The spell of the syren was over me. I went out, hypocritically
persuading myself, that I was only animated by a capricious curiosity
to know the girl's name, which once satisfied, would leave me at rest on
the matter, and free to laugh at my own idleness and folly as soon as I
got home again.

I arrived at the house. The blinds were all drawn down over the front
windows, to keep out the sun. The little slip of garden was left
solitary--baking and cracking in the heat. The square was silent;
desolately silent, as only a suburban square can be. I walked up and
down the glaring pavement, resolved to find out her name before
I quitted the place. While still undecided how to act, a shrill
whistling--sounding doubly shrill in the silence around--made me look
up.

A tradesman's boy--one of those town Pucks of the highway; one of those
incarnations of precocious cunning, inveterate mischief, and impudent
humour, which great cities only can produce--was approaching me with his
empty tray under his arm. I called to him to come and speak to me. He
evidently belonged to the neighbourhood, and might be made of some use.

His first answer to my inquiries, showed that his master served the
household at North Villa. A present of a shilling secured his attention
at once to the few questions of any importance which I desired to put
to him. I learned from his replies, that the name of the master of the
house was "Sherwin:" and that the family only consisted of Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwin, and the young lady, their daughter.

My last inquiry addressed to the boy was the most important of all. Did
he know what Mr. Sherwin's profession or employment was?

His answer startled me into perfect silence. Mr. Sherwin kept a large
linen-draper's shop in one of the great London thoroughfares! The
boy mentioned the number, and the side of the way on which the house
stood--then asked me if I wanted to know anything more. I could only
tell him by a sign that he might leave me, and that I had heard enough.

Enough? If he had spoken the truth, I had heard too much.

A linen-draper's shop--a linen-draper's daughter! Was I still in
love?--I thought of my father; I thought of the name I bore; and this
time, though I might have answered the question, I dared not.

But the boy might be wrong. Perhaps, in mere mischief, he had been
deceiving me throughout. I determined to seek the address he had
mentioned, and ascertain the truth for myself.

I reached the place: there was the shop, and there the name "Sherwin"
over the door. One chance still remained. This Sherwin and the Sherwin
of Hollyoake Square might not be the same.

I went in and purchased something. While the man was tying up the
parcel, I asked him whether his master lived in Hollyoake Square.
Looking a little astonished at the question, he answered in the
affirmative.

"There was a Mr. Sherwin I once knew," I said, forging in those words
the first link in the long chain of deceit which was afterwards to
fetter and degrade me--"a Mr. Sherwin who is now, as I have heard,
living somewhere in the Hollyoake Square neighbourhood. He was a
bachelor--I don't know whether my friend and your master are the same?"

"Oh dear no, Sir! My master is a married man, and has one daughter--Miss
Margaret--who is reckoned a very fine young lady, Sir!" And the man
grinned as he spoke--a grin that sickened and shocked me.

I was answered at last: I had discovered all. Margaret!--I had heard her
name, too. Margaret!--it had never hitherto been a favourite name with
me. Now I felt a sort of terror as I detected myself repeating it, and
finding a new, unimagined poetry in the sound.

Could this be love?--pure, first love for a shopkeeper's daughter, whom
I had seen for a quarter of an hour in an omnibus, and followed home for
another quarter of an hour? The thing was impossible. And yet, I felt
a strange unwillingness to go back to our house, and see my father and
sister, just at that moment.

I was still walking onward slowly, but not in the direction of home,
when I met an old college friend of my brother's, and an acquaintance
of mine--a reckless, good-humoured, convivial fellow. He greeted me at
once, with uproarious cordiality; and insisted on my accompanying him to
dine at his club.

If the thoughts that still hung heavy on my mind were only the morbid,
fanciful thoughts of the hour, here was a man whose society would
dissipate them. I resolved to try the experiment, and accepted his
invitation.

At dinner, I tried hard to rival him in jest and joviality; I drank much
more than my usual quantity of wine--but it was useless. The gay words
came fainting from my heart, and fell dead on my lips. The wine fevered,
but did not exhilarate me. Still, the image of the dark beauty of the
morning was the one reigning image of my thoughts--still, the influence
of the morning, at once sinister and seductive, kept its hold on my
heart.

I gave up the struggle. I longed to be alone again. My friend soon found
that my forced spirits were flagging; he tried to rouse me, tried to
talk for two, ordered more wine, but everything failed. Yawning at last,
in undisguised despair, he suggested a visit to the theatre.

I excused myself--professed illness--hinted that the wine had been
too much for me. He laughed, with something of contempt as well as
good-nature in the laugh; and went away to the play by himself evidently
feeling that I was still as bad a companion as he had found me at
college, years ago.

As soon as we parted I felt a sense of relief. I hesitated, walked
backwards and forwards a few paces in the street; and then, silencing
all doubts, leaving my inclinations to guide me as they would--I turned
my steps for the third time in that one day to Hollyoake Square.

The fair summer evening was tending towards twilight; the sun stood
fiery and low in a cloudless horizon; the last loveliness of the last
quietest daylight hour was fading on the violet sky, as I entered the
square.

I approached the house. She was at the window--it was thrown wide open.
A bird-cage hung rather high up, against the shutter-panel. She was
standing opposite to it, making a plaything for the poor captive canary
of a piece of sugar, which she rapidly offered and drew back again,
now at one bar of the cage, and now at another. The bird hopped and
fluttered up and down in his prison after the sugar, chirping as if he
enjoyed playing _his_ part of the game with his mistress. How lovely she
looked! Her dark hair, drawn back over each cheek so as just to leave
the lower part of the ear visible, was gathered up into a thick simple
knot behind, without ornament of any sort. She wore a plain white dress
fastening round the neck, and descending over the bosom in numberless
little wavy plaits. The cage hung just high enough to oblige her to look
up to it. She was laughing with all the glee of a child; darting the
piece of sugar about incessantly from place to place. Every moment, her
head and neck assumed some new and lovely turn--every moment her figure
naturally fell into the position which showed its pliant symmetry best.
The last-left glow of the evening atmosphere was shining on her--the
farewell pause of daylight over the kindred daylight of beauty and
youth.

I kept myself concealed behind a pillar of the garden-gate; I looked,
hardly daring either to move or breathe; for I feared that if she saw or
heard me, she would leave the window. After a lapse of some minutes, the
canary touched the sugar with his beak.

"There, Minnie!" she cried laughingly, "you have caught the runaway
sugar, and now you shall keep it!"

For a moment more, she stood quietly looking at the cage; then raising
herself on tip-toe, pouted her lips caressingly to the bird, and
disappeared in the interior of the room.

The sun went down; the twilight shadows fell over the dreary square;
the gas lamps were lighted far and near; people who had been out for a
breath of fresh air in the fields, came straggling past me by ones and
twos, on their way home--and still I lingered near the house, hoping she
might come to the window again; but she did not re-appear. At last,
a servant brought candles into the room, and drew down the Venetian
blinds. Knowing it would be useless to stay longer, I left the square.

I walked homeward joyfully. That second sight of her completed what the
first meeting had begun. The impressions left by it made me insensible
for the time to all boding reflections, careless of exercising the
smallest self-restraint. I gave myself up to the charm that was at
work on me. Prudence, duty, memories and prejudices of home, were all
absorbed and forgotten in love--love that I encouraged, that I dwelt
over in the first reckless luxury of a new sensation.

I entered our house, thinking of nothing but how to see her, how to
speak to her, on the morrow; murmuring her name to myself; even while my
hand was on the lock of my study door. The instant I was in the room, I
involuntarily shuddered and stopped speechless. Clara was there! I was
not merely startled; a cold, faint sensation came over me. My first look
at my sister made me feel as if I had been detected in a crime.

She was standing at my writing-table, and had just finished stringing
together the loose pages of my manuscript, which had hitherto laid
disconnectedly in a drawer. There was a grand ball somewhere, to which
she was going that night. The dress she wore was of pale blue crape (my
father's favourite colour, on her). One white flower was placed in her
light brown hair. She stood within the soft steady light of my lamp,
looking up towards the door from the leaves she had just tied together.
Her slight figure appeared slighter than usual, in the delicate material
that now clothed it. Her complexion was at its palest: her face looked
almost statue-like in its purity and repose. What a contrast to the
other living picture which I had seen at sunset!

The remembrance of the engagement that I had broken came back on me
avengingly, as she smiled, and held my manuscript up before me to look
at. With that remembrance there returned, too--darker than ever--the
ominous doubts which had depressed me but a few hours since. I tried to
steady my voice, and felt how I failed in the effort, as I spoke to her:

"Will you forgive me, Clara, for having deprived you of your ride
to-day? I am afraid I have but a bad excuse--"

"Then don't make it, Basil; or wait till papa can arrange it for you, in
a proper parliamentary way, when he comes back from the House of Commons
to-night. See how I have been meddling with your papers; but they were
in such confusion I was really afraid some of these leaves might have
been lost."

"Neither the leaves nor the writer deserve half the pains you have taken
with them; but I am really sorry for breaking our engagement. I met an
old college friend--there was business too, in the morning--we dined
together--he would take no denial."

"Basil, how pale you look! Are you ill?"

"No; the heat has been a little too much for me--nothing more."

"Has anything happened? I only ask, because if I can be of any use--if
you want me to stay at home--"

"Certainly not, love. I wish you all success and pleasure at the ball."

For a moment she did not speak; but fixed her clear, kind eyes on me
more gravely and anxiously than usual. Was she searching my heart, and
discovering the new love rising, an usurper already, in the place where
the love of her had reigned before?

Love! love for a shopkeeper's daughter! That thought came again, as she
looked at me! and, strangely mingled with it, a maxim I had often heard
my father repeat to Ralph--"Never forget that your station is not yours,
to do as you like with. It belongs to us, and belongs to your children.
You must keep it for them, as I have kept it for you."

"I thought," resumed Clara, in rather lower tones than before, "that I
would just look into your room before I went to the ball, and see that
everything was properly arranged for you, in case you had any idea of
writing tonight; I had just time to do this while my aunt, who is going
with me, was upstairs altering her toilette. But perhaps you don't feel
inclined to write?"

"I will try at least."

"Can I do anything more? Would you like my nosegay left in the
room?--the flowers smell so fresh! I can easily get another. Look at the
roses, my favourite white roses, that always remind me of my own garden
at the dear old Park!"

"Thank you, Clara; but I think the nosegay is fitter for your hand than
my table."

"Good night, Basil."

"Good night."

She walked to the door, then turned round, and smiled as if she were
about to speak again; but checked herself, and merely looked at me for
an instant. In that instant, however, the smile left her face, and the
grave, anxious expression came again. She went out softly. A few minutes
afterwards the roll of the carriage which took her and her companion
to the ball, died away heavily on my ear. I was left alone in the
house--alone for the night.

VIII.

My manuscript lay before me, set in order by Clara's careful hand.
I slowly turned over the leaves one by one; but my eye only fell
mechanically on the writing. Yet one day since, and how much ambition,
how much hope, how many of my heart's dearest sensations and my mind's
highest thoughts dwelt in those poor paper leaves, in those
little crabbed marks of pen and ink! Now I could look on them
indifferently--almost as a stranger would have looked. The days of calm
study, of steady toil of thought, seemed departed for ever. Stirring
ideas; store of knowledge patiently heaped up; visions of better sights
than this world can show, falling freshly and sunnily over the pages
of my first book; all these were past and gone--withered up by the
hot breath of the senses--doomed by a paltry fate, whose germ was the
accident of an idle day!

I hastily put the manuscript aside. My unexpected interview with Clara
had calmed the turbulent sensations of the evening: but the fatal
influence of the dark beauty remained with me still. How could I write?

I sat down at the open window. It was at the back of the house, and
looked out on a strip of garden--London garden--a close-shut dungeon for
nature, where stunted trees and drooping flowers seemed visibly pining
for the free air and sunlight of the country, in their sooty atmosphere,
amid their prison of high brick walls. But the place gave room for the
air to blow in it, and distanced the tumult of the busy streets. The
moon was up, shined round tenderly by a little border-work of pale
yellow light. Elsewhere, the awful void of night was starless; the dark
lustre of space shone without a cloud.

A presentiment arose within me, that in this still and solitary hour
would occur my decisive, my final struggle with myself. I felt that my
heart's life or death was set on the hazard of the night.

This new love that was in me; this giant sensation of a day's growth,
was first love. Hitherto, I had been heart-whole. I had known nothing
of the passion, which is the absorbing passion of humanity. No woman
had ever before stood between me and my ambitions, my occupations, my
amusements. No woman had ever before inspired me with the sensations
which I now felt.

In trying to realise my position, there was this one question to
consider; was I still strong enough to resist the temptation which
accident had thrown in my way? I had this one incentive to resistance:
the conviction that, if I succumbed, as far as my family prospects were
concerned, I should be a ruined man.

I knew my father's character well: I knew how far his affections and
his sympathies might prevail over his prejudices--even over his
principles--in some peculiar cases; and this very knowledge convinced
me that the consequences of a degrading marriage contracted by his son
(degrading in regard to rank), would be terrible: fatal to one, perhaps
to both. Every other irregularity--every other offence even--he
might sooner or later forgive. _This_ irregularity, _this_ offence,
never--never, though his heart broke in the struggle. I was as sure of
it, as I was of my own existence at that moment.

I loved her! All that I felt, all that I knew, was summed up in those
few words! Deteriorating as my passion was in its effect on the
exercise of my mental powers, and on my candour and sense of duty in
my intercourse with home, it was a pure feeling towards _her._ This is
truth. If I lay on my death-bed, at the present moment, and knew that,
at the Judgment Day, I should be tried by the truth or falsehood of the
lines just written, I could say with my last breath: So be it; let them
remain.

But what mattered my love for her? However worthy of it she might be, I
had misplaced it, because chance--the same chance which might have
given her station and family--had placed her in a rank of life far--too
far--below mine. As the daughter of a "gentleman," my father's welcome,
my father's affection, would have been bestowed on her, when I took her
home as my wife. As the daughter of a tradesman, my father's anger, my
father's misery, my own ruin perhaps besides, would be the fatal dower
that a marriage would confer on her. What made all this difference? A
social prejudice. Yes: but a prejudice which had been a principle--nay,
more, a religion--in our house, since my birth; and for centuries before
it.

(How strange that foresight of love which precipitates the future into
the present! Here was I thinking of her as my wife, before, perhaps, she
had a suspicion of the passion with which she had inspired me--vexing my
heart, wearying my thoughts, before I had even spoken to her, as if the
perilous discovery of our marriage were already at hand! I have thought
since how unnatural I should have considered this, if I had read it in a
book.)

How could I best crush the desire to see her, to speak to her, on the
morrow? Should I leave London, leave England, fly from the temptation,
no matter where, or at what sacrifice? Or should I take refuge in my
books--the calm, changeless old friends of my earliest fireside hours?
Had I resolution enough to wear my heart out by hard, serious, slaving
study? If I left London on the morrow, could I feel secure, in my own
conscience, that I should not return the day after!

While, throughout the hours of the night, I was thus vainly striving to
hold calm counsel with myself; the base thought never occurred to me,
which might have occurred to some other men, in my position: Why
marry the girl, because I love her? Why, with my money, my station, my
opportunities, obstinately connect love and marriage as one idea; and
make a dilemma and a danger where neither need exist? Had such a thought
as this, in the faintest, the most shadowy form, crossed my mind, I
should have shrunk from it, have shrunk from my self; with horror.
Whatever fresh degradations may be yet in store for me, this one
consoling and sanctifying remembrance must still be mine. My love for
Margaret Sherwin was worthy to be offered to the purest and perfectest
woman that ever God created.

The night advanced--the noises faintly reaching me from the streets,
sank and ceased--my lamp flickered and went out--I heard the carriage
return with Clara from the ball--the first cold clouds of day rose and
hid the waning orb of the moon--the air was cooled with its morning
freshness: the earth was purified with its morning dew--and still I sat
by my open window, striving with my burning love-thoughts of Margaret;
striving to think collectedly and usefully--abandoned to a struggle ever
renewing, yet never changing; and always hour after hour, a struggle in
vain.

At last I began to think less and less distinctly--a few moments more,
and I sank into a restless, feverish slumber. Then began another, and
a more perilous ordeal for me--the ordeal of dreams. Thoughts and
sensations which had been more and more weakly restrained with each
succeeding hour of wakefulness, now rioted within me in perfect
liberation from all control.

This is what I dreamed:

I stood on a wide plain. On one side, it was bounded by thick woods,
whose dark secret depths looked unfathomable to the eye: on the other,
by hills, ever rising higher and higher yet, until they were lost in
bright, beautifully white clouds, gleaming in refulgent sunlight. On
the side above the woods, the sky was dark and vaporous. It seemed as if
some thick exhalation had arisen from beneath the trees, and overspread
the clear firmament throughout this portion of the scene.

As I still stood on the plain and looked around, I saw a woman coming
towards me from the wood. Her stature was tall; her black hair flowed
about her unconfined; her robe was of the dun hue of the vapour and mist
which hung above the trees, and fell to her feet in dark thick folds.
She came on towards me swiftly and softly, passing over the ground like
cloud-shadows over the ripe corn-field or the calm water.

I looked to the other side, towards the hills; and there was another
woman descending from their bright summits; and her robe was white,
and pure, and glistening. Her face was illumined with a light, like
the light of the harvest-moon; and her footsteps, as she descended the
hills, left a long track of brightness, that sparkled far behind her,
like the track of the stars when the winter night is clear and cold. She
came to the place where the hills and the plain were joined together.
Then she stopped, and I knew that she was watching me from afar off.

Meanwhile, the woman from the dark wood still approached; never pausing
on her path, like the woman from the fair hills. And now I could see her
face plainly. Her eyes were lustrous and fascinating, as the eyes of
a serpent--large, dark and soft, as the eyes of the wild doe. Her lips
were parted with a languid smile; and she drew back the long hair, which
lay over her cheeks, her neck, her bosom, while I was gazing on her.

Then, I felt as if a light were shining on me from the other side. I
turned to look, and there was the woman from the hills beckoning me away
to ascend with her towards the bright clouds above. Her arm, as she
held it forth, shone fair, even against the fair hills; and from
her outstretched hand came long thin rays of trembling light, which
penetrated to where I stood, cooling and calming wherever they touched
me.

But the woman from the woods still came nearer and nearer, until I
could feel her hot breath on my face. Her eyes looked into mine, and
fascinated them, as she held out her arms to embrace me. I touched her
hand, and in an instant the touch ran through me like fire, from head to
foot. Then, still looking intently on me with her wild bright eyes, she
clasped her supple arms round my neck, and drew me a few paces away with
her towards the wood.

I felt the rays of light that had touched me from the beckoning hand,
depart; and yet once more I looked towards the woman from the hills.
She was ascending again towards the bright clouds, and ever and anon she
stopped and turned round, wringing her hands and letting her head droop,
as if in bitter grief. The last time I saw her look towards me, she
was near the clouds. She covered her face with her robe, and knelt down
where she stood. After this I discerned no more of her. For now the
woman from the woods clasped me more closely than before, pressing her
warm lips on mine; and it was as if her long hair fell round us
both, spreading over my eyes like a veil, to hide from them the fair
hill-tops, and the woman who was walking onward to the bright clouds
above.

I was drawn along in the arms of the dark woman, with my blood burning
and my breath failing me, until we entered the secret recesses that lay
amid the unfathomable depths of trees. There, she encircled me in the
folds of her dusky robe, and laid her cheek close to mine, and murmured
a mysterious music in my ear, amid the midnight silence and darkness of
all around us. And I had no thought of returning to the plain again; for
I had forgotten the woman from the fair hills, and had given myself up,
heart, and soul, and body, to the woman from the dark woods.

Here the dream ended, and I awoke.

It was broad daylight. The sun shone brilliantly, the sky was cloudless.
I looked at my watch; it had stopped. Shortly afterwards I heard the
hall clock strike six.

My dream was vividly impressed on my memory, especially the latter
part of it. Was it a warning of coming events, foreshadowed in the wild
visions of sleep? But to what purpose could this dream, or indeed any
dream, tend? Why had it remained incomplete, failing to show me the
visionary consequences of my visionary actions? What superstition to
ask! What a waste of attention to bestow it on such a trifle as a dream!

Still, this trifle had produced one abiding result. I knew it not
then; but I know it now. As I looked out on the reviving, re-assuring
sunlight, it was easy enough for me to dismiss as ridiculous from my
mind, or rather from my conscience, the tendency to see in the two
shadowy forms of my dream, the types of two real living beings, whose
names almost trembled into utterance on my lips; but I could not also
dismiss from my heart the love-images which that dream had set up there
for the worship of the senses. Those results of the night still remained
within me, growing and strengthening with every minute.

If I had been told beforehand how the mere sight of the morning would
reanimate and embolden me, I should have scouted the prediction as
too outrageous for consideration; yet so it was. The moody and boding
reflections, the fear and struggle of the hours of darkness were gone
with the daylight. The love-thoughts of Margaret alone remained, and now
remained unquestioned and unopposed. Were my convictions of a few hours
since, like the night-mists that fade before returning sunshine? I knew
not. But I was young; and each new morning is as much the new life of
youth, as the new life of Nature.

So I left my study and went out. Consequences might come how they would,
and when they would; I thought of them no more. It seemed as if I had
cast off every melancholy thought, in leaving my room; as if my heart
had sprung up more elastic than ever, after the burden that had been
laid on it during the night. Enjoyment for the present, hope for the
future, and chance and fortune to trust in to the very last! This was
my creed, as I walked into the street, determined to see Margaret again,
and to tell her of my love before the day was out. In the exhilaration
of the fresh air and the gay sunshine, I turned my steps towards
Hollyoake Square, almost as light-hearted as a boy let loose from
school, joyously repeating Shakespeare's lines as I went:

            "Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that,
             And manage it against despairing thoughts."

IX.

London was rousing everywhere into morning activity, as I passed
through the streets. The shutters were being removed from the windows
of public-houses: the drink-vampyres that suck the life of London, were
opening their eyes betimes to look abroad for the new day's prey!
Small tobacco and provision-shops in poor neighbourhoods; dirty little
eating-houses, exhaling greasy-smelling steam, and displaying a leaf of
yesterday's paper, stained and fly-blown, hanging in the windows--were
already plying, or making ready to ply, their daily trade. Here,
a labouring man, late for his work, hurried by; there, a hale
old gentleman started for his early walk before breakfast. Now a
market-cart, already unloaded, passed me on its way back to the country;
now, a cab, laden with luggage and carrying pale, sleepy-looking people,
rattled by, bound for the morning train or the morning steamboat. I
saw the mighty vitality of the great city renewing itself in every
direction; and I felt an unwonted interest in the sight. It was as if
all things, on all sides, were reflecting before me the aspect of my own
heart.

But the quiet and torpor of the night still hung over Hollyoake Square.
That dreary neighbourhood seemed to vindicate its dreariness by being
the last to awaken even to a semblance of activity and life. Nothing
was stirring as yet at North Villa. I walked on, beyond the last houses,
into the sooty London fields; and tried to think of the course I ought
to pursue in order to see Margaret, and speak to her, before I turned
homeward again. After the lapse of more than half an hour, I returned
to the square, without plan or project; but resolved, nevertheless, to
carry my point.

The garden-gate of North Villa was now open. One of the female servants
of the house was standing at it, to breathe the fresh air, and look
about her, before the duties of the day began. I advanced; determined,
if money and persuasion could do it, to secure her services.

She was young (that was one chance in my favour!)--plump, florid, and
evidently not by any means careless about her personal appearance (that
gave me another!) As she saw me approaching her, she smiled; and
passed her apron hurriedly over her face--carefully polishing it for my
inspection, much as a broker polishes a piece of furniture when you stop
to look at it.

"Are you in Mr. Sherwin's service?"--I asked, as I got to the garden
gate.

"As plain cook, Sir," answered the girl, administering to her face a
final and furious rub of the apron.

"Should you be very much surprised if I asked you to do me a great
favour?"

"Well--really, Sir--you're quite a stranger to me--I'm _sure_ I don't
know!" She stopped, and transferred the apron-rubbing to her arms.

"I hope we shall not be strangers long. Suppose I begin our
acquaintance, by telling you that you would look prettier in brighter
cap-ribbons, and asking you to buy some, just to see whether I am not
right?"

"It's very kind of you to say so, Sir; and thank you. But cap and
ribbons are the last things I can buy while I'm in _this_ place.
Master's master and missus too, here; and drives us half wild with the
fuss he makes about our caps and ribbons. He's such an austerious man,
that he will have our caps as he likes 'em. It's bad enough when a
missus meddles with a poor servant's ribbons; but to have master come
down into the kitchen, and--Well, it's no use telling _you_ of it,
Sir--and--and thank you, Sir, for what you've given me, all the same!"

"I hope this is not the last time I shall make you a present. And now I
must come to the favour I want to ask of you: can you keep a secret?"

"That I can, Sir! I've kep' a many secrets since I've been out at
service."

"Well: I want you to find me an opportunity of speaking to your young
lady--"

"To Miss Margaret, Sir?"

"Yes. I want an opportunity of seeing Miss Margaret, and speaking to her
in private--and not a word must be said to her about it, beforehand."

"Oh Lord, Sir! I couldn't dare to do it!"

"Come! come! Can't you guess why I want to see your young lady, and what
I want to say to her?"

The girl smiled, and shook her head archly. "Perhaps you're in love with
Miss Margaret, Sir!--But I couldn't do it! I couldn't dare to do it!"

"Very well; but you can tell me at least, whether Miss Margaret ever
goes out to take a walk?"

"Oh, yes, Sir; mostly every day."

"Do you ever go out with her?--just to take care of her when no one else
can be spared?"

"Don't ask me--please, Sir, don't!" She crumpled her apron between her
fingers, with a very piteous and perplexed air. "I don't know you;
and Miss Margaret don't know you, I'm sure--I couldn't, Sir, I really
couldn't!"

"Take a good look at me! Do you think I am likely to do you or your
young lady any harm? Am I too dangerous a man to be trusted? Would you
believe me on my promise?"

"Yes, Sir, I'm sure I would!--being so kind and so civil to _me,_ too!"
(a fresh arrangement of the cap followed this speech.)

"Then suppose I promised, in the first place, not to tell Miss Margaret
that I had spoken to you about her at all. And suppose I promised, in
the second place, that, if you told me when you and Miss Margaret go
out together, I would only speak to her while she was in your sight, and
would leave her the moment you wished me to go away. Don't you think you
could venture to help me, if I promised all that?"

"Well, Sir, that would make a difference, to be sure. But then, it's
master I'm so afraid of--couldn't you speak to master first, Sir?"

"Suppose you were in Miss Margaret's place, would you like to be made
love to, by your father's authority, without your own wishes being
consulted first? would you like an offer of marriage, delivered like a
message, by means of your father? Come, tell me honestly, would you?"

She laughed, and shook her head very expressively. I knew the strength
of my last argument, and repeated it: "Suppose you were in Miss
Margaret's place?"

"Hush! don't speak so loud," resumed the girl in a confidential whisper.
"I'm sure you're a gentleman. I should like to help you--if I could only
dare to do it, I should indeed!"

"That's a good girl," I said. "Now tell me, when does Miss Margaret go
out to-day; and who goes with her?"

"Dear! dear!--it's very wrong to say it; but I must. She'll go out with
me to market, this morning, at eleven o'clock. She's done it for the
last week. Master don't like it; but Missus begged and prayed she might;
for Missus says she won't be fit to be married, if she knows nothing
about housekeeping, and prices, and what's good meat, and what isn't,
and all that, you know."

"Thank you a thousand times! you have given me all the help I want. I'll
be here before eleven, waiting for you to come out."

"Oh, please don't, Sir--I wish I hadn't told you--I oughtn't, indeed I
oughtn't!"

"No fear--you shall not lose by what you have told me--I promise all I
said I would promise--good bye. And mind, not a word to Miss Margaret
till I see her!"

As I hurried away, I heard the girl run a few paces after me--then
stop--then return, and close the garden gate, softly. She had evidently
put herself once more in Miss Margaret's place; and had given up all
idea of further resistance as she did so.

How should I occupy the hours until eleven o'clock? Deceit
whispered:--Go home; avoid even the chance of exciting suspicion, by
breakfasting with your family as usual. And as deceit counselled, so I
acted.

I never remember Clara more kind, more ready with all those trifling
little cares and attentions which have so exquisite a grace, when
offered by a woman to a man, and especially by a sister to a brother, as
when she and I and my father assembled together at the breakfast-table.
I now recollect with shame how little I thought about her, or spoke
to her on that morning; with how little hesitation or self-reproach I
excused myself from accepting an engagement which she wished to make
with me for that day. My father was absorbed in some matter of business;
to _him_ she could not speak. It was to me that she addressed all her
wonted questions and remarks of the morning. I hardly listened to them;
I answered them carelessly and briefly. The moment breakfast was over,
without a word of explanation I hastily left the house again.

As I descended the steps, I glanced by accident at the dining-room
window. Clara was looking after me from it. There was the same anxious
expression on her face which it had worn when she left me the evening
before. She smiled as our eyes met--a sad, faint smile that made her
look unlike herself. But it produced no impression on me then: I had no
attention for anything but my approaching interview with Margaret.
My life throbbed and burned within me, in that direction: it was all
coldness, torpor, insensibility, in every other.

I reached Hollyoake Square nearly an hour before the appointed time. In
the suspense and impatience of that long interval, it was impossible to
be a moment in repose. I walked incessantly up and down the square, and
round and round the neighbourhood, hearing each quarter chimed from a
church clock near, and mechanically quickening my pace the nearer the
time came for the hour to strike. At last, I heard the first peal of the
eventful eleven. Before the clock was silent, I had taken up my position
within view of the gate of North Villa.

Five minutes passed--ten--and no one appeared. In my impatience, I could
almost have rung the bell and entered the house, no matter who might
be there, or what might be the result. The first quarter struck; and
at that very moment I heard the door open, and saw Margaret, and the
servant with whom I had spoken, descending the steps.

They passed out slowly through the garden gate, and walked down the
square, away from where I was standing. The servant noticed me by one
significant look, as they went on. Her young mistress did not appear
to see me. At first, my agitation was so violent that I was perfectly
incapable of following them a single step. In a few moments I recovered
myself; and hastened to overtake them, before they arrived at a more
frequented part of the neighbourhood.

As I approached her side, Margaret turned suddenly and looked at me,
with an expression of anger and astonishment in her eyes. The next
instant, her lovely face became tinged all over with a deep, burning
blush; her head drooped a little; she hesitated for a moment; and then
abruptly quickened her pace. Did she remember me? The mere chance that
she did, gave me confidence: I--

--No! I cannot write down the words that I said to her. Recollecting the
end to which our fatal interview led, I recoil at the very thought of
exposing to others, or of preserving in any permanent form, the words
in which I first confessed my love. It may be pride--miserable, useless
pride--which animates me with this feeling: but I cannot overcome it.
Remembering what I do, I am ashamed to write, ashamed to recall, what
I said at my first interview with Margaret Sherwin. I can give no good
reason for the sensations which now influence me; I cannot analyse them;
and I would not if I could.

Let it be enough to say that I risked everything, and spoke to her. My
words, confused as they were, came hotly, eagerly, and eloquently from
my heart. In the space of a few minutes, I confessed to her all, and
more than all, that I have here painfully related in many pages. I made
use of my name and my rank in life--even now, my cheeks burn while I
think of it--to dazzle her girl's pride, to make her listen to me
for the sake of my station, if she would not for the sake of my suit,
however honourably urged. Never before had I committed the meanness of
trusting to my social advantages, what I feared to trust to myself. It
is true that love soars higher than the other passions; but it can stoop
lower as well.

Her answers to all that I urged were confused, commonplace, and chilling
enough. I had surprised her--frightened her--it was impossible she could
listen to such addresses from a total stranger--it was very wrong of me
to speak, and of her to stop and hear me--I should remember what became
me as a gentleman, and should not make such advances to her again--I
knew nothing of her--it was impossible I could really care about her
in so short a time--she must beg that I would allow her to proceed
unhindered.

Thus she spoke; sometimes standing still, sometimes moving hurriedly
a few steps forward. She might have expressed herself severely, even
angrily; but nothing she could have said would have counteracted
the fascination that her presence exercised over me. I saw her face,
lovelier than ever in its confusion, in its rapid changes of expression;
I saw her eloquent eyes once or twice raised to mine, then instantly
withdrawn again--and so long as I could look at her, I cared not what I
listened to. She was only speaking what she had been educated to speak;
it was not in her words that I sought the clue to her thoughts and
sensations; but in the tone of her voice, in the language of her eyes,
in the whole expression of her face. All these contained indications
which reassured me. I tried everything that respect, that the persuasion
of love could urge, to win her consent to our meeting again; but she
only answered with repetitions of what she had said before, walking
onward rapidly while she spoke. The servant, who had hitherto lingered
a few paces behind, now advanced to her young mistress's side, with a
significant look, as if to remind me of my promise. Saying a few parting
words, I let them proceed: at this first interview, to have delayed them
longer would have been risking too much.

As they walked away, the servant turned round, nodding her head and
smiling, as if to assure me that I had lost nothing by the forbearance
which I had exercised. Margaret neither lingered nor looked back. This
last proof of modesty and reserve, so far from discouraging, attracted
me to her more powerfully than ever. After a first interview, it was the
most becoming virtue she could have shown. All my love for her before,
seemed as nothing compared with my love for her now that she had left
me, and left me without a parting look.

What course should I next pursue? Could I expect that Margaret, after
what she had said, would go out again at the same hour on the morrow?
No: she would not so soon abandon the modesty and restraint that she had
shown at our first interview. How communicate with her? how manage most
skilfully to make good the first favourable impression which vanity
whispered I had already produced? I determined to write to her.

How different was the writing of that letter, to the writing of those
once-treasured pages of my romance, which I had now abandoned for ever!
How slowly I worked; how cautiously and diffidently I built up sentence
after sentence, and doubtingly set a stop here, and laboriously rounded
off a paragraph there, when I toiled in the service of ambition! Now,
when I had given myself up to the service of love, how rapidly the pen
ran over the paper; how much more freely and smoothly the desires of the
heart flowed into words, than the thoughts of the mind! Composition was
an instinct now, an art no longer. I could write eloquently, and yet
write without pausing for an expression or blotting a word--It was the
slow progress up the hill, in the service of ambition; it was the swift
(too swift) career down it, in the service of love!

There is no need to describe the contents of my letter to Margaret; they
comprised a mere recapitulation of what I had already said to her. I
insisted often and strongly on the honourable purpose of my suit; and
ended by entreating her to write an answer, and consent to allow me
another interview.

The letter was delivered by the servant. Another present, a little more
timely persuasion, and above all, the regard I had shown to my promise,
won the girl with all her heart to my interests. She was ready to help
me in every way, as long as her interference could be kept a secret from
her master.

I waited a day for the reply to my letter; but none came. The servant
could give me no explanation of this silence. Her young mistress had not
said one word to her about me, since the morning when we had met.
Still not discouraged, I wrote again. The letter contained some lover's
threats this time, as well as lover's entreaties; and it produced its
effect--an answer came.

It was very short--rather hurriedly and tremblingly written--and simply
said that the difference between my rank and hers made it her duty to
request of me, that neither by word nor by letter should I ever address
her again.

"Difference in rank,"--that was the only objection then! "Her duty"--it
was not from inclination that she refused me! So young a creature; and
yet so noble in self-sacrifice, so firm in her integrity! I resolved to
disobey her injunction, and see her again. My rank! What was my rank?
Something to cast at Margaret's feet, for Margaret to trample on!

Once more I sought the aid of my faithful ally, the servant. After
delays which half maddened me with impatience, insignificant though
they were, she contrived to fulfil my wishes. One afternoon, while
Mr. Sherwin was away at business, and while his wife had gone out, I
succeeded in gaining admission to the garden at the back of the house,
where Margaret was then occupied in watering some flowers.

She started as she saw me, and attempted to return to the house. I
took her hand to detain her. She withdrew it, but neither abruptly
nor angrily. I seized the opportunity, while she hesitated whether to
persist or not in retiring; and repeated what I had already said to her
at our first interview (what is the language of love but a language of
repetitions?). She answered, as she had answered me in her letter: the
difference in our rank made it her duty to discourage me.

"But if this difference did not exist," I said: "if we were both living
in the same rank, Margaret--"

She looked up quickly; then moved away a step or two, as I addressed her
by her Christian name.

"Are you offended with me for calling you Margaret so soon? I do not
think of you as Miss Sherwin, but as Margaret--are you offended with me
for speaking as I think?"

No: she ought not to be offended with me, or with anybody, for doing
that.

"Suppose this difference in rank, which you so cruelly insist on, did
not exist, would you tell me not to hope, not to speak then, as coldly
as you tell me now?"

I must not ask her that--it was no use--the difference in rank _did_
exist.

"Perhaps I have met you too late?--perhaps you are already--"

"No! oh, no!"--she stopped abruptly, as the words passed her lips. The
same lovely blush which I had before seen spreading over her face, rose
on it now. She evidently felt that she had unguardedly said too much:
that she had given me an answer in a case where, according to every
established love-law of the female code, I had no right to expect one.
Her next words accused me--but in very low and broken tones--of having
committed an intrusion which she should hardly have expected from a
gentleman in my position.

"I will regain your better opinion," I said, eagerly catching at the
most favourable interpretation of her last words, "by seeing you for the
next time, and for all times after, with your father's full permission.
I will write to-day, and ask for a private interview with him. I will
tell him all I have told you: I will tell him that you take a rank in
beauty and goodness, which is the highest rank in the land--a far higher
rank than mine--the only rank I desire." (A smile, which she vainly
strove to repress, stole charmingly to her lips.) "Yes, I will do this;
I will never leave him till his answer is favourable--and then what
would be yours? One word, Margaret; one word before I go--"

I attempted to take her hand a second time; but she broke from me, and
hurried into the house.

What more could I desire? What more could the modesty and timidity of a
young girl concede to me?

The moment I reached home, I wrote to Mr. Sherwin. The letter was
superscribed "Private;" and simply requested an interview with him on a
subject of importance, at any hour he might mention. Unwilling to trust
what I had written to the post, I sent my note by a messenger--not one
of our own servants, caution forbade that--and instructed the man to
wait for an answer: if Mr. Sherwin was out, to wait till he came home.

After a long delay--long to _me;_ for my impatience would fain have
turned hours into minutes--I received a reply. It was written on
gilt-edged letter-paper, in a handwriting vulgarised by innumerable
flourishes. Mr. Sherwin presented his respectful compliments, and
would be happy to have the honour of seeing me at North Villa, if quite
convenient, at five o'clock to-morrow afternoon.

I folded up the letter carefully: it was almost as precious as a letter
from Margaret herself. That night I passed sleeplessly, revolving in
my mind every possible course that I could take at the interview of the
morrow. It would be a difficult and a delicate business. I knew nothing
of Mr. Sherwin's character; yet I must trust him with a secret which I
dared not trust to my own father. Any proposals for paying addresses
to his daughter, coming from one in my position, might appear open
to suspicion. What could I say about marriage? A public, acknowledged
marriage was impossible: a private marriage might be a bold, if
not fatal proposal. I could come to no other conclusion, reflect as
anxiously as I might, than that it was best for me to speak candidly at
all hazards. I could be candid enough when it suited my purpose!

It was not till the next day, when the time approached for my interview
with Mr. Sherwin, that I thoroughly roused myself to face the
plain necessities of my position. Determined to try what impression
appearances could make on him, I took unusual pains with my dress; and
more, I applied to a friend whom I could rely on as likely to ask no
questions--I write this in shame and sorrow: I tell truth here, where it
is hard penance to tell it--I applied, I say, to a friend for the loan
of one of his carriages to take me to North Villa; fearing the risk
of borrowing my father's carriage, or my sister's--knowing the common
weakness of rank-worship and wealth-worship in men of Mr. Sherwin's
order, and meanly determining to profit by it to the utmost. My friend's
carriage was willingly lent me. By my directions, it took me up at the
appointed hour, at a shop where I was a regular customer.

X.

On my arrival at North Villa, I was shown into what I presumed was the
drawing-room.

Everything was oppressively new. The brilliantly-varnished door cracked
with a report like a pistol when it was opened; the paper on the walls,
with its gaudy pattern of birds, trellis-work, and flowers, in gold,
red, and green on a white ground, looked hardly dry yet; the showy
window-curtains of white and sky-blue, and the still showier carpet of
red and yellow, seemed as if they had come out of the shop yesterday;
the round rosewood table was in a painfully high state of polish; the
morocco-bound picture books that lay on it, looked as if they had never
been moved or opened since they had been bought; not one leaf even
of the music on the piano was dogs-eared or worn. Never was a richly
furnished room more thoroughly comfortless than this--the eye ached at
looking round it. There was no repose anywhere. The print of the Queen,
hanging lonely on the wall, in its heavy gilt frame, with a large crown
at the top, glared on you: the paper, the curtains, the carpet glared
on you: the books, the wax-flowers in glass-cases, the chairs in flaring
chintz-covers, the china plates on the door, the blue and pink glass
vases and cups ranged on the chimney-piece, the over-ornamented
chiffoniers with Tonbridge toys and long-necked smelling bottles on
their upper shelves--all glared on you. There was no look of shadow,
shelter, secrecy, or retirement in any one nook or corner of those four
gaudy walls. All surrounding objects seemed startlingly near to the eye;
much nearer than they really were. The room would have given a nervous
man the headache, before he had been in it a quarter of an hour.

I was not kept waiting long. Another violent crack from the new door,
announced the entrance of Mr. Sherwin himself.

He was a tall, thin man: rather round-shouldered; weak at the knees, and
trying to conceal the weakness in the breadth of his trowsers. He wore
a white cravat, and an absurdly high shirt collar. His complexion
was sallow; his eyes were small, black, bright, and incessantly in
motion--indeed, all his features were singularly mobile: they were
affected by nervous contractions and spasms which were constantly
drawing up and down in all directions the brow, the mouth, and the
muscles of the cheek. His hair had been black, but was now turning to a
sort of iron-grey; it was very dry, wiry, and plentiful, and part of
it projected almost horizontally over his forehead. He had a habit of
stretching it in this direction, by irritably combing it out, from time
to time, with his fingers. His lips were thin and colourless, the lines
about them being numerous and strongly marked. Had I seen him under
ordinary circumstances, I should have set him down as a little-minded
man; a small tyrant in his own way over those dependent on him;
a pompous parasite to those above him--a great stickler for the
conventional respectabilities of life, and a great believer in his own
infallibility. But he was Margaret's father; and I was determined to be
pleased with him.

He made me a low and rather a cringing bow--then looked to the window,
and seeing the carriage waiting for me at his door, made another bow,
and insisted on relieving me of my hat with his own hand. This done, he
coughed, and begged to know what he could do for me.

I felt some difficulty in opening my business to him. It was necessary
to speak, however, at once--I began with an apology.

"I am afraid, Mr. Sherwin, that this intrusion on the part of a perfect
stranger--"

"Not entirely a stranger, Sir, if I may be allowed to say so."

"Indeed!"

"I had the great pleasure, Sir, and profit, and--and, indeed,
advantage--of being shown over your town residence last year, when the
family were absent from London. A very beautiful house--I happen to be
acquainted with the steward of your respected father: he was kind enough
to allow me to walk through the rooms. A treat; quite an intellectual
treat--the furniture and hangings, and so on, arranged in such a chaste
style--and the pictures, some of the finest pieces I ever saw--I was
delighted--quite delighted, indeed."

He spoke in under-tones, laying great stress upon particular words that
were evidently favourites with him--such as, "indeed." Not only his
eyes, but his whole face, seemed to be nervously blinking and winking
all the time he was addressing me, In the embarrassment and anxiety
which I then felt, this peculiarity fidgetted and bewildered me more
than I can describe. I would have given the world to have had his back
turned, before I spoke to him again.

"I am delighted to hear that my family and my name are not unknown to
you, Mr. Sherwin," I resumed. "Under those circumstances, I shall feel
less hesitation and difficulty in making you acquainted with the object
of my visit."

"Just so. May I offer you anything?--a glass of sherry, a--"

"Nothing, thank you. In the first place, Mr. Sherwin, I have reasons
for wishing that this interview, whatever results it may lead to, may
be considered strictly confidential. I am sure I can depend on your
favouring me thus far?"

"Certainly--most certainly--the strictest secrecy of course--pray go
on."

He drew his chair a little nearer to me. Through all his blinking and
winking, I could see a latent expression of cunning and curiosity in his
eyes. My card was in his hand: he was nervously rolling and unrolling
it, without a moment's cessation, in his anxiety to hear what I had to
say.

"I must also beg you to suspend your judgment until you have heard me
to the end. You may be disposed to view--to view, I say, unfavourably at
first--in short, Mr. Sherwin, without further preface, the object of my
visit is connected with your daughter, with Miss Margaret Sherwin--"

"My daughter! Bless my soul--God bless my soul, I really can't
imagine--"

He stopped, half-breathless, bending forward towards me, and crumpling
my card between his fingers into the smallest possible dimensions.

"Rather more than a week ago," I continued, "I accidentally met Miss
Sherwin in an omnibus, accompanied by a lady older than herself--"

"My wife; Mrs. Sherwin," he said, impatiently motioning with his
hand, as if "Mrs. Sherwin" were some insignificant obstacle to the
conversation, which he wished to clear out of the way as fast as
possible.

"You will not probably be surprised to hear that I was struck by Miss
Sherwin's extreme beauty. The impression she made on me was something
more, however, than a mere momentary feeling of admiration. To speak
candidly, I felt--You have heard of such a thing as love at first sight,
Mr. Sherwin?"

"In books, Sir." He tapped one of the morocco-bound volumes on the
table, and smiled--a curious smile, partly deferential and partly
sarcastic.

"You would be inclined to laugh, I dare say, if I asked you to believe
that there is such a thing as love at first sight, _out_ of books. But,
without dwelling further on that, it is my duty to confess to you, in
all candour and honesty, that the impression Miss Sherwin produced on me
was such as to make me desire the privilege of becoming acquainted with
her. In plain words, I discovered her place of residence by following
her to this house."

"Upon my soul this is the most extraordinary proceeding----!"

"Pray hear me out, Mr. Sherwin: you will not condemn my conduct, I
think, if you hear all I have to say."

He muttered something unintelligible; his complexion turned yellower; he
dropped my card, which he had by this time crushed into fragments; and
ran his hand rapidly through his hair until he had stretched it out like
a penthouse over his forehead--blinking all the time, and regarding me
with a lowering, sinister expression of countenance. I saw that it
was useless to treat him as I should have treated a gentleman. He had
evidently put the meanest and the foulest construction upon my delicacy
and hesitation in speaking to him: so I altered my plan, and came to the
point abruptly--"came to business," as he would have called it.

"I ought to have been plainer, Mr. Sherwin; I ought perhaps to have told
you at the outset, in so many words, that I came to--" (I was about
to say, "to ask your daughter's hand in marriage;" but a thought of my
father moved darkly over my mind at that moment, and the words would not
pass my lips).

"Well, Sir! to what?"

The tone in which he said this was harsh enough to rouse me. It gave me
back my self-possession immediately.

"To ask your permission to pay my addresses to Miss Sherwin--or, to be
plainer still, if you like, to ask of you her hand in marriage."

The words were spoken. Even if I could have done so, I would not have
recalled what I had just said; but still, I trembled in spite of myself
as I expressed in plain, blunt words what I had only rapturously thought
over, or delicately hinted at to Margaret, up to this time.

"God bless me!" cried Mr. Sherwin, suddenly sitting back bolt upright
in his chair, and staring at me in such surprise, that his restless
features were actually struck with immobility for the moment--"God
bless me, this is quite another story. Most gratifying, most
astonishing--highly flattered I am sure; highly indeed, my dear Sir!
Don't suppose, for one moment, I ever doubted your honourable feeling.
Young gentlemen in your station of life do sometimes fail in respect
towards the wives and daughters of their--in short, of those who are
not in their rank exactly. But that's not the question--quite a
misunderstanding--extremely stupid of me, to be sure. _Pray_ let me
offer you a glass of wine!"

"No wine, thank you, Mr. Sherwin. I must beg your attention a little
longer, while I state to you, in confidence, how I am situated with
regard to the proposals I have made. There are certain circumstances--"

"Yes--yes?"

He bent forward again eagerly towards me, as he spoke; looking more
inquisitive and more cunning than ever.

"I have acknowledged to you, Mr. Sherwin, that I have found means
to speak to your daughter--to speak to her twice. I made my advances
honourably. She received them with a modesty and a reluctance worthy of
herself, worthy of any lady, the highest lady in the land." (Mr. Sherwin
looked round reverentially to his print of the Queen; then looked back
at me, and bowed solemnly.) "Now, although in so many words she directly
discouraged me--it is her due that I should say this--still, I think I
may without vanity venture to hope that she did so as a matter of duty,
more than as a matter of inclination."

"Ah--yes, yes! I understand. She would do nothing without my authority,
of course?"

"No doubt that was one reason why she received me as she did; but she
had another, which she communicated to me in the plainest terms--the
difference in our rank of life."

"Ah! she said that, did she? Exactly so--she saw a difficulty there?
Yes--yes! high principles, Sir--high principles, thank God!"

"I need hardly tell you, Mr. Sherwin, how deeply I feel the delicate
sense of honour which this objection shows on your daughter's part. You
will easily imagine that it is no objection to _me,_ personally. The
happiness of my whole life depends on Miss Sherwin; I desire no
higher honour, as I can conceive no greater happiness, than to be
your daughter's husband. I told her this: I also told her that I would
explain myself on the subject to you. She made no objection; and I am,
therefore, I think, justified in considering that if you authorised the
removal of scruples which do her honour at present, she would not feel
the delicacy she does now at sanctioning my addresses."

"Very proper--a very proper way of putting it. Practical, if I may be
allowed to say so. And now, my dear Sir, the next point is: how about
your own honoured family--eh?"

"It is exactly there that the difficulty lies. My father, on whom I am
dependent as the younger son, has very strong prejudices--convictions I
ought perhaps to call them--on the subject of social inequalities."

"Quite so--most natural; most becoming, indeed, on the part of your
respected father. I honour his convictions, sir. Such estates, such
houses, such a family as his--connected, I believe, with the nobility,
especially on your late lamented mother's side. My dear Sir, I
emphatically repeat it, your father's convictions do him honour; I
respect them as much as I respect him; I do, indeed."

"I am glad you can view my father's ideas on social subjects in so
favourable a light, Mr. Sherwin. You will be less surprised to hear how
they are likely to affect me in the step I am now taking."

"He disapproves of it, of course--strongly, perhaps. Well, though
my dear girl is worthy of any station; and a man like me, devoted to
mercantile interests, may hold his head up anywhere as one of the props
of this commercial country," (he ran his fingers rapidly through his
hair, and tried to look independent), "still I am prepared to admit,
under all the circumstances--I say under all the circumstances--that his
disapproval is very natural, and was very much to be expected--very much
indeed."

"He has expressed no disapproval, Mr. Sherwin."

"You don't say so!"

"I have not given him an opportunity. My meeting with your daughter
has been kept a profound secret from him, and from every member of my
family; and a secret it must remain. I speak from my intimate knowledge
of my father, when I say that I hardly know of any means that he would
not be capable of employing to frustrate the purpose of this visit, if I
had mentioned it to him. He has been the kindest and best of fathers
to me; but I firmly believe, that if I waited for his consent, no
entreaties of mine, or of any one belonging to me, would induce him to
give his sanction to the marriage I have come to you to propose."

"Bless my soul! this is carrying things rather far, though--dependent as
you are on him, and all that. Why, what on earth can we do--eh?"

"We must keep both the courtship and the marriage secret."

"Secret! Good gracious, I don't at all see my way--"

"Yes, secret--a profound secret among ourselves, until I can divulge my
marriage to my father, with the best chance of--"

"But I tell you, Sir, I can't see my way through it at all. Chance! what
chance would there be, after what you have told me?"

"There might be many chances. For instance, when the marriage
was solemnised, I might introduce your daughter to my father's
notice--without disclosing who she was--and leave her, gradually and
unsuspectedly, to win his affection and respect (as with her beauty,
elegance, and amiability, she could not fail to do), while I waited
until the occasion was ripe for confessing everything. Then if I said
to him, 'This young lady, who has so interested and delighted you, is my
wife;' do you think, with that powerful argument in my favour, he could
fail to give us his pardon? If, on the other hand, I could only say,
'This young lady is about to become my wife,' his prejudices would
assuredly induce him to recall his most favourable impressions, and
refuse his consent. In short, Mr. Sherwin, before marriage, it would be
impossible to move him--after marriage, when opposition could no longer
be of any avail, it would be quite a different thing: we might be sure
of producing, sooner or later, the most favourable results. This is why
it would be absolutely necessary to keep our union secret at first."

I wondered then--I have since wondered more--how it was that I contrived
to speak thus, so smoothly and so unhesitatingly, when my conscience was
giving the lie all the while to every word I uttered.

"Yes, yes; I see--oh, yes, I see!" said Mr. Sherwin, rattling a bunch of
keys in his pocket, with an expression of considerable perplexity;
"but this is a ticklish business, you know--a very queer and ticklish
business indeed. To have a gentleman of your birth and breeding for a
son-in-law, is of course--but then there is the money question.
Suppose you failed with your father after all--_my_ money is out in my
speculations--_I_ can do nothing. Upon my word, you have placed me in a
position that I never was placed in before."

"I have influential friends, Mr. Sherwin, in many directions--there are
appointments, good appointments, which would be open to me, if I
pushed my interests. I might provide in this way against the chance of
failure."

"Ah!--well--yes. There's something in that, certainly."

"I can only assure you that my attachment to Miss Sherwin is not of a
nature to be overcome by any pecuniary considerations. I speak in all
our interests, when I say that a private marriage gives us a chance for
the future, as opportunities arise of gradually disclosing it. My offer
to you may be made under some disadvantages and difficulties, perhaps;
for, with the exception of a very small independence, left me by my
mother, I have no certain prospects. But I really think my proposals
have some compensating advantages to recommend them--"

"Certainly! most decidedly so! I am not insensible, my dear Sir, to the
great advantage, and honour, and so forth. But there is something so
unusual about the whole affair. What would be my feelings, if your
father should not come round, and my dear girl was disowned by the
family? Well, well! that could hardly happen, I think, with her
accomplishments and education, and manners too, so distinguished--though
perhaps I ought not to say so. Her schooling alone was a hundred a-year,
Sir, without including extras--"

"I am sure, Mr. Sherwin--"

"--A school, Sir, where it was a rule to take in no thing lower than
the daughter of a professional man--they only waived the rule in
my case--the most genteel school, perhaps, in all London! A
drawing-room-deportment day once every week--the girls taught how
to enter a room and leave a room with dignity and ease--a model of a
carriage door and steps, in the back drawing-room, to practise the girls
(with the footman of the establishment in attendance) in getting into
a carriage and getting out again, in a lady-like manner! No duchess has
had a better education than my Margaret!--"

"Permit me to assure you, Mr. Sherwin--"

"And then, her knowledge of languages--her French, and Italian, and
German, not discontinued in holidays, or after she left school (she has
only just left it); but all kept up and improved every evening, by the
kind attention of Mr. Mannion--"

"May I ask who Mr. Mannion is?" The tone in which I put this question,
cooled his enthusiasm about his daughter's education immediately. He
answered in his former tones, and with one of his former bows:

"Mr. Mannion is my confidential clerk, Sir--a most superior person, most
highly talented, and well read, and all that."

"Is he a young man?"

"Young! Oh, dear no! Mr. Mannion is forty, or a year or two more, if
he's a day--an admirable man of business, as well as a great scholar.
He's at Lyons now, buying silks for me. When he comes back I shall be
delighted to introduce---"

"I beg your pardon, but I think we are wandering away from the point, a
little."

"I beg _yours_--so we are. Well, my dear Sir, I must be allowed a day or
two--say two days--to ascertain what my daughter's feelings are, and to
consider your proposals, which have taken me very much by surprise,
as you may in fact see. But I assure you I am most flattered, most
honoured, most anxious--".

"I hope you will consider my anxieties, Mr. Sherwin, and let me know the
result of your deliberations as soon as possible."

"Without fail, depend upon it. Let me see: shall we say the second day
from this, at the same time, if you can favour me with a visit?"

"Certainly."

"And between that time and this, you will engage not to hold any
communication with my daughter?"

"I promise not, Mr. Sherwin--because I believe that your answer will be
favourable."

"Ah, well--well! lovers, they say, should never despair. A little
consideration, and a little talk with my dear girl--really now, won't
you change your mind and have a glass of sherry? (No again?) Very well,
then, the day after tomorrow, at five o'clock."

With a louder crack than ever, the brand-new drawing-room door was
opened to let me out. The noise was instantly succeeded by the rustling
of a silk dress, and the banging of another door, at the opposite end of
the passage. Had anybody been listening? Where was Margaret?

Mr. Sherwin stood at the garden-gate to watch my departure, and to make
his farewell bow. Thick as was the atmosphere of illusion in which I now
lived, I shuddered involuntarily as I returned his parting salute, and
thought of him as my father-in-law!

XI.

The nearer I approached to our own door, the more reluctance I felt to
pass the short interval between my first and second interview with Mr.
Sherwin, at home. When I entered the house, this reluctance increased to
something almost like dread. I felt unwilling and unfit to meet the eyes
of my nearest and dearest relatives. It was a relief to me to hear that
my father was not at home. My sister was in the house: the servant said
she had just gone into the library, and inquired whether he should tell
her that I had come in. I desired him not to disturb her, as it was my
intention to go out again immediately.

I went into my study, and wrote a short note there to Clara; merely
telling her that I should be absent in the country for two days. I had
sealed and laid it on the table for the servant to deliver, and was
about to leave the room, when I heard the library door open. I instantly
drew back, and half-closed my own door again. Clara had got the book she
wanted, and was taking it up to her own sitting-room. I waited till she
was out of sight, and then left the house. It was the first time I had
ever avoided my sister--my sister, who had never in her life asked a
question, or uttered a word that could annoy me; my sister, who had
confided all her own little secrets to my keeping, ever since we had
been children. As I thought on what I had done, I felt a sense of
humiliation which was almost punishment enough for the meanness of which
I had been guilty.

I went round to the stables, and had my horse saddled immediately. No
idea of proceeding in any particular direction occurred to me. I
simply felt resolved to pass my two days' ordeal of suspense away from
home--far enough away to keep me faithful to my promise not to see
Margaret. Soon after I started, I left my horse to his own guidance, and
gave myself up to my thoughts and recollections, as one by one they rose
within me. The animal took the direction which he had been oftenest used
to take during my residence in London--the northern road.

It was not until I had ridden half a mile beyond the suburbs that I
looked round me, and discovered towards what part of the country I was
proceeding. I drew the rein directly, and turned my horse's head back
again, towards the south. To follow the favourite road which I had so
often followed with Clara; to stop perhaps at some place where I
had often stopped with her, was more than I had the courage or the
insensibility to do at that moment.

I rode as far as Ewell, and stopped there: the darkness had overtaken
me, and it was useless to tire my horse by going on any greater
distance. The next morning, I was up almost with sunrise; and passed
the greater part of the day in walking about among villages, lanes, and
fields, just as chance led me. During the night, many thoughts that I
had banished for the last week had returned--those thoughts of evil omen
under which the mind seems to ache, just as the body aches under a dull,
heavy pain, to which we can assign no particular place or cause.
Absent from Margaret, I had no resource against the oppression that
now overcame me. I could only endeavour to alleviate it by keeping
incessantly in action; by walking or riding, hour after hour, in the
vain attempt to quiet the mind by wearying out the body. Apprehension of
the failure of my application to Mr. Sherwin had nothing to do with the
vague gloom which now darkened my thoughts; they kept too near home
for that. Besides, what I had observed of Margaret's father, especially
during the latter part of my interview with him, showed me plainly
enough that he was trying to conceal, under exaggerated surprise and
assumed hesitation, his secret desire to profit at once by my
offer; which, whatever conditions might clog it, was infinitely more
advantageous in a social point of view, than any he could have hoped
for. It was not his delay in accepting my proposals, but the burden
of deceit, the fetters of concealment forced on me by the proposals
themselves, which now hung heavy on my heart.

That evening I left Ewell, and rode towards home again, as far as
Richmond, where I remained for the night and the forepart of the next
day. I reached London in the afternoon; and got to North Villa--without
going home first--about five o'clock.

The oppression was still on my spirits. Even the sight of the house
where Margaret lived failed to invigorate or arouse me.

On this occasion, when I was shown into the drawing-room, both Mr. and
Mrs. Sherwin were awaiting me there. On the table was the sherry which
had been so perseveringly pressed on me at the last interview, and by it
a new pound cake. Mrs. Sherwin was cutting the cake as I came in, while
her husband watched the process with critical eyes. The poor woman's
weak white fingers trembled as they moved the knife under conjugal
inspection.

"Most happy to see you again--most happy indeed, my dear Sir," said Mr.
Sherwin, advancing with hospitable smile and outstretched hand. "Allow
me to introduce my better half, Mrs. S."

His wife rose in a hurry, and curtseyed, leaving the knife sticking
in the cake; upon which Mr. Sherwin, with a stern look at her,
ostentatiously pulled it out, and set it down rather violently on the
dish.

Poor Mrs. Sherwin! I had hardly noticed her on the day when she got into
the omnibus with her daughter--it was as if I now saw her for the first
time. There is a natural communicativeness about women's emotions. A
happy woman imperceptibly diffuses her happiness around her; she has an
influence that is something akin to the influence of a sunshiny day.
So, again, the melancholy of a melancholy woman is invariably, though
silently, infectious; and Mrs. Sherwin was one of this latter order. Her
pale, sickly, moist-looking skin; her large, mild, watery, light-blue
eyes; the restless timidity of her expression; the mixture of useless
hesitation and involuntary rapidity in every one of her actions--all
furnished the same significant betrayal of a life of incessant fear
and restraint; of a disposition full of modest generosities and meek
sympathies, which had been crushed down past rousing to self-assertion,
past ever seeing the light. There, in that mild, wan face of hers--in
those painful startings and hurryings when she moved; in that tremulous,
faint utterance when she spoke--_there,_ I could see one of those
ghastly heart-tragedies laid open before me, which are acted and
re-acted, scene by scene, and year by year, in the secret theatre of
home; tragedies which are ever shadowed by the slow falling of the black
curtain that drops lower and lower every day--that drops, to hide all at
last, from the hand of death.

"We have had very beautiful weather lately, Sir," said Mrs. Sherwin,
almost inaudibly; looking as she spoke, with anxious eyes towards her
husband, to see if she was justified in uttering even those piteously
common-place words. "Very beautiful weather to be sure," continued the
poor woman, as timidly as if she had become a little child again, and
had been ordered to say her first lesson in a stranger's presence.

"Delightful weather, Mrs. Sherwin. I have been enjoying it for the
last two days in the country--in a part of Surrey (the neighbourhood of
Ewell) that I had not seen before."

There was a pause. Mr. Sherwin coughed; it was evidently a warning
matrimonial peal that he had often rung before--for Mrs. Sherwin
started, and looked up at him directly.

"As the lady of the house, Mrs. S., it strikes me that you might offer
a visitor, like this gentleman, some cake and wine, without making any
particular hole in your manners!"

"Oh dear me! I beg your pardon! I'm very sorry, I'm sure"--and she
poured out a glass of wine, with such a trembling hand that the decanter
tinkled all the while against the glass. Though I wanted nothing, I
ate and drank something immediately, in common consideration for Mrs.
Sherwin's embarrassment.

Mr. Sherwin filled himself a glass--held it up admiringly to the
light--said, "Your good health, Sir, your very good health;" and drank
the wine with the air of a connoisseur, and a most expressive smacking
of the lips. His wife (to whom he offered nothing) looked at him all the
time with the most reverential attention.

"You are taking nothing yourself, Mrs. Sherwin," I said.

"Mrs. Sherwin, Sir," interposed her husband, "never drinks wine, and
can't digest cake. A bad stomach--a very bad stomach. Have another glass
yourself. Won't you, indeed? This sherry stands me in six shillings a
bottle--ought to be first-rate wine at that price: and so it is.
Well, if you won't have any more, we will proceed to business. Ha! ha!
business as _I_ call it; pleasure I hope it will be to _you_."

Mrs. Sherwin coughed--a very weak, small cough, half-stifled in its
birth.

"There you are again!" he said, turning fiercely towards her--"Coughing
again! Six months of the doctor--a six months' bill to come out of my
pocket--and no good done--no good, Mrs. S."

"Oh, I am much better, thank you--it was only a little--"

"Well, Sir, the evening after you left me, I had what you may call
an explanation with my dear girl. She was naturally a little confused
and--and embarrassed, indeed. A very serious thing of course, to decide
at her age, and at so short a notice, on a point involving the happiness
of her whole life to come."

Here Mrs. Sherwin put her handkerchief to her eyes--quite noiselessly;
for she had doubtless acquired by long practice the habit of weeping in
silence. Her husband's quick glance turned on her, however, immediately,
with anything but an expression of sympathy.

"Good God, Mrs. S.! what's the use of going on in that way?" he said,
indignantly. "What is there to cry about? Margaret isn't ill, and isn't
unhappy--what on earth's the matter now? Upon my soul this is a most
annoying circumstance: and before a visitor too! You had better leave me
to discuss the matter alone--you always _were_ in the way of business,
and it's my opinion you always will be."

Mrs. Sherwin prepared, without a word of remonstrance, to leave the
room. I sincerely felt for her; but could say nothing. In the impulse
of the moment, I rose to open the door for her; and immediately repented
having done so. The action added so much to her embarrassment that she
kicked her foot against a chair, and uttered a suppressed exclamation of
pain as she went out.

Mr. Sherwin helped himself to a second glass of wine, without taking the
smallest notice of this.

"I hope Mrs. Sherwin has not hurt herself?" I said. "Oh dear no! not
worth a moment's thought--awkwardness and nervousness, nothing else--she
always was nervous--the doctors (all humbugs) can do nothing with
her--it's very sad, very sad indeed; but there's no help for it."

By this time (in spite of all my efforts to preserve some respect
for him, as Margaret's father) he had sunk to his proper place in my
estimation.

"Well, my dear Sir," he resumed, "to go back to where I was interrupted
by Mrs. S. Let me see: I was saying that my dear girl was a little
confused, and so forth. As a matter of course, I put before her all the
advantages which such a connection as yours promised--and at the same
time, mentioned some of the little embarrassing circumstances--the
private marriage, you know, and all that--besides telling her of certain
restrictions in reference to the marriage, if it came off, which I
should feel it my duty as a father to impose; and which I shall proceed,
in short, to explain to you. As a man of the world, my dear Sir, you
know as well as I do, that young ladies don't give very straightforward
answers on the subject of their prepossessions in favour of young
gentlemen. But I got enough out of her to show me that you had made
pretty good use of your time--no occasion to despond, you know--I leave
_you_ to make her speak plain; it's more in your line than mine, more a
good deal. And now let us come to the business part of the transaction.
All I have to say is this:--if you agree to my proposals, then I agree
to yours. I think that's fair enough--Eh?"

"Quite fair, Mr. Sherwin."

"Just so. Now, in the first place, my daughter is too young to be
married yet. She was only seventeen last birthday."

"You astonish me! I should have imagined her three years older at
least."

"Everybody thinks her older than she is--everybody, my dear Sir--and she
certainly looks it. She's more formed, more developed I may say, than
most girls at her age. However, that's not the point. The plain fact is,
she's too young to be married now--too young in a moral point of view;
too young in an educational point of view; too young altogether. Well:
the upshot of this is, that I could not give my consent to Margaret's
marrying, until another year is out--say a year from this time. One
year's courtship for the finishing off of her education, and the
formation of her constitution--you understand me, for the formation of
her constitution."

A year to wait! At first, this seemed a long trial to endure, a trial
that ought not to be imposed on me. But the next moment, the delay
appeared in a different light. Would it not be the dearest of privileges
to be able to see Margaret, perhaps every day, perhaps for hours at a
time? Would it not be happiness enough to observe each development of
her character, to watch her first maiden love for me, advancing nearer
and nearer towards confidence and maturity the oftener we met? As I
thought on this, I answered Mr. Sherwin without further hesitation.

"It will be some trial," I said, "to my patience, though none to my
constancy, none to the strength of my affection--I will wait the year."

"Exactly so," rejoined Mr. Sherwin; "such candour and such
reasonableness were to be expected from one who is quite the gentleman.
And now comes my grand difficulty in this business--in fact, the little
stipulation I have to make."

He stopped, and ran his fingers through his hair, in all directions; his
features fidgetting and distorting themselves ominously, while he looked
at me.

"Pray explain yourself, Mr. Sherwin. Your silence gives me some
uneasiness at this particular moment, I assure you."

"Quite so--I understand. Now, you must promise me not to be
huffed--offended, I should say--at what I am going to propose."

"Certainly not."

"Well, then, it may seem odd; but under all the circumstances--that is
to say, as far as the case concerns you personally--I want you and my
dear girl to be married at once, and yet not to be married exactly, for
another year. I don't know whether you understand me?"

"I must confess I do not."

He coughed rather uneasily; turned to the table, and poured out another
glass of sherry--his hand trembling a little as he did so. He drank off
the wine at a draught; cleared his throat three or four times after it;
and then spoke again.

"Well, to be still plainer, this is how the matter stands: If you were
a party in our rank of life, coming to court Margaret with your father's
full approval and permission when once you had consented to the year's
engagement, everything would be done and settled; the bargain would
have been struck on both sides; and there would be an end of it. But,
situated as you are, I can't stop here safely--I mean, I can't end the
agreement exactly in this way."

He evidently felt that he got fluent on wine; and helped himself, at
this juncture, to another glass.

"You will see what I am driving at, my dear Sir, directly," he
continued. "Suppose now, you came courting my daughter for a year, as
we settled; and suppose your father found it out--we should keep it a
profound secret of course: but still, secrets are sometimes found out,
nobody knows how. Suppose, I say, your father got scent of the thing,
and the match was broken off; where do you think Margaret's reputation
would be? If it happened with somebody in her own station, we might
explain it all, and be believed: but happening with somebody in yours,
what would the world say? Would the world believe you had ever intended
to marry her? That's the point--that's the point precisely."

"But the case could not happen--I am astonished you can imagine it
possible. I have told you already, I am of age."

"Properly urged--very properly, indeed. But you also told me, if you
remember, when I first had the pleasure of seeing you, that your father,
if he knew of this match, would stick at nothing to oppose it--_at
nothing_--I recollect you said so. Now, knowing this, my dear
Sir--though I have the most perfect confidence in _your_ honour, and
_your_ resolution to fulfil your engagement--I can't have confidence in
your being prepared beforehand to oppose all your father might do if he
found us out; because you can't tell yourself what he might be up to, or
what influence he might set to work over you. This sort of mess is not
very probable, you will say; but if it's at all possible--and there's
a year for it to be possible in--by George, Sir, I must guard against
accidents, for my daughter's sake--I must indeed!"

"In Heaven's name, Mr. Sherwin, pass over all these impossible
difficulties of yours! and let me hear what you have finally to
propose."

"Gently, my dear Sir! gently, gently, gently! I propose to begin with:
that you should marry my daughter--privately marry her--in a week's
time. Now, pray compose yourself!" (I was looking at him in speechless
astonishment.) "Take it easy; pray take it easy! Supposing, then, you
marry her in this way, I make one stipulation. I require you to give me
your word of honour to leave her at the church door; and for the space
of one year never to attempt to see her, except in the presence of a
third party. At the end of that time, I will engage to give her to you,
as your wife in fact, as well as in name. There! what do you say to
that--eh?"

I was too astounded, too overwhelmed, to say anything at that moment;
Mr. Sherwin went on:

"This plan of mine, you see, reconciles everything. If any accident
_does_ happen, and we are discovered, why your father can do nothing to
stop the match, because the match will have been already made. And,
at the same time, I secure a year's delay, for the formation of her
constitution, and the finishing of her accomplishments, and so forth.
Besides, what an opportunity this gives of sailing as near the wind as
you choose, in breaking the thing, bit by bit, to your father, without
fear of consequences, in case he should run rough after all. Upon my
honour, my dear Sir, I think I deserve some credit for hitting on this
plan--it makes everything so right and straight, and suits of course
the wishes of all parties! I need hardly say that you shall have
every facility for seeing Margaret, under the restrictions--under the
restrictions, you understand. People may talk about your visits; but
having got the certificate, and knowing it's all safe and settled, I
shan't care for that. Well, what do you say? take time to think, if you
wish it--only remember that I have the most perfect confidence in your
honour, and that I act from a fatherly feeling for the interests of my
dear girl!" He stopped, out of breath from the extraordinary volubility
of his long harangue.

Some men more experienced in the world, less mastered by love than I
was, would, in my position, have recognised this proposal an unfair
trial of self-restraint--perhaps, something like an unfair humiliation
as well. Others have detected the selfish motives which suggested it:
the mean distrust of my honour, integrity, and firmness of purpose which
it implied; and the equally mean anxiety on Sherwin's part to clench
his profitable bargain at once, for fear it might be repented of. I
discerned nothing of this. As soon as I had recovered from the natural
astonishment of the first few moments, I only saw in the strange plan
proposed to me, a certainty of assuring--no matter with what sacrifice,
what hazard, or what delay--the ultimate triumph of my love. When Mr.
Sherwin had ceased speaking, I replied at once:

"I accept your conditions--I accept them with all my heart."

He was hardly prepared for so complete and so sudden an acquiescence in
his proposal, and looked absolutely startled by it, at first. But
soon resuming his self-possession--his wily, "business-like"
self-possession--he started up, and shook me vehemently by the hand.

"Delighted--most delighted, my dear Sir, to find how soon we understand
each other, and that we pull together so well. We must have another
glass; hang it, we really must! a toast, you know; a toast you can't
help drinking--your wife! Ha! ha!--I had you there!--my dear, dear
Margaret, God bless her!"

"We may consider all difficulties finally settled then," I said, anxious
to close my interview with Mr. Sherwin as speedily as possible.

"Decidedly so. Done, and double done, I may say. There will be a
little insurance on your life, that I shall ask you to effect for dear
Margaret's sake; and perhaps, a memorandum of agreement, engaging to
settle a certain proportion of any property you may become possessed of,
on her and her children. You see I am looking forward to my grandfather
days already! But this can wait for a future occasion--say in a day or
two."

"Then I presume there will be no objection to my seeing Miss Sherwin
now?"

"None whatever---at once, if you like. This way, my dear Sir; this way,"
and he led me across the passage, into the dining-room.

This apartment was furnished with less luxury, but with more bad taste
(if possible) than the room we had just left. Near the window sat
Margaret--it was the same window at which I had seen her, on the evening
when I wandered into the square, after our meeting in the omnibus. The
cage with the canary-bird hung in the same place. I just noticed--with
a momentary surprise--that Mrs. Sherwin was sitting far away from
her daughter, at the other end of the room; and then placed myself by
Margaret's side. She was dressed in pale yellow--a colour which gave new
splendour to her dark complexion and magnificently dark hair. Once more,
all my doubts, all my self-upbraidings vanished, and gave place to the
exquisite sense of happiness, the glow of joy and hope and love which
seemed to rush over my heart, the moment I looked at her.

After staying in the room about five minutes, Mr. Sherwin whispered to
his wife, and left us. Mrs. Sherwin still kept her place; but she said
nothing, and hardly turned to look round at us more than once or twice.
Perhaps she was occupied by her own thoughts; perhaps, from a motive of
delicacy, she abstained even from an appearance of watching her daughter
or watching me. Whatever feelings influenced her, I cared not to
speculate on them. It was enough that I had the privilege of speaking
to Margaret uninterruptedly; of declaring my love at last, without
hesitation and without reserve.

How much I had to say to her, and how short a time seemed to be left me
that evening to say it in! How short a time to tell her all the thoughts
of the past which she had created in me; all the self-sacrifice to which
I had cheerfully consented for her sake; all the anticipations of future
happiness which were concentrated in her, which drew their very breath
of life, only from the prospect of her rewarding love! She spoke but
little; yet even that little it was a new delight to hear. She smiled
now; she let me take her hand, and made no attempt to withdraw it.
The evening had closed in; the darkness was stealing fast upon us; the
still, dead-still figure of Mrs. Sherwin, always in the same place
and the same attitude, grew fainter and fainter to the eye, across the
distance of the room--but no thought of time, no thought of home ever
once crossed my mind. I could have sat at the window with Margaret
the long night through; without an idea of numbering the hours as they
passed.

Ere long, however, Mr. Sherwin entered the room again, and effectually
roused me by approaching and speaking to us. I saw that I had stayed
long enough, and that we were not to be left together again, that
night. So I rose and took my leave, having first fixed a time for seeing
Margaret on the morrow. Mr. Sherwin accompanied me with great ceremony
to the outer door. Just as I was leaving him, he touched me on the arm,
and said in his most confidential tones:

"Come an hour earlier, to-morrow; and we'll go and get the licence
together. No objection to that--eh? And the marriage, shall we say this
day week? Just as _you_ like, you know--don't let me seem to dictate.
Ah! no objection to that, either, I see, and no objection on Margaret's
side, I'll warrant! With respect to consents, in the marrying part of
the business, there's complete mutuality--isn't there? Good night: God
bless you!"

XII.

That night I went home with none of the reluctance or the apprehension
which I had felt on the last occasion, when I approached our own door.
The assurance of success contained in the events of the afternoon, gave
me a trust in my own self-possession--a confidence in my own capacity
to parry all dangerous questions--which I had not experienced before.
I cared not how soon, or for how long a time, I might find myself in
company with Clara or my father. It was well for the preservation of my
secret that I was in this frame of mind; for, on opening my study door,
I was astonished to see both of them in my room.

Clara was measuring one of my over-crowded book-shelves, with a piece of
string; and was apparently just about to compare the length of it with
a vacant space on the wall close by, when I came in. Seeing me, she
stopped; and looked round significantly at my father, who was standing
near her, with a file of papers in his hand.

"You may well feel surprised, Basil, at this invasion of your
territory," he said, with peculiar kindness of manner--"you must,
however, apply there, to the prime minister of the household," pointing
to Clara, "for an explanation. I am only the instrument of a domestic
conspiracy on your sister's part."

Clara seemed doubtful whether she should speak. It was the first time I
had ever seen such an expression in her face, when she looked into mine.

"We are discovered, papa," she said, after a momentary silence, "and we
must explain: but you know I always leave as many explanations as I can
to you."

"Very well," said my father smiling; "my task in this instance will be
an easy one. I was intercepted, Basil, on my way to my own room by your
sister, and taken in here to advise about a new set of bookcases for
you, when I ought to have been attending to my own money matters.
Clara's idea was to have had these new bookcases made in secret, and put
up as a surprise, some day when you were not at home. However, as you
have caught her in the act of measuring spaces, with all the skill of
an experienced carpenter, and all the impetuosity of an arbitrary young
lady who rules supreme over everybody, further concealment is out of the
question. We must make a virtue of necessity, and confess everything."

Poor Clara! This was her only return for ten days' utter neglect--and
she had been half afraid to tell me of it herself. I approached and
thanked her; not very gratefully, I am afraid, for I felt too confused
to speak freely. It seemed like a fatality. The more evil I was doing
in secret, evil to family ties and family principles, the more good was
unconsciously returned to me by my family, through my sister's hands.

"I made no objection, of course, to the bookcase plan," continued my
father. "More room is really wanted for the volumes on volumes that you
have collected about you; but I certainly suggested a little delay in
the execution of the project. The bookcases will, at all events, not be
required here for five months to come. This day week we return to the
country."

I could not repress a start of astonishment and dismay. Here was a
difficulty which I ought to have provided for; but which I had most
unaccountably never once thought of, although it was now the period
of the year at which on all former occasions we had been accustomed to
leave London. This day week too! The very day fixed by Mr. Sherwin for
my marriage!

"I am afraid, Sir, I shall not be able to go with you and Clara so soon
as you propose. It was my wish to remain in London some time longer." I
said this in a low voice, without venturing to look at my sister. But I
could not help hearing her exclamation as I spoke, and the tone in which
she uttered it.

My father moved nearer to me a step or two, and looked in my face
intently, with the firm, penetrating expression which peculiarly
characterized him.

"This seems an extraordinary resolution," he said, his tones and manner
altering ominously while he spoke. "I thought your sudden absence for
the last two days rather odd; but this plan of remaining in London by
yourself is really incomprehensible. What can you have to do?"

An excuse--no! not an excuse; let me call things by their right names
in these pages--a _lie_ was rising to my lips; but my father checked the
utterance of it. He detected my embarrassment immediately, anxiously as
I strove to conceal it.

"Stop," he said coldly, while the red flush which meant so much when it
rose on _his_ cheek, began to appear there for the first time. "Stop! If
you must make excuses, Basil, I must ask no questions. You have a secret
which you wish to keep from me; and I beg you _will_ keep it. I have
never been accustomed to treat my sons as I would not treat any other
gentlemen with whom I may happen to be associated. If they have private
affairs, I cannot interfere with those affairs. My trust in their honour
is my only guarantee against their deceiving me; but in the intercourse
of gentlemen that is guarantee enough. Remain here as long as you like:
we shall be happy to see you in the country, when you are able to leave
town."

He turned to Clara. "I suppose, my love, you want me no longer. While I
settle my own matters of business, you can arrange about the bookcases
with your brother. Whatever you wish, I shall be glad to do." And he
left the room without speaking to me, or looking at me again. I sank
into a chair, feeling disgraced in my own estimation by the last words
he had spoken to me. His trust in my honour was his only guarantee
against my deceiving him. As I thought over that declaration, every
syllable of it seemed to sear my conscience; to brand Hypocrite on my
heart.

I turned towards my sister. She was standing at a little distance from
me, silent and pale, mechanically twisting the measuring-string, which
she still held between her trembling fingers; and fixing her eyes upon
me so lovingly, so mournfully, that my fortitude gave way when I looked
at her. At that instant, I seemed to forget everything that had passed
since the day when I first met Margaret, and to be restored once more
to my old way of life and my old home-sympathies. My head drooped on my
breast, and I felt the hot tears forcing themselves into my eyes.

Clara stepped quietly to my side; and sitting down by me in silence, put
her arm round my neck.

When I was calmer, she said gently:

"I have been very anxious about you, Basil; and perhaps I have allowed
that anxiety to appear more than I ought. Perhaps I have been accustomed
to exact too much from you--you have been too ready to please me. But I
have been used to it so long; and I have nobody else that I can speak to
as I can to you. Papa is very kind; but he can't be what you are to me
exactly; and Ralph does not live with us now, and cared little about me,
I am afraid, when he did. I have friends, but friends are not--"

She stopped again; her voice was failing her. For a moment, she
struggled to keep her self-possession--struggled as only women can--and
succeeded in the effort. She pressed her arm closer round my neck; but
her tones were steadier and clearer when she resumed:

"It will not be very easy for me to give up our country rides and walks
together, and the evening talk that we always had at dusk in the old
library at the park. But I think I can resign all this, and go away
alone with papa, for the first time, without making you melancholy by
anything I say or do at parting, if you will only promise that when you
are in any difficulty you will let me be of some use. I think I could
always be of use, because I should always feel an interest in anything
that concerned you. I don't want to intrude on your secret; but if that
secret should ever bring you trouble or distress (which I hope and pray
it may not), I want you to have confidence in my being able to help you,
in some way, through any mischances. Let me go into the country, Basil,
knowing that you can still put trust in me, even though a time should
come when you can put trust in no one else--let me know this: _do_ let
me!"

I gave her the assurance she desired--gave it with my whole heart. She
seemed to have recovered all her old influence over me by the few simple
words she had spoken. The thought crossed my mind, whether I ought not
in common gratitude to confide my secret to her at once, knowing as I
did, that it would be safe in her keeping, however the disclosure might
startle or pain her, I believe I should have told her all, in another
minute, but for a mere accident--the trifling interruption caused by a
knock at the door.

It came from one of the servants. My father desired to see Clara on some
matter connected with their impending departure for the country. She was
unfit enough to obey such a summons at such a time; but with her usual
courage in disciplining her own feelings into subserviency to the
wishes of any one whom she loved, she determined to obey immediately
the message which had been delivered to her. A few moments of silence;
a slight trembling soon repressed; a parting kiss for me; these few
farewell words of encouragement at the door; "Don't grieve about what
papa has said; you have made _me_ feel happy about you, Basil; I will
make _him_ feel happy too," and Clara was gone.

With those few minutes of interruption, the time for the disclosure of
my secret had passed by. As soon as my sister was out of the room, my
former reluctance to trust it to home-keeping returned, and remained
unchanged throughout the whole of the long year's probation which I had
engaged to pass. But this mattered little. As events turned out, if
I had told Clara all, the end would have come in the same way, the
fatality would have been accomplished by the same means.

I went out shortly after my sister had left me. I could give myself to
no occupation at home, for the rest of that night; and I knew that it
would be useless to attempt to sleep just then. As I walked through
the streets, bitter thoughts against my father rose in my mind--bitter
thoughts against his inexorable family pride, which imposed on me the
concealment and secrecy, under the oppression of which I had already
suffered so much--bitter thoughts against those social tyrannies, which
take no account of human sympathy and human love, and which my father
now impersonated, as it were, to my ideas. Gradually these reflections
merged in others that were better. I thought of Clara again; consoling
myself with the belief, that, however my father might receive the news
of my marriage, I might count upon my sister as certain to love my
wife and be kind to her, for my sake. This thought led my heart back to
Margaret--led it gently and happily. I went home, calmed and reassured
again--at least for the rest of the night.

The events of that week, so fraught with importance for the future of my
life, passed with ominous rapidity.

The marriage license was procured; all remaining preliminaries with Mr.
Sherwin were adjusted; I saw Margaret every day, and gave myself up more
and more unreservedly to the charm that she exercised over me, at each
succeeding interview. At home, the bustle of approaching departure; the
farewell visitings; the multitudinous minor arrangements preceding a
journey to the country, seemed to hurry the hours on faster and faster,
as the parting day for Clara, and the marriage day for me, drew near.
Incessant interruptions prevented any more lengthened or private
conversations with my sister; and my father was hardly ever accessible
for more than five minutes together, even to those who specially wished
to speak with him. Nothing arose to embarrass or alarm me now, out of my
intercourse with home.

The day came. I had not slept during the night that preceded it; so I
rose early to look out on the morning.

It is strange how frequently that instinctive belief in omens and
predestinations, which we flippantly term Superstition, asserts its
natural prerogative even over minds trained to repel it, at the moment
of some great event in our lives. I believe this has happened to many
more men than ever confessed it; and it happened to me. At any former
period of my life, I should have laughed at the bare imputation of a
"superstitious" feeling ever having risen in my mind. But now, as I
looked on the sky, and saw the black clouds that overspread the
whole firmament, and the heavy rain that poured down from them, an
irrepressible sinking of the heart came over me. For the last ten days
the sun had shone almost uninterruptedly--with my marriage-day came
the cloud, the mist and the rain. I tried to laugh myself out of the
forebodings which this suggested, and tried in vain.

The departure for the country was to take place at an early hour. We
all breakfasted together; the meal was hurried over comfortlessly and
silently. My father was either writing notes, or examining the steward's
accounts, almost the whole time; and Clara was evidently incapable of
uttering a single word, without risking the loss of her self-possession.
The silence was so complete, while we sat together at the table, that
the fall of the rain outside (which had grown softer and thicker as the
morning advanced), and the quick, quiet tread of the servants, as they
moved about the room, were audible with a painful distinctness. The
oppression of our last family breakfast in London, for that year, had
an influence of wretchedness which I cannot describe--which I can never
forget.

At last the hour of starting came. Clara seemed afraid to trust herself
even to look at me now. She hurriedly drew down her veil the moment the
carriage was announced. My father shook hands with me rather coldly. I
had hoped he would have said something at parting; but he only bade me
farewell in the simplest and shortest manner. I had rather he would have
spoken to me in anger than restrained himself as he did, to what the
commonest forms of courtesy required. There was but one more slight,
after this, that he could cast on me; and he did not spare it. While my
sister was taking leave of me, he waited at the door of the room to
lead her down stairs, as if he knew by intuition that this was the last
little parting attention which I had hoped to show her myself.

Clara whispered (in such low, trembling tones that I could hardly hear
her):

"Think of what you promised in your study, Basil, whenever you think of
_me:_ I will write often."

As she raised her veil for a moment, and kissed me, I felt on my own
cheek the tears that were falling fast over hers. I followed her and
my father down stairs. When they reached the street, she gave me her
hand--it was cold and powerless. I knew that the fortitude she had
promised to show, was giving way, in spite of all her efforts to
preserve it; so I let her hurry into the carriage without detaining
her by any last words. The next instant she and my father were driven
rapidly from the door.

When I re-entered the house, my watch showed me that I had still an hour
to wait, before it was time to go to North Villa.

Between the different emotions produced by my impressions of the scene I
had just passed through, and my anticipations of the scene that was yet
to come, I suffered in that one hour as much mental conflict as most men
suffer in a life. It seemed as if I were living out all my feelings in
this short interval of delay, and must die at heart when it was over.
My restlessness was a torture to me; and yet I could not overcome it. I
wandered through the house from room to room, stopping nowhere. I took
down book after book from the library, opened them to read, and put them
back on the shelves the next instant. Over and over again I walked to
the window to occupy myself with what was passing in the street; and
each time I could not stay there for one minute together. I went into
the picture-gallery, looked along the walls, and yet knew not what I was
looking at. At last I wandered into my father's study--the only room I
had not yet visited.

A portrait of my mother hung over the fireplace: my eyes turned towards
it, and for the first time I came to a long pause. The picture had an
influence that quieted me; but what influence I hardly knew. Perhaps
it led my spirit up to the spirit that had gone from us--perhaps those
secret voices from the unknown world, which only the soul can listen to,
were loosed at that moment, and spoke within me. While I sat looking up
at the portrait, I grew strangely and suddenly calm before it. My memory
flew back to a long illness that I had suffered from, as a child, when
my little cradle-couch was placed by my mother's bedside, and she used
to sit by me in the dull evenings and hush me to sleep. The remembrance
of this brought with it a dread imagining that she might now be hushing
my spirit, from her place among the angels of God. A stillness and awe
crept over me; and I hid my face in my hands.

The striking of the hour from a clock in the room, startled me back to
the outer world. I left the house and went at once to North Villa.

Margaret and her father and mother were in the drawing-room when I
entered it. I saw immediately that neither of the two latter had passed
the morning calmly. The impending event of the day had exercised its
agitating influence over them, as well as over me. Mrs. Sherwin's
face was pale to her very lips: not a word escaped her. Mr. Sherwin
endeavoured to assume the self-possession which he was evidently far
from feeling, by walking briskly up and down the room, and talking
incessantly--asking the most common-place questions, and making the most
common-place jokes. Margaret, to my surprise, showed fewer symptoms of
agitation than either of her parents. Except when the colour came and
went occasionally on her cheek, I could detect no outward evidences of
emotion in her at all.

The church was near at hand. As we proceeded to it, the rain fell
heavily, and the mist of the morning was thickening to a fog. We had
to wait in the vestry for the officiating clergyman. All the gloom and
dampness of the day seemed to be collected in this room--a dark, cold,
melancholy place, with one window which opened on a burial-ground
steaming in the wet. The rain pattered monotonously on the pavement
outside. While Mr. Sherwin exchanged remarks on the weather with the
clerk, (a tall, lean man, arrayed in a black gown), I sat silent, near
Mrs. Sherwin and Margaret, looking with mechanical attention at the
white surplices which hung before me in a half-opened cupboard--at the
bottle of water and tumbler, and the long-shaped books, bound in brown
leather, which were on the table. I was incapable of speaking--incapable
even of thinking--during that interval of expectation.

At length the clergyman arrived, and we went into the church--the
church, with its desolate array of empty pews, and its chill, heavy,
week-day atmosphere. As we ranged ourselves round the altar, a confusion
overspread all my faculties. My sense of the place I was in, and even of
the ceremony in which I took part, grew more and more vague and doubtful
every minute. My attention wandered throughout the whole service. I
stammered and made mistakes in uttering the responses. Once or twice
I detected myself in feeling impatient at the slow progress of the
ceremony--it seemed to be doubly, trebly longer than its usual length.
Mixed up with this impression was another, wild and monstrous as if
it had been produced by a dream--an impression that my father had
discovered my secret, and was watching me from some hidden place in
the church; watching through the service, to denounce and abandon me
publicly at the end. This morbid fancy grew and grew on me until the
termination of the ceremony, until we had left the church and returned
to the vestry once more.

The fees were paid; we wrote our names in the books and on the
certificate; the clergyman quietly wished me happiness; the clerk
solemnly imitated him; the pew-opener smiled and curtseyed; Mr. Sherwin
made congratulatory speeches, kissed his daughter, shook hands with me,
frowned a private rebuke at his wife for shedding tears, and, finally,
led the way with Margaret out of the vestry. The rain was still falling,
as they got into the carriage. The fog was still thickening, as I stood
alone under the portico of the church, and tried to realise to myself
that I was married.

_Married!_ The son of the proudest man in England, the inheritor of a
name written on the roll of Battle Abbey, wedded to a linen-draper's
daughter! And what a marriage! What a condition weighed on it! What a
probation was now to follow it! Why had I consented so easily to Mr.
Sherwin's proposals? Would he not have given way, if I had only been
resolute enough to insist on my own conditions?

How useless to inquire! I had made the engagement and must abide by
it--abide by it cheerfully until the year was over, and she was mine
for ever. This must be my all-sufficing thought for the future. No more
reflections on consequences, no more forebodings about the effect of the
disclosure of my secret on my family--the leap into a new life had
been taken, and, lead where it might, it was a leap that could never be
retraced!

Mr. Sherwin had insisted, with the immovable obstinacy which
characterises all feeble-minded people in the management of their
important affairs, that the first clause in our agreement (the leaving
my wife at the church-door) should be performed to the letter. As a due
compensation for this, I was to dine at North Villa that day. How should
I employ the interval that was to elapse before the dinner-hour?

I went home, and had my horse saddled. I was in no mood for remaining in
an empty house, in no mood for calling on any of my friends--I was fit
for nothing but a gallop through the rain. All my wearing and depressing
emotions of the morning, had now merged into a wild excitement of body
and mind. When the horse was brought round, I saw with delight that the
groom could hardly hold him. "Keep him well in hand, Sir," said the man,
"he's not been out for three days." I was just in the humour for such a
ride as the caution promised me.

And what a ride it was, when I fairly got out of London; and the
afternoon brightening of the foggy atmosphere, showed the smooth, empty
high road before me! The dashing through the rain that still fell; the
feel of the long, powerful, regular stride of the horse under me; the
thrill of that physical sympathy which establishes itself between the
man and the steed; the whirling past carts and waggons, saluted by the
frantic barking of dogs inside them; the flying by roadside alehouses,
with the cheering of boys and half-drunken men sounding for an instant
behind me, then lost in the distance--this was indeed to occupy, to
hurry on, to annihilate the tardy hours of solitude on my wedding day,
exactly as my heart desired!

I got home wet through; but with my body in a glow from the exercise,
with my spirits boiling up at fever heat. When I arrived at North Villa,
the change in my manner astonished every one. At dinner, I required no
pressing now to partake of the sherry which Mr. Sherwin was so fond
of extolling, nor of the port which he brought out afterwards, with a
preliminary account of the vintage-date of the wine, and the price of
each bottle. My spirits, factitious as they were, never flagged. Every
time I looked at Margaret, the sight of her stimulated them afresh. She
seemed pre-occupied, and was unusually silent during dinner; but her
beauty was just that voluptuous beauty which is loveliest in repose. I
had never felt its influence so powerful over me as I felt it then.

In the drawing-room, Margaret's manner grew more familiar, more
confident towards me than it had ever been before. She spoke to me in
warmer tones, looked at me with warmer looks. A hundred little incidents
marked our wedding-evening--trifles that love treasures up--which still
remain in my memory. One among them, at least, will never depart from
it: I first kissed her on that evening.

Mr. Sherwin had gone out of the room; Mrs. Sherwin was at the other end
of it, watering some plants at the window; Margaret, by her father's
desire, was showing me some rare prints. She handed me a magnifying
glass, through which I was to look at a particular part of one of the
engravings, that was considered a master-piece of delicate workmanship.
Instead of applying the magnifying test to the print, for which I cared
nothing, I laughingly applied it to Margaret's face. Her lovely lustrous
black eye seemed to flash into mine through the glass; her warm, quick
breathing played on my cheek--it was but for an instant, and in that
instant I kissed her for the first time. What sensations the kiss gave
me then!--what remembrances it has left me now!

It was one more proof how tenderly, how purely I loved her, that, before
this time, I had feared to take the first love-privilege which I had
longed to assert, and might well have asserted, before. Men may not
understand this; women, I believe, will.

The hour of departure arrived; the inexorable hour which was to separate
me from my wife on my wedding evening. Shall I confess what I felt, on
the first performance of my ill-considered promise to Mr. Sherwin? No: I
kept this a secret from Margaret; I will keep it a secret here.

I took leave of her as hurriedly and abruptly as possible--I could not
trust myself to quit her in any other way. She had contrived to slip
aside into the darkest part of the room, so that I only saw her face
dimly at parting.

I went home at once. When I lay down to sleep--then the ordeal which I
had been unconsciously preparing for myself throughout the day, began
to try me. Every nerve in my body, strung up to the extremest point
of tension since the morning, now at last gave way. I felt my limbs
quivering, till the bed shook under me. I was possessed by a gloom and
horror, caused by no thought, and producing no thought: the thinking
faculty seemed paralysed within me, altogether. The physical and mental
reaction, after the fever and agitation of the day, was so sudden and
severe, that the faintest noise from the street now terrified--yes,
literally terrified me. The whistling of the wind--which had risen since
sunset--made me start up in bed, with my heart throbbing, and my blood
all chill. When no sounds were audible, then I listened for them to
come--listened breathlessly, without daring to move. At last, the agony
of nervous prostration grew more than I could bear--grew worse even than
the child's horror of walking in the darkness, and sleeping alone on the
bed-room floor, which had overcome me, almost from the first moment when
I laid down. I groped my way to the table and lit the candle again; then
wrapped my dressing-gown round me, and sat shuddering near the light, to
watch the weary hours out till morning.

And this was my wedding-night! This was how the day ended which had
begun by my marriage with Margaret Sherwin!




PART II.


I.

AN epoch in my narrative has now arrived. Up to the time of my marriage,
I have appeared as an active agent in the different events I have
described. After that period, and--with one or two exceptional
cases--throughout the whole year of my probation, my position changed
with the change in my life, and became a passive one.

During this interval year, certain events happened, some of which, at
the time, excited my curiosity, but none my apprehension--some affected
me with a temporary disappointment, but none with even a momentary
suspicion. I can now look back on them, as so many timely warnings which
I treated with fatal neglect. It is in these events that the history
of the long year through which I waited to claim my wife as my own,
is really comprised. They marked the lapse of time broadly and
significantly; and to them I must now confine myself, as exclusively as
may be, in the present portion of my narrative.

It will be first necessary, however, that I should describe what was the
nature of my intercourse with Margaret, during the probationary period
which followed our marriage.

Mr. Sherwin's anxiety was to make my visits to North Villa as few as
possible: he evidently feared the consequences of my seeing his daughter
too often. But on this point, I was resolute enough in asserting my own
interests, to overpower any resistance on his part. I required him
to concede to me the right of seeing Margaret every day--leaving all
arrangements of time to depend on his own convenience. After the due
number of objections, he reluctantly acquiesced in my demand. I was
bound by no engagement whatever, limiting the number of my visits to
Margaret; and I let him see at the outset, that I was now ready in my
turn, to impose conditions on him, as he had already imposed them on me.

Accordingly, it was settled that Margaret and I were to meet every day.
I usually saw her in the evening. When any alteration in the hour of my
visit took place, that alteration was produced by the necessity (which
we all recognised alike) of avoiding a meeting with any of Mr. Sherwin's
friends.

Those portions of the day or the evening which I spent with Margaret,
were seldom passed altogether in the Elysian idleness of love. Not
content with only enumerating his daughter's school-accomplishments to
me at our first interview, Mr. Sherwin boastfully referred to them again
and again, on many subsequent occasions; and even obliged Margaret to
display before me, some of her knowledge of languages--which he never
forgot to remind us had been lavishly paid for out of his own pocket. It
was at one of these exhibitions that the idea occurred to me of making
a new pleasure for myself out of Margaret's society, by teaching her
really to appreciate and enjoy the literature which she had evidently
hitherto only studied as a task. My fancy revelled by anticipation in
all the delights of such an employment as this. It would be like acting
the story of Abelard and Heloise over again--reviving all the poetry and
romance in which those immortal love-studies of old had begun, with none
of the guilt and none of the misery that had darkened their end.

I had a definite purpose, besides, in wishing to assume the direction of
Margaret's studies. Whenever the secret of my marriage was revealed, my
pride was concerned in being able to show my wife to every one, as the
all-sufficient excuse for any imprudence I might have committed for her
sake. I was determined that my father, especially, should have no other
argument against her than the one ungracious argument of her birth--that
he should see her, fitted by the beauty of her mind, as well as by all
her other beauties, for the highest station that society could offer.
The thought of this gave me fresh ardour in my project; I assumed my new
duties without delay, and continued them with a happiness which never
once suffered even a momentary decrease.

Of all the pleasures which a man finds in the society of a woman whom he
loves, are there any superior, are there many equal, to the pleasure
of reading out of the same book with her? On what other occasion do the
sweet familiarities of the sweetest of all companionships last so long
without cloying, and pass and re-pass so naturally, so delicately, so
inexhaustibly between you and her? When is your face so constantly close
to hers as it is then?--when can your hair mingle with hers, your cheek
touch hers, your eyes meet hers, so often as they can then? That is, of
all times, the only time when you can breathe with her breath for hours
together; feel every little warming of the colour on her cheek marking
its own changes on the temperature of yours; follow every slight
fluttering of her bosom, every faint gradation of her sighs, as if
_her_ heart was beating, _her_ life glowing, within yours. Surely it is
then--if ever--that we realize, almost revive, in ourselves, the love
of the first two of our race, when angels walked with them on the same
garden paths, and their hearts were pure from the pollution of the fatal
tree!

Evening after evening passed away--one more happily than another--in
what Margaret and I called our lessons. Never were lessons of literature
so like lessons of love We read oftenest the lighter Italian poets--we
studied the poetry of love, written in the language of love. But, as for
the steady, utilitarian purpose I had proposed to myself of practically
improving Margaret's intellect, that was a purpose which insensibly and
deceitfully abandoned me as completely as if it had never existed. The
little serious teaching I tried with her at first, led to very poor
results. Perhaps, the lover interfered too much with the tutor; perhaps,
I had over-estimated the fertility of the faculties I designed to
cultivate--but I cared not, and thought not to inquire where the fault
lay, then. I gave myself up unreservedly to the exquisite sensations
which the mere act of looking on the same page with Margaret procured
for me; and neither detected, nor wished to detect, that it was I
who read the difficult passages, and left only a few even of the very
easiest to be attempted by her.

Happily for my patience under the trial imposed on me by the terms on
which Mr. Sherwin's restrictions, and my promise to obey them, obliged
me to live with Margaret, it was Mrs. Sherwin who was generally selected
to remain in the room with us. By no one could such ungrateful duties of
supervision as those imposed on her, have been more delicately and more
considerately performed.

She always kept far enough away to be out of hearing when we whispered
to each other. We rarely detected her even in looking at us. She had a
way of sitting for hours together in the same part of the room, without
ever changing her position, without occupation of any kind, without
uttering a word, or breathing a sigh. I soon discovered that she was not
lost in thought, at these periods (as I had at first supposed): but lost
in a strange lethargy of body and mind; a comfortless, waking trance,
into which she fell from sheer physical weakness--it was like the
vacancy and feebleness of a first convalescence, after a long illness.
She never changed: never looked better, never worse. I often spoke
to her: I tried hard to show my sympathy, and win her confidence and
friendship. The poor lady was always thankful, always spoke to me
gratefully and kindly, but very briefly. She never told me what were her
sufferings or her sorrows. The story of that lonely, lingering life
was an impenetrable mystery for her own family--for her husband and her
daughter, as well as for me. It was a secret between her and God.

With Mrs. Sherwin as the guardian to watch over Margaret, it may easily
be imagined that I felt none of the heavier oppressions of restraint.
Her presence, as the third person appointed to remain with us, was not
enough to repress the little endearments to which each evening's lesson
gave rise; but was just sufficiently perceptible to invest them with the
character of stolen endearments, and to make them all the more precious
on that very account. Mrs. Sherwin never knew, I never thoroughly knew
myself till later, how much of the secret of my patience under my year's
probation lay in her conduct, while she was sitting in the room with
Margaret and me.

In this solitude where I now write--in the change of life and of all
life's hopes and enjoyments which has come over me--when I look back to
those evenings at North Villa, I shudder as I look. At this moment,
I see the room again--as in a dream--with the little round table, the
reading lamp, and the open books. Margaret and I are sitting together:
her hand is in mine; my heart is with hers. Love, and Youth, and
Beauty--the mortal Trinity of this world's worship--are there, in that
quiet softly-lit room; but not alone. Away in the dim light behind, is a
solitary figure, ever mournful and ever still. It is a woman's form;
but how wasted and how weak!--a woman's face; but how ghastly and
changeless, with those eyes that are vacant, those lips that are
motionless, those cheeks that the blood never tinges, that the freshness
of health and happiness shall never visit again! Woeful, warning figure
of dumb sorrow and patient pain, to fill the background of a picture of
Love, and Beauty, and Youth!

I am straying from my task. Let me return to my narrative: its course
begins to darken before me apace, while I now write.

The partial restraint and embarrassment, caused at first by the strange
terms on which my wife and I were living together, gradually vanished
before the frequency of my visits to North Villa. We soon began to speak
with all the ease, all the unpremeditated frankness of a long intimacy.
Margaret's powers of conversation were generally only employed to lead
me to exert mine. She was never tired of inducing me to speak of my
family. She listened with every appearance of interest, while I
talked of my father, my sister, or my elder brother; but whenever she
questioned me directly about any of them, her inquiries invariably
led away from their characters and dispositions, to their personal
appearance, their every-day habits, their dress, their intercourse with
the gay world, the things they spent their money on, and other topics of
a similar nature.

For instance; she always listened, and listened attentively, to what I
told her of my father's character, and of the principles which regulated
his life. She showed every disposition to profit by the instructions I
gave her beforehand, about how she should treat his peculiarities when
she was introduced to him. But, on all these occasions, what really
interested her most, was to hear how many servants waited on him; how
often he went to Court; how many lords and ladies he knew; what he said
or did to his servants, when they committed mistakes; whether he was
ever angry with his children for asking him for money; and whether he
limited my sister to any given number of dresses in the course of the
year?

Again; whenever our conversation turned on Clara, if I began by
describing her kindness, her gentleness and goodness, her simple winning
manners--I was sure to be led insensibly into a digression about her
height, figure, complexion, and style of dress. The latter subject
especially interested Margaret; she could question me on it, over and
over again. What was Clara's usual morning dress? How did she wear her
hair? What was her evening dress? Did she make a difference between a
dinner party and a ball? What colours did she prefer? What dressmaker
did she employ? Did she wear much jewellery? Which did she like best in
her hair, and which were most fashionable, flowers or pearls? How many
new dresses did she have in a year; and was there more than one maid
especially to attend on her?

Then, again: Had she a carriage of her own? What ladies took care of
her when she went out? Did she like dancing? What were the fashionable
dances at noblemen's houses? Did young ladies in the great world
practise the pianoforte much? How many offers had my sister had? Did she
go to Court, as well as my father? What did she talk about to gentlemen,
and what did gentlemen talk about to her? If she were speaking to a
duke, how often would she say "your Grace" to him? and would a duke get
her a chair, or an ice, and wait on her just as gentlemen without titles
waited on ladies, when they met them in society?

My replies to these and hundreds of other questions like them, were
received by Margaret with the most eager attention. On the favourite
subject of Clara's dresses, my answers were an unending source of
amusement and pleasure to her. She especially enjoyed overcoming the
difficulties of interpreting aright my clumsy, circumlocutory phrases
in attempting to describe shawls, gowns, and bonnets; and taught me the
exact millinery language which I ought to have made use of with an arch
expression of triumph and a burlesque earnestness of manner, that
always enchanted me. At that time, every word she uttered, no matter how
frivolous, was the sweetest of all music to my ears. It was only by the
stern test of after-events that I learnt to analyse her conversation.
Sometimes, when I was away from her, I might think of leading her
girlish curiosity to higher things; but when we met again, the thought
vanished; and it became delight enough for me simply to hear her speak,
without once caring or considering what she spoke of.

Those were the days when I lived happy and unreflecting in the broad
sunshine of joy which love showered round me--my eyes were dazzled; my
mind lay asleep under it. Once or twice, a cloud came threatening, with
chill and shadowy influence; but it passed away, and then the sunshine
returned to me, the same sunshine that it was before.

II.

The first change that passed over the calm uniformity of the life at
North Villa, came in this manner:

One evening, on entering the drawing-room, I missed Mrs. Sherwin; and
found to my great disappointment that her husband was apparently
settled there for the evening. He looked a little flurried, and was more
restless than usual. His first words, as we met, informed me of an event
in which he appeared to take the deepest interest.

"News, my dear sir!" he said. "Mr. Mannion has come back--at least two
days before I expected him!"

At first, I felt inclined to ask who Mr. Mannion was, and what
consequence it could possibly be to me that he had come back. But
immediately afterwards, I remembered that this Mr. Mannion's name had
been mentioned during my first conversation with Mr. Sherwin; and then
I recalled to mind the description I had heard of him, as "confidential
clerk;" as forty years of age; and as an educated man, who had made his
information of some use to Margaret in keeping up the knowledge she had
acquired at school. I knew no more than this about him, and I felt no
curiosity to discover more from Mr. Sherwin.

Margaret and I sat down as usual with our books about us.

There had been something a little hurried and abrupt in her manner
of receiving me, when I came in. When we began to read, her attention
wandered incessantly; she looked round several times towards the door.
Mr. Sherwin walked about the room without intermission, except when
he once paused on his restless course, to tell me that Mr. Mannion was
coming that evening; and that he hoped I should have no objection to be
introduced to a person who was "quite like one of the family, and well
enough read to be sure to please a great reader like me." I asked myself
rather impatiently, who was this Mr. Mannion, that his arrival at his
employer's house should make a sensation? When I whispered something of
this to Margaret, she smiled rather uneasily, and said nothing.

At last the bell was rung. Margaret started a little at the sound.
Mr. Sherwin sat down; composing himself into rather an elaborate
attitude--the door opened, and Mr. Mannion came in.

Mr. Sherwin received his clerk with the assumed superiority of the
master in his words; but his tones and manner flatly contradicted them.
Margaret rose hastily, and then as hastily sat down again, while the
visitor very respectfully took her hand, and made the usual inquiries.
After this, he was introduced to me; and then Margaret was sent away to
summon her mother down stairs. While she was out of the room, there was
nothing to distract my attention from Mr. Mannion. I looked at him with
a curiosity and interest, Which I could hardly account for at first.

If extraordinary regularity of feature were alone sufficient to make
a handsome man, then this confidential clerk of Mr. Sherwin's was
assuredly one of the handsomest men I ever beheld. Viewed separately
from the head (which was rather large, both in front and behind) his
face exhibited, throughout, an almost perfect symmetry of proportion.
His bald forehead was smooth and massive as marble; his high brow and
thin eyelids had the firmness and immobility of marble, and seemed
as cold; his delicately-formed lips, when he was not speaking, closed
habitually, as changelessly still as if no breath of life ever passed
them. There was not a wrinkle or line anywhere on his face. But for the
baldness in front, and the greyness of the hair at the back and sides
of his head, it would have been impossible from his appearance to have
guessed his age, even within ten years of what it really was.

Such was his countenance in point of form; but in that which is the
outward assertion of our immortality--in expression--it was, as I now
beheld it, an utter void. Never had I before seen any human face
which baffled all inquiry like his. No mask could have been made
expressionless enough to resemble it; and yet it looked like a mask.
It told you nothing of his thoughts, when he spoke: nothing of his
disposition, when he was silent. His cold grey eyes gave you no help in
trying to study him. They never varied from the steady, straightforward
look, which was exactly the same for Margaret as it was for me; for Mrs.
Sherwin as for Mr. Sherwin--exactly the same whether he spoke or whether
he listened; whether he talked of indifferent, or of important matters.
Who was he? What was he? His name and calling were poor replies to those
questions. Was he naturally cold and unimpressible at heart? or had some
fierce passion, some terrible sorrow, ravaged the life within him, and
left it dead for ever after? Impossible to conjecture! There was the
impenetrable face before you, wholly inexpressive--so inexpressive that
it did not even look vacant--a mystery for your eyes and your mind to
dwell on--hiding something; but whether vice or virtue you could not
tell.

He was dressed as unobtrusively as possible, entirely in black; and was
rather above the middle height. His manner was the only part of him that
betrayed anything to the observation of others. Viewed in connection
with his station, his demeanour (unobtrusive though it was) proclaimed
itself as above his position in the world. He had all the quietness and
self-possession of a gentleman. He maintained his respectful bearing,
without the slightest appearance of cringing; and displayed a decision,
both in word and action, that could never be mistaken for obstinacy
or over-confidence. Before I had been in his company five minutes, his
manner assured me that he must have descended to the position he now
occupied.

On his introduction to me, he bowed without saying anything. When he
spoke to Mr. Sherwin, his voice was as void of expression as his face:
it was rather low in tone, but singularly distinct in utterance. He
spoke deliberately, but with no emphasis on particular words, and
without hesitation in choosing his terms.

When Mrs. Sherwin came down, I watched her conduct towards him. She
could not repress a slight nervous shrinking, when he approached and
placed a chair for her. In answering his inquiries after her health, she
never once looked at him; but fixed her eyes all the time on Margaret
and me, with a sad, anxious expression, wholly indescribable, which
often recurred to my memory after that day. She always looked more or
less frightened, poor thing, in her husband's presence; but she seemed
positively awe-struck before Mr. Mannion.

In truth, my first observation of this so-called clerk, at North Villa,
was enough to convince me that he was master there--master in his own
quiet, unobtrusive way. That man's character, of whatever elements it
might be composed, was a character that ruled. I could not see this
in his face, or detect it in his words; but I could discover it in the
looks and manners of his employer and his employer's family, as he now
sat at the same table with them. Margaret's eyes avoided his countenance
much less frequently than the eyes of her parents; but then he rarely
looked at her in return--rarely looked at her at all, except when common
courtesy obliged him to do so.

If any one had told me beforehand, that I should suspend my ordinary
evening's occupation with my young wife, for the sake of observing the
very man who had interrupted it, and that man only Mr. Sherwin's
clerk, I should have laughed at the idea. Yet so it was. Our books lay
neglected on the table--neglected by me, perhaps by Margaret too, for
Mr. Mannion.

His conversation, on this occasion at least, baffled all curiosity as
completely as his face. I tried to lead him to talk. He just answered
me, and that was all; speaking with great respect of manner and phrase,
very intelligibly, but very briefly. Mr. Sherwin--after referring to
the business expedition on which he had been absent, for the purchase
of silks at Lyons--asked him some questions about France and the French,
which evidently proceeded from the most ludicrous ignorance both of the
country and the people. Mr. Mannion just set him right; and did no more.
There was not the smallest inflection of sarcasm in his voice, not the
slightest look of sarcasm in his eye, while he spoke. When we talked
among ourselves, he did not join in the conversation; but sat quietly
waiting until he might be pointedly and personally addressed again. At
these times a suspicion crossed my mind that he might really be studying
my character, as I was vainly trying to study his; and I often turned
suddenly round on him, to see whether he was looking at me. This was
never the case. His hard, chill grey eyes were not on me, and not on
Margaret: they rested most frequently on Mrs. Sherwin, who always shrank
before them.

After staying little more than half an hour, he rose to go away. While
Mr. Sherwin was vainly pressing him to remain longer, I walked to the
round table at the other end of the room, on which the book was placed
that Margaret and I had intended to read during the evening. I was
standing by the table when he came to take leave of me. He just glanced
at the volume under my hand, and said in tones too low to be heard at
the other end of the room:

"I hope my arrival has not interrupted any occupation to-night, Sir.
Mr. Sherwin, aware of the interest I must feel in whatever concerns the
family of an employer whom I have served for years, has informed me in
confidence--a confidence which I know how to respect and preserve--of
your marriage with his daughter, and of the peculiar circumstances
under which the marriage has been contracted. I may at least venture to
congratulate the young lady on a change of life which must procure her
happiness, having begun already by procuring the increase of her mental
resources and pleasures." He bowed, and pointed to the book on the
table.

"I believe, Mr. Mannion," I said, "that you have been of great
assistance in laying a foundation for the studies to which I presume you
refer."

"I endeavoured to make myself useful in that way, Sir, as in all others,
when my employer desired it." He bowed again, as he said this; and then
went out, followed by Mr. Sherwin, who held a short colloquy with him in
the hall.

What had he said to me? Only a few civil words, spoken in a very
respectful manner. There had been nothing in his tones, nothing in his
looks, to give any peculiar significance to what he uttered. Still, the
moment his back was turned, I found myself speculating whether his words
contained any hidden meaning; trying to recall something in his voice or
manner which might guide me in discovering the real sense he attached
to what he said. It seemed as if the most powerful whet to my curiosity,
were supplied by my own experience of the impossibility of penetrating
beneath the unassailable surface which this man presented to me.

I questioned Margaret about him. She could not tell me more than I knew
already. He had always been very kind and useful; he was a clever man,
and could talk a great deal sometimes, when he chose; and he had taught
her more of foreign languages and foreign literature in a month, than
she had learned at school in a year. While she was telling me this,
I hardly noticed that she spoke in a very hurried manner, and busied
herself in arranging the books and work that lay on the table. My
attention was more closely directed to Mrs. Sherwin. To my surprise, I
saw her eagerly lean forward while Margaret was speaking, and fix her
eyes on her daughter with a look of penetrating scrutiny, of which I
could never have supposed a person usually so feeble and unenergetic
to be capable. I thought of transferring to her my questionings on the
subject of Mr. Mannion; but at that moment her husband entered the room,
and I addressed myself for further enlightenment to him.

"Aha!"--cried Mr. Sherwin, rubbing his hands triumphantly--"I knew
Mannion would please you. I told you so, my dear Sir, if you remember,
before he came. Curious looking person--isn't he?"

"So curious, that I may safely say I never saw a face in the slightest
degree resembling his in my life. Your clerk, Mr. Sherwin, is a complete
walking mystery that I want to solve. Margaret cannot give me much help,
I am afraid. When you came in, I was about to apply to Mrs. Sherwin for
a little assistance."

"Don't do any such thing! You'll be quite in the wrong box there.
Mrs. S. is as sulky as a bear, whenever Mannion and she are in company
together. Considering her behaviour to him, I wonder he can be so civil
to her as he is."

"What can you tell me about him yourself, Mr. Sherwin?"

"I can tell you there's not a house of business in London has such a
managing man as he is: he's my factotum--my right hand, in short; and
my left too, for the matter of that. He understands my ways of doing
business; and, in fact, carries things out in first-rate style. Why,
he'd be worth his weight in gold, only for the knack he has of keeping
the young men in the shop in order. Poor devils! they don't know how he
does it; but there's a particular look of Mr. Mannion's that's as bad
as transportation and hanging to them, whenever they see it. I'll pledge
you my word of honour he's never had a day's illness, or made a single
mistake, since he's been with me. He's a quiet, steady-going, regular
dragon at his work--he is! And then, so obliging in other things. I've
only got to say to him: 'Here's Margaret at home for the holidays;' or,
'Here's Margaret a little out of sorts, and going to be nursed at home
for the half-year--what's to be done about keeping up her lessons? I
can't pay for a governess (bad lot, governesses!) and school too.'--I've
only got to say that; and up gets Mannion from his books and his
fireside at home, in the evening--which begins to be something, you
know, to a man of his time of life--and turns tutor for me, gratis; and
a first-rate tutor, too! That's what I call having a treasure! And yet,
though he's been with us for years, Mrs. S. there won't take to him!--I
defy her or anybody else to say why, or wherefore!"

"Do you know how he was employed before he came to you?"

"Ah! now you've hit it--that's where you're right in saying he's a
mystery. What he did before I knew him, is more than I can tell--a good
deal more. He came to me with a capital recommendation and security,
from a gentleman whom I knew to be of the highest respectability. I had
a vacancy in the back office, and tried him, and found out what he was
worth, in no time--I flatter myself I've a knack at that with everybody.
Well: before I got used to his curious-looking face, and his quiet
ways, I wanted badly enough to know something about him, and who his
connections were. First, I asked his friend who had recommended
him--the friend wasn't at liberty to answer for anything but his perfect
trustworthiness. Then I asked Mannion himself point-blank about it, one
day. He just told me that he had reasons for keeping his family affairs
to himself--nothing more--but you know the way he has with him; and,
damn it, he put the stopper on me, from that time to this. I wasn't
going to risk losing the best clerk that ever man had, by worrying
him about his secrets. They didn't interfere with business, and didn't
interfere with me; so I put my curiosity in my pocket. I know nothing
about him, but that he's my right-hand man, and the honestest fellow
that ever stood in shoes. He may be the Great Mogul himself, in
disguise, for anything I care! In short, you may be able to find out all
about him, my dear Sir; but I can't."

"There does not seem much chance for me, Mr. Sherwin, after what you
have said."

"Well: I'm not so sure of that--plenty of chances here, you know.
You'll see him often enough: he lives near, and drops in constantly
of evenings. We settle business matters that won't come into business
hours, in my private snuggery up stairs. In fact, he's one of the
family; treat him as such, and get anything out of him you can--the more
the better, as far as regards that. Ah! Mrs. S., you may stare, Ma'am;
but I say again, he's one of the family; may be, he'll be my partner
some of these days--you'll have to get used to him then, whether you
like it or not."

"One more question: is he married or single?"

"Single, to be sure--a regular old bachelor, if ever there was one yet."

During the whole time we had been speaking, Mrs. Sherwin had looked
at us with far more earnestness and attention than I had ever seen her
display before. Even her languid faculties seemed susceptible of active
curiosity on the subject of Mr. Mannion--the more so, perhaps, from her
very dislike of him. Margaret had moved her chair into the background,
while her father was talking; and was apparently little interested
in the topic under discussion. In the first interval of silence, she
complained of headache, and asked leave to retire to her room.

After she left us, I took my departure: for Mr. Sherwin evidently had
nothing more to tell me about his clerk that was worth hearing. On my
way home, Mr. Mannion occupied no small share of my thoughts. The idea
of trying to penetrate the mystery connected with him was an idea
that pleased me; there was a promise of future excitement in it of no
ordinary kind. I determined to have a little private conversation with
Margaret about him; and to make her an ally in my new project. If there
really had been some romance connected with Mr. Mannion's early life--if
that strange and striking face of his was indeed a sealed book which
contained a secret story, what a triumph and a pleasure, if Margaret and
I should succeed in discovering it together!

When I woke the next morning, I could hardly believe that this
tradesman's clerk had so interested my curiosity that he had actually
shared my thoughts with my young wife, during the evening before. And
yet, when I next saw him, he produced exactly the same impression on me
again.

III.

Some weeks passed away; Margaret and I resumed our usual employments and
amusements; the life at North Villa ran on as smoothly and obscurely as
usual--and still I remained ignorant of Mr. Mannion's history and Mr.
Mannion's character. He came frequently to the house, in the evening;
but was generally closeted with Mr. Sherwin, and seldom accepted
his employer's constant invitation to him to join the party in
the drawing-room. At those rare intervals when we did see him, his
appearance and behaviour were exactly the same as on the night when I
had met him for the first time; he spoke just as seldom, and resisted
just as resolutely and respectfully the many attempts made on my part to
lead him into conversation and familiarity. If he had really been trying
to excite my interest, he could not have succeeded more effectually. I
felt towards him much as a man feels in a labyrinth, when every fresh
failure in gaining the centre, only produces fresh obstinacy in renewing
the effort to arrive at it.

From Margaret I gained no sympathy for my newly-aroused curiosity. She
appeared, much to my surprise, to care little about Mr. Mannion; and
always changed the conversation, if it related to him, whenever it
depended upon her to continue the topic or not.

Mrs. Sherwin's conduct was far from resembling her daughter's, when I
spoke to her on the same subject. She always listened intently to what
I said; but her answers were invariably brief, confused, and sometimes
absolutely incomprehensible. It was only after great difficulty that I
induced her to confess her dislike of Mr. Mannion. Whence it proceeded
she could never tell. Did she suspect anything? In answering this
question, she always stammered, trembled, and looked away from me. "How
could she suspect anything? If she did suspect, it would be very wrong
without good reason: but she ought not to suspect, and did not, of
course."

I never obtained any replies from her more intelligible than these.
Attributing their confusion to the nervous agitation which more or less
affected her when she spoke on any subject, I soon ceased making any
efforts to induce her to explain herself; and determined to search for
the clue to Mr. Mannion's character, without seeking assistance from any
one.

Accident at length gave me an opportunity of knowing something of his
habits and opinions; and so far, therefore, of knowing something about
the man himself.

One night, I met him in the hall at North Villa, about to leave the
house at the same time that I was, after a business-consultation in
private with Mr. Sherwin. We went out together. The sky was unusually
black; the night atmosphere unusually oppressive and still. The roll
of distant thunder sounded faint and dreary all about us. The sheet
lightning, flashing quick and low in the horizon, made the dark
firmament look like a thick veil, rising and falling incessantly, over
a heaven of dazzling light behind it. Such few foot-passengers as passed
us, passed running--for heavy, warning drops were falling already from
the sky. We quickened our pace; but before we had walked more than
two hundred yards, the rain came down, furious and drenching; and the
thunder began to peal fearfully, right over our heads.

"My house is close by," said my companion, just as quietly and
deliberately as usual--"pray step in, Sir, until the storm is over."

I followed him down a bye street; he opened a door with his own key; and
the next instant I was sheltered under Mr. Mannion's roof.

He led me at once into a room on the ground floor. The fire was blazing
in the grate; an arm-chair, with a reading easel attached, was placed by
it; the lamp was ready lit; the tea-things were placed on the table;
the dark, thick curtains were drawn close over the window; and, as if to
complete the picture of comfort before me, a large black cat lay on the
rug, basking luxuriously in the heat of the fire. While Mr. Mannion
went out to give some directions, as he said, to his servant, I had
an opportunity of examining the apartment more in detail. To study the
appearance of a man's dwelling-room, is very often nearly equivalent to
studying his own character.

The personal contrast between Mr. Sherwin and his clerk was remarkable
enough, but the contrast between the dimensions and furnishing of the
rooms they lived in, was to the full as extraordinary. The apartment I
now surveyed was less than half the size of the sitting-room at North
Villa. The paper on the walls was of a dark red; the curtains were of
the same colour; the carpet was brown, and if it bore any pattern, that
pattern was too quiet and unpretending to be visible by candlelight. One
wall was entirely occupied by rows of dark mahogany shelves, completely
filled with books, most of them cheap editions of the classical works of
ancient and modern literature. The opposite wall was thickly hung with
engravings in maple-wood frames from the works of modern painters,
English and French. All the minor articles of furniture were of the
plainest and neatest order--even the white china tea-pot and tea-cup
on the table, had neither pattern nor colouring of any kind. What a
contrast was this room to the drawing-room at North Villa!

On his return, Mr. Mannion found me looking at his tea-equipage. "I
am afraid, Sir, I must confess myself an epicure and a prodigal in two
things," he said; "an epicure in tea, and a prodigal (at least for a
person in my situation) in books. However, I receive a liberal salary,
and can satisfy my tastes, such as they are, and save money too. What
can I offer you, Sir?"

Seeing the preparations on the table, I asked for tea. While he was
speaking to me, there was one peculiarity about him that I observed.
Almost all men, when they stand on their own hearths, in their own
homes, instinctively alter more or less from their out-of-door manner:
the stiffest people expand, the coldest thaw a little, by their own
firesides. It was not so with Mr. Mannion. He was exactly the same man
at his own house that he was at Mr. Sherwin's.

There was no need for him to have told me that he was an epicure in tea;
the manner in which he made it would have betrayed that to anybody. He
put in nearly treble the quantity which would generally be considered
sufficient for two persons; and almost immediately after he had
filled the tea-pot with boiling water, began to pour from it into the
cups--thus preserving all the aroma and delicacy of flavour in the herb,
without the alloy of any of the coarser part of its strength. When we
had finished our first cups, there was no pouring of dregs into a basin,
or of fresh water on the leaves. A middle-aged female servant, neat and
quiet, came up and took away the tray, bringing it to us again with the
tea-pot and tea-cups clean and empty, to receive a fresh infusion from
fresh leaves. These were trifles to notice; but I thought of other
tradesmen's clerks who were drinking their gin-and-water jovially, at
home or at a tavern, and found Mr. Mannion a more exasperating mystery
to me than ever.

The conversation between us turned at first on trivial subjects, and
was but ill sustained on my part--there were peculiarities in my present
position which made me thoughtful. Once, our talk ceased altogether;
and, just at that moment, the storm began to rise to its height. Hail
mingled with the rain, and rattled heavily against the window. The
thunder, bursting louder and louder with each successive peal, seemed
to shake the house to its foundations. As I listened to the fearful
crashing and roaring that seemed to fill the whole measureless void of
upper air, and then looked round on the calm, dead-calm face of the man
beside me--without one human emotion of any kind even faintly pictured
on it--I felt strange, unutterable sensations creeping over me; our
silence grew oppressive and sinister; I began to wish, I hardly knew
why, for some third person in the room--for somebody else to look at and
to speak to.

He was the first to resume the conversation. I should have imagined it
impossible for any man, in the midst of such thunder as now raged above
our heads, to think or talk of anything but the storm. And yet, when he
spoke, it was merely on a subject connected with his introduction to
me at North Villa. His attention seemed as far from being attracted or
impressed by the mighty elemental tumult without, as if the tranquillity
of the night were uninvaded by the slightest murmur of sound.

"May I inquire, Sir," he began, "whether I am right in apprehending that
my conduct towards you, since we first met at Mr. Sherwin's house, may
have appeared strange, and even discourteous, in your eyes?"

"In what respect, Mr. Mannion?" I asked, a little startled by the
abruptness of the question.

"I am perfectly sensible, Sir, that you have kindly set me the example,
on many occasions, in trying to better our acquaintance. When such
advances are made by one in your station to one in mine, they ought to
be immediately and gratefully responded to."

Why did he pause? Was he about to tell me he had discovered that my
advances sprang from curiosity to know more about him than he was
willing to reveal? I waited for him to proceed.

"I have only failed," he continued, "in the courtesy and gratitude you
had a right to expect from me, because, knowing how you were situated
with Mr. Sherwin's daughter, I thought any intrusion on my part, while
you were with the young lady, might not be so acceptable as you, Sir, in
your kindness, were willing to lead me to believe."

"Let me assure you," I answered; relieved to find myself unsuspected,
and really impressed by his delicacy--"let me assure you that I fully
appreciate the consideration you have shown--"

Just as the last words passed my lips, the thunder pealed awfully over
the house. I said no more: the sound silenced me.

"As my explanation has satisfied you, Sir," he went on; his clear
and deliberate utterance rising discordantly audible above the long,
retiring roll of the last burst of thunder--"may I feel justified in
speaking on the subject of your present position in my employer's house,
with some freedom? I mean, if I may say so without offence, with the
freedom of a friend."

I begged he would use all the freedom he wished; feeling really desirous
that he should do so, apart from any purpose of leading him to talk
unreservedly on the chance of hearing him talk of himself. The profound
respect of manner and phrase which he had hitherto testified--observed
by a man of his age, to a man of mine--made me feel ill at ease. He was
most probably my equal in acquirements: he had the manners and tastes
of a gentleman, and might have the birth too, for aught I knew to the
contrary. The difference between us was only in our worldly positions.
I had not enough of my father's pride of caste to think that this
difference alone, made it right that a man whose years nearly doubled
mine, whose knowledge perhaps surpassed mine, should speak to me as Mr.
Mannion had spoken up to this time.

"I may tell you then," he resumed, "that while I am anxious to commit no
untimely intrusion on your hours at North Villa, I am at the same time
desirous of being something more than merely inoffensive towards you. I
should wish to be positively useful, as far as I can. In my opinion
Mr. Sherwin has held you to rather a hard engagement--he is trying your
discretion a little too severely I think, at your years and in your
situation. Feeling thus, it is my sincere wish to render what connection
and influence I have with the family, useful in making the probation you
have still to pass through, as easy as possible. I have more means of
doing this, Sir, than you might at first imagine."

His offer took me a little by surprise. I felt with a sort of shame,
that candour and warmth of feeling were what I had not expected from
him. My attention insensibly wandered away from the storm, to attach
itself more and more closely to him, as he went on:

"I am perfectly sensible," he resumed, "that such a proposition as I
now make to you, proceeding from one little better than a stranger, may
cause surprise and even suspicion, at first. I can only explain it, by
asking you to remember that I have known the young lady since childhood;
and that, having assisted in forming her mind and developing her
character, I feel towards her almost as a second father, and am
therefore naturally interested in the gentleman who has chosen her for a
wife."

Was there a tremor at last in that changeless voice, as he spoke?
I thought so; and looked anxiously to catch the answering gleam of
expression, which might now, for the first time, be softening his iron
features, animating the blank stillness of his countenance. If any such
expression had been visible, I was too late to detect it. Just as I
looked at him he stooped down to poke the fire. When he turned towards
me again, his face was the same impenetrable face, his eye the same
hard, steady, inexpressive eye as before.

"Besides," he continued, "a man must have some object in life for his
sympathies to be employed on. I have neither wife nor child; and no near
relations to think of--I have nothing but my routine of business in the
day, and my books here by my lonely fireside, at night. Our life is not
much; but it was made for a little more than this. My former pupil at
North Villa is my pupil no longer. I can't help feeling that it would
be an object in existence for me to occupy myself with her happiness and
yours; to have two young people, in the heyday of youth and first love,
looking towards me occasionally for the promotion of some of their
pleasures--no matter how trifling. All this will seem odd and
incomprehensible to _you._ If you were of my age, Sir, and in my
position, you would understand it."

Was it possible that he could speak thus, without his voice faltering,
or his eye softening in the slightest degree? Yes: I looked at him and
listened to him intently; but here was not the faintest change in his
face or his tones--there was nothing to show outwardly whether he
felt what he said, or whether he did not. His words had painted such a
picture of forlornness on my mind, that I had mechanically half raised
my hand to take his, while he was addressing me; but the sight of him
when he ceased, checked the impulse almost as soon as it was formed.
He did not appear to have noticed either my involuntary gesture, or its
immediate repression; and went on speaking.

"I have said perhaps more than I ought," he resumed. "If I have not
succeeded in making you understand my explanation as I could wish, we
will change the subject, and not return to it again, until you have
known me for a much longer time."

"On no account change the subject, Mr. Mannion," I said; unwilling
to let it be implied that I would not put trust in him. "I am deeply
sensible of the kindness of your offer, and the interest you take in
Margaret and me. We shall both, I am sure, accept your good offices--"

I stopped. The storm had decreased a little in violence: but my
attention was now struck by the wind, which had risen as the thunder and
rain had partially lulled. How drearily it was moaning down the street!
It seemed, at that moment, to be wailing over _me;_ to be wailing over
_him;_ to be wailing over all mortal things! The strange sensations I
then felt, moved me to listen in silence; but I checked them, and spoke
again.

"If I have not answered you as I should," I continued, "you must
attribute it partly to the storm, which I confess rather discomposes
my ideas; and partly to a little surprise--a very foolish surprise, I
own--that you should still be able to feel so strong a sympathy with
interests which are generally only considered of importance to the
young."

"It is only in their sympathies, that men of my years can, and do,
live their youth over again," he said. "You may be surprised to hear a
tradesman's clerk talk in this manner; but I was not always what I am
now. I have gathered knowledge, and suffered in the gathering. I have
grown old before my time--my forty years are like the fifty of other
men--"

My heart beat quicker--was he, unasked, about to disclose the mystery
which evidently hung over his early life? No: he dropped the subject
at once, when he continued. I longed to ask him to resume it, but could
not. I feared the same repulse which Mr. Sherwin had received: and
remained silent.

"What I was," he proceeded, "matters little; the question is what can
I do for you? Any aid I can give, may be poor enough; but it may be of
some use notwithstanding. For instance, the other day, if I mistake not,
you were a little hurt at Mr. Sherwin's taking his daughter to a party
to which the family had been invited. This was very natural. You
could not be there to watch over her in your real character, without
disclosing a secret which must be kept safe; and you could not know
what young men she might meet, who would imagine her to be Miss Sherwin
still, and would regulate their conduct accordingly. Now, I think I
might be of use here. I have some influence--perhaps in strict truth I
ought to say great influence--with my employer; and, if you wished it,
I would use that influence to back yours, in inducing him to forego, for
the future, any intention of taking his daughter into society, except
when you desire it. Again: I think I am not wrong in assuming that you
infinitely prefer the company of Mrs. Sherwin to that of Mr. Sherwin,
during your interviews with the young lady?"

How he had found that out? At any rate, he was right; and I told him so
candidly.

"The preference is on many accounts a very natural one," he said; "but
if you suffered it to appear to Mr. Sherwin, it might, for obvious
reasons, produce a most unfavourable effect. I might interfere in the
matter, however, without suspicion; I should have many opportunities of
keeping him away from the room, in the evening, which I could use if you
wished it. And more than that, if you wanted longer and more frequent
communication with North Villa than you now enjoy, I might be able to
effect this also. I do not mention what I could do in these, and in
other matters, in any disparagement, Sir, of the influence which you
have with Mr. Sherwin, in your own right; but because I know that in
what concerns your intercourse with his daughter, my employer _has_
asked, and _will_ ask my advice, from the habit of doing so in other
things. I have hitherto declined giving him this advice in your affairs;
but I will give it, and in your favour and the young lady's, if you and
she choose."

I thanked him--but not in such warm terms as I should have employed, if
I had seen even the faintest smile on his face, or had heard any change
in his steady, deliberate tones, as he spoke. While his words attracted,
his immovable looks repelled me, in spite of myself.

"I must again beg you"--he proceeded--"to remember what I have already
said, in your estimate of the motives of my offer. If I still appear to
be interfering officiously in your affairs, you have only to think that
I have presumed impertinently on the freedom you have allowed me, and
to treat me no longer on the terms of to-night. I shall not complain of
your conduct, and shall try hard not to consider you unjust to me, if
you do."

Such an appeal as this was not to be resisted: I answered him at once
and unreservedly. What right had I to draw bad inferences from a man's
face, voice, and manner, merely because they impressed me, as out of the
common? Did I know how much share the influence of natural infirmity,
or the outward traces of unknown sorrow and suffering, might have had in
producing the external peculiarities which had struck me? He would
have every right to upbraid me as unjust--and that in the strongest
terms--unless I spoke out fairly in reply.

"I am quite incapable, Mr. Mannion," I said, "of viewing your offer with
any other than grateful feelings. You will find I shall prove this by
employing your good offices for Margaret and myself in perfect faith,
and sooner perhaps than you may imagine."

He bowed and said a few cordial words, which I heard but
imperfectly--for, as I addressed him, a blast of wind fiercer than
usual, rushed down the street, shaking the window shutter violently as
it passed, and dying away in a low, melancholy, dirging swell, like a
spirit-cry of lamentation and despair.

When he spoke again, after a momentary silence, it was to make some
change in the conversation. He talked of Margaret--dwelling in terms of
high praise rather on her moral than on her personal qualities. He
spoke of Mr. Sherwin, referring to solid and attractive points in
his character which I had not detected. What he said of Mrs. Sherwin
appeared to be equally dictated by compassion and respect--he even
hinted at her coolness towards himself, considerately attributing it
to the involuntary caprice of settled nervousness and ill-health. His
language, in touching on these subjects, was just as unaffected, just as
devoid of any peculiarities, as I had hitherto found it when occupied by
other topics.

It was growing late. The thunder still rumbled at long intervals, with
a dull, distant sound; and the wind showed no symptoms of subsiding. But
the pattering of the rain against the window ceased to be audible. There
was little excuse for staying longer; and I wished to find none. I had
acquired quite knowledge enough of Mr. Mannion to assure me, that any
attempt on my part at extracting from him, in spite of his reserve,
the secrets which might be connected with his early life, would prove
perfectly fruitless. If I must judge him at all, I must judge him by
the experience of the present, and not by the history of the past. I had
heard good, and good only, of him from the shrewd master who knew him
best, and had tried him longest. He had shown the greatest delicacy
towards my feelings, and the strongest desire to do me service--it would
be a mean return for those acts of courtesy, to let curiosity tempt me
to pry into his private affairs.

I rose to go. He made no effort to detain me; but, after unbarring the
shutter and looking out of the window, simply remarked that the rain had
almost entirely ceased, and that my umbrella would be quite sufficient
protection against all that remained. He followed me into the passage to
light me out. As I turned round upon his door-step to thank him for his
hospitality, and to bid him good night, the thought came across me, that
my manner must have appeared cold and repelling to him--especially when
he was offering his services to my acceptance. If I had really produced
this impression, he was my inferior in station, and it would be cruel to
leave it. I tried to set myself right at parting.

"Let me assure you again," I said, "that it will not be my fault if
Margaret and I do not thankfully employ your good offices, as the good
offices of a well-wisher and a friend."

The lightning was still in the sky, though it only appeared at long
intervals. Strangely enough, at the moment when I addressed him, a flash
came, and seemed to pass right over his face. It gave such a hideously
livid hue, such a spectral look of ghastliness and distortion to his
features, that he absolutely seemed to be glaring and grinning on me
like a fiend, in the one instant of its duration. For the moment, it
required all my knowledge of the settled calmness of his countenance,
to convince me that my eyes must have been only dazzled by an optical
illusion produced by the lightning.

When the darkness had come again, I bade him good night--first
mechanically repeating what I had just said, almost in the same words.

I walked home thoughtful. That night had given me much matter to think
of.

IV.

About the time of my introduction to Mr. Mannion--or, to speak more
correctly, both before and after that period--certain peculiarities in
Margaret's character and conduct, which came to my knowledge by pure
accident, gave me a little uneasiness and even a little displeasure.
Neither of these feelings lasted very long, it is true; for the
incidents which gave rise to them were of a trifling nature in
themselves. While I now write, however, these domestic occurrences are
all vividly present to my recollection. I will mention two of them as
instances. Subsequent events, yet to be related, will show that they are
not out of place at this part of my narrative.

One lovely autumn morning, I called rather before the appointed time
at North Villa. As the servant opened the front garden-gate, the idea
occurred to me of giving Margaret a surprise, by entering the drawing
room unexpectedly, with a nosegay gathered for her from her own
flower-bed. Telling the servant not to announce me, I went round to the
back garden, by a gate which opened into it at the side of the house.
The progress of my flower-gathering led me on to the lawn under one of
the drawing-room windows, which was left a little open. The voices of my
wife and her mother reached me from the room. It was this part of their
conversation which I unintentionally overheard:--

"I tell you, mamma, I must and will have the dress, whether papa chooses
or not."

This was spoken loudly and resolutely; in such tones as I had never
heard from Margaret before.

"Pray--pray, my dear, don't talk so," answered the weak, faltering voice
of Mrs. Sherwin; "you know you have had more than your year's allowance
of dresses already."

"I won't be allowanced. _His_ sister isn't allowanced: why should I be?"

"My dear love, surely there is some difference--"

"I'm sure there isn't, now I am his wife. I shall ride some day in my
carriage, just as his sister does. _He_ gives me my way in everything;
and so ought you."

"It isn't _me,_ Margaret: if I could do anything, I'm sure I would; but
I really couldn't ask your papa for another new dress, after his having
given you so many this year, already."

"That's the way it always is with you, mamma--you can't do this, and
you can't do that--you are so excessively tiresome! But I will have the
dress, I'm determined. He says his sister wears light blue crape of an
evening; and I'll have light blue crape, too--see if I don't! I'll get
it somehow from the shop, myself. Papa never takes any notice, I'm sure,
what I have on; and he needn't find out anything about what's gone out
of the shop, until they 'take stock,' or whatever it is he calls it. And
then, if he flies into one of his passions--"

"My dear! my dear! you really ought not to talk so of your papa--it is
very wrong, Margaret, indeed--what would Mr. Basil say if he heard you?"

I determined to go in at once, and tell Margaret that I had heard
her--resolving, at the same time, to exert some firmness, and
remonstrate with her, for her own good, on much of what she had said,
which had really surprised and displeased me. On my unexpected entrance,
Mrs. Sherwin started, and looked more timid than ever. Margaret,
however, came forward to meet me with her wonted smile, and held out
her hand with her wonted grace. I said nothing until we had got into our
accustomed corner, and were talking together in whispers as usual.
Then I began my remonstrance--very tenderly, and in the lowest possible
tones. She took precisely the right way to stop me in full career,
in spite of all my resolution. Her beautiful eyes filled with tears
directly--the first I had ever seen in them: caused, too, by what I had
said!--and she murmured a few plaintive words about the cruelty of being
angry with her for only wanting to please me by being dressed as my
sister was, which upset every intention I had formed but the moment
before. I involuntarily devoted myself to soothing her for the rest
of the morning. Need I say how the matter ended? I never mentioned the
subject more; and I made her a present of the new dress.

Some weeks after the little home-breeze which I have just related, had
died away into a perfect calm, I was accidentally witness of another
domestic dilemma in which Margaret bore a principal share. On this
occasion, as I walked up to the house (in the morning again), I found
the front door open. A pail was on the steps--the servant had evidently
been washing them, had been interrupted in her work, and had forgotten
to close the door when she left it. The nature of the interruption I
soon discovered as I entered the hall.

"For God's sake, Miss!" cried the housemaid's voice, from the
dining-room, "for God's sake, put down the poker! Missus will be here
directly; and it's _her_ cat!"

"I'll kill the vile brute! I'll kill the hateful cat! I don't care whose
it is!--my poor dear, dear, dear bird!" The voice was Margaret's. At
first, its tones were tones of fury; they were afterwards broken by
hysterical sobs.

"Poor thing," continued the servant, soothingly, "I'm sorry for it, and
for you too, Miss! But, oh! do please to remember it was you left the
cage on the table, in the cat's reach--"

"Hold your tongue, you wretch! How dare you hold me?--let me go!"

"Oh, you mustn't--you mustn't indeed! It's missus's cat, recollect--poor
missus's, who's always ill, and hasn't got nothing else to amuse her."

"I don't care! The cat has killed my bird, and the cat shall be killed
for doing it!--it shall!--it shall!!--it shall!!! I'll call in the first
boy from the street to catch it, and hang it! Let me go! I _will_ go!"

"I'll let the cat go first, Miss, as sure as my name's Susan!"

The next instant, the door was suddenly opened, and puss sprang past
me, out of harm's way, closely followed by the servant, who stared
breathless and aghast at seeing me in the hall. I went into the
dining-room immediately.

On the floor lay a bird-cage, with the poor canary dead inside (it was
the same canary that I had seen my wife playing with, on the evening of
the day when I first met her). The bird's head had been nearly dragged
through the bent wires of the cage, by the murderous claws of the cat.
Near the fire-place, with the poker she had just dropped on the floor by
her side, stood Margaret. Never had I seen her look so beautiful as
she now appeared, in the fury of passion which possessed her. Her
large black eyes were flashing grandly through her tears--the blood was
glowing crimson in her cheeks--her lips were parted as she gasped for
breath. One of her hands was clenched, and rested on the mantel-piece;
the other was pressed tight over her bosom, with the fingers
convulsively clasping her dress. Grieved as I was at the paroxysm of
passion into which she had allowed herself to be betrayed, I could not
repress an involuntary feeling of admiration when my eyes first rested
on her. Even anger itself looked lovely in that lovely face!

She never moved when she saw me. As I approached her, she dropped down
on her knees by the cage, sobbing with frightful violence, and pouring
forth a perfect torrent of ejaculations of vengeance against the cat.
Mrs. Sherwin came down; and by her total want of tact and presence
of mind, made matters worse. In brief, the scene ended by a fit of
hysterics.

To speak to Margaret on that day, as I wished to speak to her, was
impossible. To approach the subject of the canary's death afterwards,
was useless. If I only hinted in the gentlest way, and with the
strongest sympathy for the loss of the bird, at the distress and
astonishment she had caused me by the extremities to which she had
allowed her passion to hurry her, a burst of tears was sure to be her
only reply--just the reply, of all others, which was best calculated to
silence me. If I had been her husband in fact, as well as in name; if I
had been her father, her brother, or her friend, I should have let
her first emotions have their way, and then have expostulated with her
afterwards. But I was her lover still; and, to my eyes, Margaret's tears
made virtues even of Margaret's faults.



Such occurrences as these, happening but at rare intervals, formed
the only interruptions to the generally even and happy tenour of our
intercourse. Weeks and weeks glided away, and not a hasty or a hard word
passed between us. Neither, after one preliminary difference had been
adjusted, did any subsequent disagreement take place between Mr. Sherwin
and me. This last element in the domestic tranquillity of North Villa
was, however, less attributable to his forbearance, or to mine, than to
the private interference of Mr. Mannion.

For some days after my interview with the managing clerk, at his
own house, I had abstained from calling his offered services into
requisition. I was not conscious of any reason for this course of
conduct. All that had been said, all that had happened during the night
of the storm, had produced a powerful, though vague impression on me.
Strange as it may appear, I could not determine whether my brief but
extraordinary experience of my new friend had attracted me towards him,
or repelled me from him. I felt an unwillingness to lay myself under an
obligation to him, which was not the result of pride, or false delicacy,
or sullenness, or suspicion--it was an inexplicable unwillingness, that
sprang from the fear of encountering some heavy responsibility; but of
what nature I could not imagine. I delayed and held back, by instinct;
and, on his side, Mr. Mannion made no further advances. He maintained
the same manner, and continued the same habits, during his intercourse
with the family at North Villa, which I had observed as characterising
him before I took shelter from the storm, in his house. He never
referred again to the conversation of that evening, when we now met.

Margaret's behaviour, when I mentioned to her Mr. Mannion's willingness
to be useful to us both, rather increased than diminished the vague
uncertainties which perplexed me, on the subject of accepting or
rejecting his overtures.

I could not induce her to show the smallest interest about him. Neither
his house, his personal appearance, his peculiar habits, or his secrecy
in relation to his early life--nothing, in short, connected with
him--appeared to excite her attention or curiosity in the slightest
degree. On the evening of his return from the continent, she had
certainly shown some symptoms of interest in his arrival at North Villa,
and some appearance of attention to him, when he joined our party. Now,
she seemed completely and incomprehensibly changed on this point. Her
manner became almost petulant, if I persisted long in making Mr. Mannion
a topic of conversation--it was as if she resented his sharing my
thoughts with her in the slightest degree. As to the difficult question
whether we should engage him in our interests or not, that was a matter
which she always seemed to think too trifling to be discussed between us
at all.

Ere long, however, circumstances decided me as to the course I should
take with Mr. Mannion.

A ball was given by one of Mr. Sherwin's rich commercial friends,
to which he announced his intention of taking Margaret. Besides the
jealousy which I felt--naturally enough, in my peculiar situation--at
the idea of my wife going out as Miss Sherwin, and dancing in the
character of a young unmarried lady with any young gentlemen who were
introduced to her, I had also the strongest possible desire to keep
Margaret out of the society of her own class, until my year's probation
was over, and I could hope to instal her permanently in the society of
my class. I had privately mentioned to her my ideas on this subject, and
found that she fully agreed with them. She was not wanting in ambition
to ascend to the highest degree in the social scale; and had already
begun to look with indifference on the society which was offered to her
by those in her own rank.

To Mr. Sherwin I could confide nothing of this. I could only object,
generally, to his taking Margaret out, when neither she nor I desired
it. He declared that she liked parties--that all girls did--that she
only pretended to dislike them, to please me--and that he had made no
engagement to keep her moping at home a whole year on my account. In the
case of the particular ball now under discussion, he was determined to
have his own way; and he bluntly told me as much.

Irritated by his obstinacy and gross want of consideration for my
defenceless position, I forgot all doubts and scruples; and privately
applied to Mr. Mannion to exert the influence which he had promised to
use, if I wished it, in my behalf.

The result was as immediate as it was conclusive. The very next evening,
Mr. Sherwin came to us with a note which he had just written, and
informed me that it was an excuse for Margaret's non-appearance at the
ball. He never mentioned Mr. Mannion's name, but sulkily and shortly
said, that he had reconsidered the matter, and had altered his first
decision for reasons of his own.

Having once taken a first step in the new direction, I soon followed it
up, without hesitation, by taking many others. Whenever I wished to call
oftener than once a-day at North Villa, I had but to tell Mr. Mannion,
and the next morning I found the permission immediately accorded to me
by the ruling power. The same secret machinery enabled me to regulate
Mr. Sherwin's incomings and outgoings, just as I chose, when Margaret
and I were together in the evening. I could feel almost certain, now,
of never having any one with us, but Mrs. Sherwin, unless I desired
it--which, as may be easily imagined, was seldom enough.

My new ally's ready interference for my advantage was exerted quietly,
easily, and as a matter of course. I never knew how, or when, he
influenced his employer, and Mr. Sherwin on his part, never breathed a
word of that influence to me. He accorded any extra privilege I might
demand, as if he acted entirely under his own will, little suspecting
how well I knew what was the real motive power which directed him.

I was the more easily reconciled to employing the services of Mr.
Mannion, by the great delicacy with which he performed them. He did
not allow me to think--he did not appear to think himself--that he was
obliging me in the smallest degree. He affected no sudden intimacy with
me; his manners never altered; he still persisted in not joining us in
the evening, but at my express invitation; and if I referred in any way
to the advantages I derived from his devotion to my interests, he always
replied in his brief undemonstrative way, that he considered himself the
favoured person, in being permitted to make his services of some use to
Margaret and me.

I had told Mr. Mannion, when I was leaving him on the night of the
storm, that I would treat his offers as the offers of a friend; and I
had now made good my words, much sooner and much more unreservedly than
I had ever intended, when we parted at his own house-door.

V.

The autumn was now over; the winter--a cold, gloomy winter--had fairly
come. Five months had nearly elapsed since Clara and my father had
departed for the country. What communication did I hold with them,
during that interval?

No personal communication with either--written communication only with
my sister. Clara's letters to me were frequent. They studiously avoided
anything like a reproach for my long absence; and were confined almost
exclusively to such details of country life as the writer thought likely
to interest me. Their tone was as affectionate--nay, more affectionate,
if possible--than usual; but Clara's gaiety and quiet humour, as a
correspondent, were gone. My conscience taught me only too easily and
too plainly how to account for this change--my conscience told me
who had altered the tone of my sister's letters, by altering all the
favourite purposes and favourite pleasures of her country life.

I was selfishly enough devoted to my own passions and my own interests,
at this period of my life; but I was not so totally dead to every one
of the influences which had guided me since childhood, as to lose
all thought of Clara and my father, and the ancient house that was
associated with my earliest and happiest recollections. Sometimes, even
in Margaret's beloved presence, a thought of Clara put away from me
all other thoughts. And, sometimes, in the lonely London house, I
dreamed--with the strangest sleeping oblivion of my marriage, and of all
the new interests which it had crowded into my life--of country rides
with my sister, and of quiet conversations in the old gothic library
at the Hall. Under such influences as these, I twice resolved to make
amends for my long absence, by joining my father and my sister in the
country, even though it were only for a few days--and, each time, I
failed in my resolution. On the second occasion, I had actually mustered
firmness enough to get as far as the railway station; and only at the
last moment faltered and hung back. The struggle that it cost me to
part for any length of time from Margaret, I had overcome; but the
apprehension, as vivid as it was vague, that something--I knew not
what--might happen to her in my absence, turned my steps backward at
starting. I felt heartily ashamed of my own weakness; but I yielded to
it nevertheless.

At last, a letter arrived from Clara, containing a summons to the
country, which I could not disobey.

"I have never asked you," she wrote, "to come and see us for my sake;
for I would not interfere with any of your interests or any of your
plans; but I now ask you to come here for your own sake--just for one
week, and no more, unless you like to remain longer. You remember papa
telling you, in your room in London, that he believed you kept some
secret from him. I am afraid this is preying on his mind: your long
absence is making him uneasy about you. He does not say so; but he never
sends any message, when I write; and if I speak about you, he always
changes the subject directly. Pray come here, and show yourself for a
few days--no questions will be asked, you may be sure. It will do so
much good; and will prevent--what I hope and pray may never happen--a
serious estrangement between papa and you. Recollect, Basil, in a month
or six weeks we shall come back to town; and then the opportunity will
be gone."

As I read these lines, I determined to start for the country at once,
while the effect of them was still fresh on my mind. Margaret, when
I took leave of her, only said that she should like to be going with
me--"it would be such a sight for her, to see a grand country house like
ours!" Mr. Sherwin laughed as coarsely as usual, at the difficulties
I made about only leaving his daughter for a week. Mrs. Sherwin very
earnestly, and very inaccountably as I then thought, recommended me not
to be away any longer than I had proposed. Mr. Mannion privately assured
me, that I might depend on him in my absence from North Villa, exactly
as I had always depended on him, during my presence there. It was
strange that his parting words should be the only words which soothed
and satisfied me on taking leave of London.

The winter afternoon was growing dim with the evening darkness, as I
drove up to the Hall. Snow on the ground, in the country, has always
a cheerful look to me. I could have wished to see it on the day of my
arrival at home; but there had been a thaw for the last week--mud and
water were all about me--a drizzling rain was falling--a raw, damp wind
was blowing--a fog was rising, as the evening stole on--and the ancient
leafless elms in the park avenue groaned and creaked above my head
drearily, as I approached the house.

My father received me with more ceremony than I liked. I had known, from
a boy, what it meant when he chose to be only polite to his own son.
What construction he had put on my long absence and my persistence in
keeping my secret from him, I could not tell; but it was evident that
I had lost my usual place in his estimation, and lost it past regaining
merely by a week's visit. The estrangement between us, which my sister
had feared, had begun already.

I had been chilled by the desolate aspect of nature, as I approached the
Hall; my father's reception of me, when I entered the house, increased
the comfortless and melancholy impressions produced on my mind; it
required all the affectionate warmth of Clara's welcome, all the
pleasure of hearing her whisper her thanks, as she kissed me, for my
readiness in following her advice, to restore my equanimity. But even
then, when the first hurry and excitement of meeting had passed away, in
spite of her kind words and looks, there was something in her face which
depressed me. She seemed thinner, and her constitutional paleness was
more marked than usual. Cares and anxieties had evidently oppressed
her--was I the cause of them?

The dinner that evening proceeded very heavily and gloomily. My father
only talked on general and commonplace topics, as if a mere acquaintance
had been present. When my sister left us, he too quitted the room, to
see some one who had arrived on business. I had no heart for the company
of the wine bottles, so I followed Clara.

At first, we only spoke of her occupations since she had been in the
country; I was unwilling, and she forbore, to touch on my long stay in
London, or on my father's evident displeasure at my protracted absence.
There was a little restraint between us, which neither had the courage
to break through. Before long, however, an accident, trifling enough
in itself, obliged me to be more candid; and enabled her to speak
unreservedly on the subject nearest to her heart.

I was seated opposite to Clara, at the fire-place, and was playing
with a favourite dog which had followed me into the room. While I was
stooping towards the animal, a locket containing some of Margaret's
hair, fell out of its place in my waistcoat, and swung towards my sister
by the string which attached it round my neck. I instantly hid it again;
but not before Clara, with a woman's quickness, had detected the trinket
as something new, and drawn the right inference, as to the use to which
I devoted it.

An expression of surprise and pleasure passed over her face; she rose,
and putting her hands on my shoulders, as if to keep me still in the
place I occupied, looked at me intently.

"Basil!" she exclaimed, "if that is all the secret you have been keeping
from us, how glad I am! When I see a new locket drop out of my brother's
waistcoat--" she continued, observing that I was too confused to
speak--"and when I find him colouring very deeply, and hiding it again
in a great hurry, I should be no true woman if I did not make my own
discoveries, and begin to talk about them directly."

I made an effort--a very poor one--to laugh the thing off. Her
expression grew serious and thoughtful, while she still fixed her eyes
on me. She took my hand gently, and whispered in my ear: "Are you going
to be married, Basil? Shall I love my new sister almost as much as I
love you?"

At that moment the servant came in with tea. The interruption gave me
a minute for consideration. Should I tell her all? Impulse answered,
yes--reflection, no. If I disclosed my real situation, I knew that I
must introduce Clara to Margaret. This would necessitate taking her
privately to Mr. Sherwin's house, and exposing to her the humiliating
terms of dependence and prohibition on which I lived with my own wife. A
strange medley of feelings, in which pride was uppermost, forbade me
to do that. Then again, to involve my sister in my secret, would be to
involve her with me in any consequences which might be produced by
its disclosure to my father. The mere idea of making her a partaker in
responsibilities which I alone ought to bear, was not to be entertained
for a moment. As soon as we were left together again, I said to her:

"Will you not think the worse of me, Clara, if I leave you to draw your
own conclusions from what you have seen? only asking you to keep strict
silence on the subject to every one. I can't speak yet, love, as I
wish to speak: you will know why, some day, and say that my reserve was
right. In the meantime, can you be satisfied with the assurance, that
when the time comes for making my secret known, you shall be the first
to know it--the first I put trust in?"

"As you have not starved my curiosity altogether," said Clara, smiling,
"but have given it a little hope to feed on for the present, I think,
woman though I am, I can promise all you wish. Seriously, Basil," she
continued, "that telltale locket of yours has so pleasantly brightened
some very gloomy thoughts of mine about you, that I can now live happily
on expectation, without once mentioning your secret again, till you give
me leave to do so."

Here my father entered the room, and we said no more. His manner towards
me had not altered since dinner; and it remained the same during the
week of my stay at the Hall. One morning, when we were alone, I took
courage, and determined to try the dangerous ground a little, with a
view towards my guidance for the future; but I had no sooner begun by
some reference to my stay in London, and some apology for it, than he
stopped me at once.

"I told you," he said, gravely and coldly, "some months ago, that I had
too much faith in your honour to intrude on affairs which you choose
to keep private. Until you have perfect confidence in me, and can speak
with complete candour, I will hear nothing. You have not that confidence
now--you speak hesitatingly--your eyes do not meet mine fairly and
boldly. I tell you again, I will hear nothing which begins with such
common-place excuses as you have just addressed to me. Excuses lead to
prevarications, and prevarications to--what I will not insult you by
imagining possible in _your_ case. You are of age, and must know your
own responsibilities and mine. Choose at once, between saying nothing,
and saying all."

He waited a moment after he had spoken, and then quitted the room. If
he could only have known how I suffered, at that instant, under the base
necessities of concealment, I might have confessed everything; and he
must have pitied, though he might not have forgiven me.

This was my first and last attempt at venturing towards the revelation
of my secret to my father, by hints and half-admissions. As to boldly
confessing it, I persuaded myself into a sophistical conviction that
such a course could do no good, but might do much harm. When the wedded
happiness I had already waited for, and was to wait for still, through
so many months, came at last, was it not best to enjoy my married
life in convenient secrecy, as long as I could?--best, to abstain from
disclosing my secret to my father, until necessity absolutely obliged,
or circumstances absolutely invited me to do so? My inclinations
conveniently decided the question in the affirmative; and a decision of
any kind, right or wrong, was enough to tranquillise me at that time.

So far as my father was concerned, my journey to the country did no
good. I might have returned to London the day after my arrival at the
Hall, without altering his opinion of me--but I stayed the whole week
nevertheless, for Clara's sake.

In spite of the pleasure afforded by my sister's society, my visit was a
painful one. The selfish longing to be back with Margaret, which I could
not wholly repress; my father's coldness; and the winter gloom and rain
which confined us almost incessantly within doors, all tended in their
different degrees to prevent my living at ease in the Hall. But, besides
these causes of embarrassment, I had the additional mortification of
feeling, for the first time, as a stranger in my own home.

Nothing in the house looked to me what it used to look in former years.
The rooms, the old servants, the walks and views, the domestic animals,
all appeared to have altered, or to have lost something, since I had
seen them last. Particular rooms that I had once been fond of occupying,
were favourites no longer: particular habits that I had hitherto always
practised in the country, I could only succeed in resuming by an effort
which vexed and fretted me. It was as if my life had run into a new
channel since my last autumn and winter at the Hall, and now refused to
flow back at my bidding into its old course. Home seemed home no longer,
except in name.

As soon as the week was over, my father and I parted exactly as we had
met. When I took leave of Clara, she refrained from making any allusion
to the shortness of my stay; and merely said that we should soon meet
again in London. She evidently saw that my visit had weighed a little
on my spirits, and was determined to give to our short farewell as happy
and hopeful a character as possible. We now thoroughly understood each
other; and that was some consolation on leaving her.

Immediately on my return to London I repaired to North Villa.

Nothing, I was told, had happened in my absence, but I remarked some
change in Margaret. She looked pale and nervous, and was more silent
than I had ever known her to be before, when we met. She accounted
for this, in answer to my inquiries, by saying that confinement to the
house, in consequence of the raw, wintry weather, had a little affected
her; and then changed the subject. In other directions, household
aspects had not deviated from their accustomed monotony. As usual, Mrs.
Sherwin was at her post in the drawing-room; and her husband was reading
the evening paper, over his renowned old port, in the dining-room. After
the first five minutes of my arrival, I adapted myself again to my old
way of life at Mr. Sherwin's, as easily as if I had never interrupted
it for a single day. Henceforth, wherever my young wife was, there, and
there only, would it be home for _me!_

Late in the evening, Mr. Mannion arrived with some business letters for
Mr. Sherwin's inspection. I sent for him into the hall to see me, as I
was going away. His hand was never a warm one; but as I now took it, on
greeting him, it was so deadly cold that it literally chilled mine for
the moment. He only congratulated me, in the usual terms, on my safe
return; and said that nothing had taken place in my absence--but in his
utterance of those few words, I discovered, for the first time, a change
in his voice: his tones were lower, and his articulation quicker than
usual. This, joined to the extraordinary coldness of his hand, made
me inquire whether he was unwell. Yes, he too had been ill while I was
away--harassed with hard work, he said. Then apologising for leaving me
abruptly, on account of the letters he had brought with him, he returned
to Mr. Sherwin, in the dining-room, with a greater appearance of hurry
in his manner than I had ever remarked in it on any former occasion.

I had left Margaret and Mr. Mannion both well--I returned, and found
them both ill. Surely this was something that had taken place in my
absence, though they all said that nothing had happened. But trifling
illnesses seemed to be little regarded at North Villa--perhaps, because
serious illness was perpetually present there, in the person of Mrs.
Sherwin.

VI.

About six weeks after I had left the Hall, my father and Clara returned
to London for the season.

It is not my intention to delay over my life either at home or at North
Villa, during the spring and summer. This would be merely to repeat much
of what has been already related. It is better to proceed at once to the
closing period of my probation; to a period which it taxes my resolution
severely to write of at all. A few weeks more of toil at my narrative,
and the penance of this poor task-work will be over.

                       * * * * * *

Imagine then, that the final day of my long year of expectation has
arrived; and that on the morrow, Margaret, for whose sake I have
sacrificed and suffered so much, is at last really to be mine.

On the eve of the great change in my life that was now to take place,
the relative positions in which I, and the different persons with whom I
was associated, stood towards each other, may be sketched thus:--

My father's coldness of manner had not altered since his return to
London. On my side, I carefully abstained from uttering a word before
him, which bore the smallest reference to my real situation. Although
when we met, we outwardly preserved the usual relations of parent and
child, the estrangement between us had now become complete.

Clara did not fail to perceive this, and grieved over it in secret.
Other and happier feelings, however, became awakened within her, when I
privately hinted that the time for disclosing my secret to my sister was
not far off. She grew almost as much agitated as I was, though by
very different expectations--she could think of nothing else but the
explanation and the surprise in store for her. Sometimes, I almost
feared to keep her any longer in suspense; and half regretted having
said anything on the subject of the new and absorbing interest of my
life, before the period when I could easily have said all.

Mr. Sherwin and I had not latterly met on the most cordial terms. He was
dissatisfied with me for not having boldly approached the subject of my
marriage in my father's presence; and considered my reasons for still
keeping it secret, as dictated by morbid apprehension, and as showing a
total want of proper firmness. On the other hand, he was obliged to set
against this omission on my part, the readiness I had shown in meeting
his wishes on all remaining points. My life was insured in Margaret's
favour; and I had arranged to be called to the bar immediately, so as
to qualify myself in good time for every possible place within
place-hunting range. My assiduity in making these preparations for
securing Margaret's prospects and mine against any evil chances that
might happen, failed in producing the favourable effect on Mr. Sherwin,
which they must assuredly have produced on a less selfish man. But they
obliged him, at least, to stop short at occasional grumblings about
my reserve with my father, and to maintain towards me a sort of
sulky politeness, which was, after all, less offensive than the usual
infliction of his cordiality, with its unfailing accompaniment of dull
stories and duller jokes.

During the spring and summer, Mrs. Sherwin appeared to grow feebler
and feebler, from continued ill-health. Occasionally, her words and
actions--especially in her intercourse with me--suggested fears that her
mind was beginning to give way, as well as her body. For instance, on
one occasion, when Margaret had left the room for a minute or two,
she suddenly hurried up to me, whispering with eager looks and anxious
tones:--"Watch over your wife--mind you watch over her, and keep all bad
people from her! _I've_ tried to do it--mind _you_ do it, too!" I asked
immediately for an explanation of this extraordinary injunction; but
she only answered by muttering something about a mother's anxieties, and
then returned hastily to her place. It was impossible to induce her to
be more explicit, try how I might.

Margaret once or twice occasioned me much perplexity and distress, by
certain inconsistencies and variations in her manner, which began to
appear shortly after my return to North Villa from the country. At one
time, she would become, on a sudden, strangely sullen and silent--at
another, irritable and capricious. Then, again, she would abruptly
change to the most affectionate warmth of speech and demeanour,
anxiously anticipating every wish I could form, eagerly showing her
gratitude for the slightest attentions I paid her. These unaccountable
alterations of manner vexed and irritated me indescribably. I
loved Margaret too well to be able to look philosophically on the
imperfections of her character; I knew of no cause given by me for
the frequent changes in her conduct, and, if they only proceeded
from coquetry, then coquetry, as I once told her, was the last female
accomplishment that could charm me in any woman whom I really loved.
However, these causes of annoyance and regret--her caprices, and my
remonstrances--all passed happily away, as the term of my engagement
with Mr. Sherwin approached its end, Margaret's better and lovelier
manner returned. Occasionally, she might betray some symptoms of
confusion, some evidences of unusual thoughtfulness--but I remembered
how near was the day of the emancipation of our love, and looked on
her embarrassment as a fresh charm, a new ornament to the beauty of my
maiden wife.

Mr. Mannion continued--as far as attention to my interests went--to be
the same ready and reliable friend as ever; but he was, in some other
respects, an altered man. The illness of which he had complained months
back, when I returned to London, seemed to have increased. His face was
still the same impenetrable face which had so powerfully impressed
me when I first saw him, but his manner, hitherto so quiet and
self-possessed, had now grown abrupt and variable. Sometimes, when he
joined us in the drawing-room at North Villa, he would suddenly stop
before we had exchanged more than three or four words, murmur something,
in a voice unlike his usual voice, about an attack of spasm and
giddiness, and leave the room. These fits of illness had something in
their nature of the same secrecy which distinguished everything else
connected with him: they produced no external signs of distortion,
no unusual paleness in his face--you could not guess what pain he was
suffering, or where he was suffering it. Latterly, I abstained from ever
asking him to join us; for the effect on Margaret of his sudden attacks
of illness was, naturally, such as to discompose her seriously for the
remainder of the evening. Whenever I saw him accidentally, at later
periods of the year, the influence of the genial summer season appeared
to produce no alteration for the better in him. I remarked that his cold
hand, which had chilled me when I took it on the raw winter night of my
return from the country, was as cold as ever, on the warm summer days
which preceded the close of my engagement at North Villa.



Such was the posture of affairs at home, and at Mr. Sherwin's, when I
went to see Margaret for the last time in my old character, on the last
night which yet remained to separate us from each other.

I had been all day preparing for our reception, on the morrow, in a
cottage which I had taken for a month, in a retired part of the country,
at some distance from London. One month's unalloyed happiness with
Margaret, away from the world and all worldly considerations, was the
Eden upon earth towards which my dearest hope and anticipations had
pointed for a whole year past--and now, now at last, those aspirations
were to be realized! All my arrangements at the cottage were completed
in time to allow me to return home, just before our usual late dinner
hour. During the meal, I provided for my month's absence from London, by
informing my father that I proposed visiting one of my country friends.
He heard me as coldly and indifferently as usual; and, as I anticipated,
did not even ask to what friend's house I was going. After dinner, I
privately informed Clara that on the morrow, before starting, I
would, in accordance with my promise, make her the depositary of my
long-treasured secret--which, as yet, was not to be divulged to any one
besides. This done, I hurried away, between nine and ten o'clock, for
a last half-hour's visit to North Villa; hardly able to realise my own
situation, or to comprehend the fulness and exaltation of my own joy.

A disappointment was in store for me. Margaret was not in the house; she
had gone out to an evening party, given by a maiden aunt of hers, who
was known to be very rich, and was, accordingly, a person to be courted
and humoured by the family.

I was angry as well as disappointed at what had taken place. To
send Margaret out, on this evening of all others, showed a want of
consideration towards both of us, which revolted me. Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwin were in the room when I entered; and to _him_ I spoke my opinion
on the subject, in no very conciliatory terms. He was suffering from a
bad attack of headache, and a worse attack of ill-temper, and answered
as irritably as he dared.

"My good Sir!" he said, in sharp, querulous tones, "do, for once, allow
me to know what's best. You'll have it all _your_ way to-morrow--just
let me have _mine,_ for the last time, to-night. I'm sure you've been
humoured often enough about keeping Margaret away from parties--and we
should have humoured you this time, too; but a second letter came from
the old lady, saying she should be affronted if Margaret wasn't one of
her guests. I couldn't go and talk her over, because of this infernal
headache of mine--Hang it! it's your interest that Margaret should keep
in with her aunt; she'll have all the old girl's money, if she only
plays her cards decently well. That's why I sent her to the party--her
going will be worth some thousands to both of you one of these days.
She'll be back by half-past twelve, or before. Mannion was asked; and
though he's all out of sorts, he's gone to take care of her, and bring
her back. I'll warrant she comes home in good time, when _he's_ with
her. So you see there's nothing to make a fuss about, after all."

It was certainly a relief to hear that Mr. Mannion was taking care of
Margaret. He was, in my opinion, much fitter for such a trust than her
own father. Of all the good services he had done for me, I thought this
the best--but it would have been even better still, if he had prevented
Margaret from going to the party.

"I must say again," resumed Mr. Sherwin, still more irritably, finding
I did not at once answer him, "there's nothing that any reasonable
being need make a fuss about. I've been doing everything for Margaret's
interests and yours--and she'll be back by twelve--and Mr. Mannion takes
care of her--and I don't know what you would have--and it's devilish
hard, so ill as I am too, to cut up rough with me like this--devilish
hard!"

"I am sorry for your illness, Mr. Sherwin; and I don't doubt your good
intentions, or the advantage of Mr. Mannion's protection for Margaret;
but I feel disappointed, nevertheless, that she should have gone out
to-night."

"I said she oughtn't to go at all, whatever her aunt wrote--_I_ said
that."

This bold speech actually proceeded from Mrs. Sherwin! I had never
before heard her utter an opinion in her husband's presence--such an
outburst from _her,_ was perfectly inexplicable. She pronounced the
words with desperate rapidity, and unwonted power of tone, fixing her
eyes all the while on me with a very strange expression.

"Damn it, Mrs. S.!" roared her husband in a fury, "will you hold your
tongue? What the devil do you mean by giving _your_ opinion, when nobody
wants it? Upon my soul I begin to think you're getting a little cracked.
You've been meddling and bothering lately, so that I don't know what
the deuce has come to you! I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Basil," he
continued, turning snappishly round upon me, "you had better stop that
fidgetty temper of yours, by going to the party yourself. The old lady
told me she wanted gentlemen; and would be glad to see any friends of
mine I liked to send her. You have only to mention my name: Mannion will
do the civil in the way of introduction. There! there's an envelope
with the address to it--they won't know who you are, or what you are, at
Margaret's aunt's--you've got your black dress things on, all right
and ready--for Heaven's sake, go to the party yourself, and then I hope
you'll be satisfied!"

Here he stopped; and vented the rest of his ill-humour by ringing the
bell violently for "his arrow-root," and abusing the servant when she
brought it.

I hesitated about accepting his proposal. While I was in doubt, Mrs.
Sherwin took the opportunity, when her husband's eye was off her, of
nodding her head at me significantly. She evidently wished me to join
Margaret at the party--but why? What did her behaviour mean?

It was useless to inquire. Long bodily suffering and weakness had but
too palpably produced a corresponding feebleness in her intellect. What
should I do? I was resolved to see Margaret that night; but to wait for
her between two and three hours, in company with her father and mother
at North Villa, was an infliction not to be endured. I determined to go
to the party. No one there would know anything about me. They would be
all people who lived in a different world from mine; and whose manners
and habits I might find some amusement in studying. At any rate, I
should spend an hour or two with Margaret, and could make it my own
charge to see her safely home. Without further hesitation, therefore
I took up the envelope with the address on it, and bade Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwin good-night.

It struck ten as I left North Villa. The moonlight which was just
beginning to shine brilliantly on my arrival there, now appeared but at
rare intervals; for the clouds were spreading thicker and thicker over
the whole surface of the sky, as the night advanced.

VII.

The address to which I was now proceeding, led me some distance away
from Mr. Sherwin's place of abode, in the direction of the populous
neighbourhood which lies on the western side of the Edgeware Road. The
house of Margaret's aunt was plainly enough indicated to me, as soon
as I entered the street where it stood, by the glare of light from the
windows, the sound of dance music, and the nondescript group of cabmen
and linkmen, with their little train of idlers in attendance, assembled
outside the door. It was evidently a very large party. I hesitated about
going in.

My sensations were not those which fit a man for exchanging conventional
civilities with perfect strangers; I felt that I showed outwardly the
fever of joy and expectation within me. Could I preserve my assumed
character of a mere friend of the family, in Margaret's presence?--and
on this night too, of all others? It was far more probable that my
behaviour, if I went to the party, would betray everything to everybody
assembled. I determined to walk about in the neighbourhood of the house,
until twelve o'clock; and then to go into the hall, and send up my card
to Mr. Mannion, with a message on it, intimating that I was waiting
below to accompany him to North Villa with Margaret.

I crossed the street, and looked up again at the house from the pavement
opposite. Then lingered a little, listening to the music as it reached
me through the windows, and imagining to myself Margaret's occupation
at that moment. After this, I turned away; and set forth eastward on my
walk, careless in which direction I traced my steps.

I felt little impatience, and no sense of fatigue; for in less than
two hours more I knew that I should see my wife again. Until then,
the present had no existence for me--I lived in the past and future.
I wandered indifferently along lonely bye-streets, and crowded
thoroughfares. Of all the sights which attend a night-walk in a great
city, not one attracted my notice. Uninformed and unobservant, neither
saddened nor startled, I passed through the glittering highways of
London. All sounds were silent to me save the love-music of my own
thoughts; all sights had vanished before the bright form that moved
through my bridal dream. Where was my world, at that moment? Narrowed to
the cottage in the country which was to receive us on the morrow. Where
were the beings in the world? All merged in one--Margaret.

Sometimes, my thoughts glided back, dreamily and voluptuously, to the
day when I first met her. Sometimes, I recalled the summer evenings when
we sat and read together out of the same book; and, once more, it was as
if I breathed with the breath, and hoped with the hopes, and longed with
the old longings of those days. But oftenest it was with the morrow that
my mind was occupied. The first dream of all young men--the dream of
living rapturously with the woman they love, in a secret retirement kept
sacred from friends and from strangers alike, was now my dream; to be
realised in a few hours, to be realised with my waking on the morning
which was already at hand!

For the last quarter of an hour of my walk, I must have been
unconsciously retracing my steps towards the house of Margaret's aunt. I
came in sight of it again, just as the sound of the neighbouring church
clocks, striking eleven, roused me from my abstraction. More cabs were
in the street; more people were gathered about the door, by this time.
Was all this bustle, the bustle of arrival or of departure? Was the
party about to break up, at an hour when parties usually begin? I
determined to go nearer to the house, and ascertain whether the music
had ceased, or not.

I had approached close enough to hear the notes of the harp and
pianoforte still sounding as gaily as ever, when the house-door was
suddenly flung open for the departure of a lady and gentleman. The light
from the hall-lamps fell on their faces; and showed me Margaret and Mr.
Mannion.

Going home already! An hour and a half before it was time to return!
Why?

There could be but one reason. Margaret was thinking of me, and of what
I should feel if I called at North Villa, and had to wait for her till
past midnight. I ran forward to speak to them, as they descended the
steps; but exactly at the same moment, my voice was overpowered, and my
further progress barred, by a scuffle on the pavement among the people
who stood between us. One man said that his pocket had been picked;
others roared to him that they had caught the thief. There was a
fight--the police came up--I was surrounded on all sides by a shouting,
struggling mob that seemed to have gathered in an instant.

Before I could force myself out of the crowd, and escape into the road,
Margaret and Mr. Mannion had hurried into a cab. I just saw the vehicle
driving off rapidly, as I got free. An empty cab was standing near me--I
jumped into it directly--and told the man to overtake them. After having
waited my time so patiently, to let a mere accident stop me from going
home with them, as I had resolved, was not to be thought of for a
moment. I was hot and angry, after my contest with the crowd; and could
have flogged on the miserable cab-horse with my own hand, rather than
have failed in my purpose.

We were just getting closer behind them: I had just put my head out of
the window to call to them, and to bid the man who was driving me, call,
too--when their cab abruptly turned down a bye-street, in a direction
exactly opposite to the direction which led to North Villa.

What did this mean? Why were they not going straight home?

The cabman asked me whether he should not hail them before they got
farther away from us; frankly confessing, as he put the question,
that his horse was nothing like equal to the pace of the horse ahead.
Mechanically, without assignable purpose or motive, I declined his
offer, and told him simply to follow at any distance he could. While the
words passed my lips, a strange sensation stole over me: I seemed to be
speaking as the mere mouthpiece of some other voice. From feeling hot,
and moving about restlessly the moment before, I felt unaccountably
cold, and sat still now. What caused this?

My cab stopped. I looked out, and saw that the horse had fallen. "We've
lots of time, Sir," said the driver, as he coolly stepped off the box,
"they are just pulling up further down the road." I gave him some money,
and got out immediately--determined to overtake them on foot.

It was a very lonely place--a colony of half-finished streets, and
half-inhabited houses, which had grown up in the neighbourhood of a
great railway station. I heard the fierce scream of the whistle, and
the heaving, heavy throb of the engine starting on its journey, as I
advanced along the gloomy Square in which I now found myself. The cab
I had been following stood at a turning which led into a long street,
occupied towards the farther end, by shops closed for the night, and at
the end nearest me, apparently by private houses only. Margaret and Mr.
Mannion hastily left the cab, and without looking either to the right
or the left, hurried down the street. They stopped at the ninth house. I
followed just in time to hear the door closed on them, and to count the
number of doors intervening between that door and the Square.

The awful thrill of a suspicion which I hardly knew yet for what it
really was, began to creep over me--to creep like a dead-cold touch
crawling through and through me to the heart. I looked up at the house.
It was an hotel--a neglected, deserted, dreary-looking building.
Still acting mechanically; still with no definite impulse that I could
recognise, even if I felt it, except the instinctive resolution to
follow them into the house, as I had already followed them through the
street--I walked up to the door, and rang the bell.

It was answered by a waiter--a mere lad. As the light in the passage
fell on my face, he paused in the act of addressing me, and drew back
a few steps. Without stopping for any explanations, I closed the door
behind me, and said to him at once:

"A lady and gentleman came into this hotel a little while ago."

"What may your business be?"--He hesitated, and added in an altered
tone, "I mean, what may you want with them, Sir?"

"I want you to take me where I can hear their voices, and I want nothing
more. Here's a sovereign for you, if you do what I ask."

His eyes fastened covetously on the gold, as I held it before them. He
retired a few steps on tiptoe, and listened at the end of the passage.
I heard nothing but the thick, rapid beating of my own heart. He came
back, muttering to himself: "Master's safe at supper down stairs--I'll
risk it! You'll promise to go away directly," he added, whispering to
me, "and not disturb the house? We are quiet people here, and can't have
anything like a disturbance. Just say at once, will you promise to step
soft, and not speak a word?"

"I promise."

"This way then, Sir--and mind you don't forget to step soft."

A strange coldness and stillness, an icy insensibility, a
dream-sensation of being impelled by some hidden, irresistible agency,
possessed me, as I followed him upstairs. He showed me softly into an
empty room; pointed to one of the walls, whispering, "It's only boards
papered over--" and then waited, keeping his eyes anxiously and steadily
fixed upon all my movements.

I listened; and through the thin partition, I heard voices--_her_ voice,
and _his_ voice. _I heard and I knew_--knew my degradation in all its
infamy, knew my wrongs in all their nameless horror. He was exulting
in the patience and secrecy which had brought success to the foul plot,
foully hidden for months on months; foully hidden until the very day
before I was to have claimed as my wife, a wretch as guilty as himself!

I could neither move nor breathe. The blood surged and heaved upward to
my brain; my heart strained and writhed in anguish; the life within me
raged and tore to get free. Whole years of the direst mental and bodily
agony were concentrated in that one moment of helpless, motionless
torment. I never lost the consciousness of suffering. I heard the
waiter say, under his breath, "My God! he's dying." I felt him loosen my
cravat--I knew that he dashed cold water over me; dragged me out of the
room; and, opening a window on the landing, held me firmly where the
night-air blew upon my face. I knew all this; and knew when the paroxysm
passed, and nothing remained of it, but a shivering helplessness in
every limb.

Erelong, the power of thinking began to return to me by degrees.

Misery, and shame, and horror, and a vain yearning to hide myself from
all human eyes, and weep out my life in secret, overcame me. Then, these
subsided; and ONE THOUGHT slowly arose in their stead--arose, and
cast down before it every obstacle of conscience, every principle of
education, every care for the future, every remembrance of the past,
every weakening influence of present misery, every repressing tie of
family and home, every anxiety for good fame in this life, and every
idea of the next that was to come. Before the fell poison of that
Thought, all other thoughts--good or evil--died. As it spoke secretly
within me, I felt my bodily strength coming back; a quick vigour leapt
hotly through my frame. I turned, and looked round towards the room we
had just left--my mind was looking at the room beyond it, the room they
were in.

The waiter was still standing by my side, watching me intently. He
suddenly started back; and, with pale face and staring eyes, pointed
down the stairs.

"You go," he whispered, "go directly! You're well now--I'm afraid to
have you here any longer. I saw your look, your horrid look at that
room! You've heard what you wanted for your money--go at once; or, if
I lose my place for it, I'll call out Murder, and raise the house. And
mind this: as true as God's in heaven, I'll warn them both before they
go outside our door!"

Hearing, but not heeding him, I left the house. No voice that ever
spoke, could have called me back from the course on which I was now
bound. The waiter watched me vigilantly from the door, as I went out.
Seeing this, I made a circuit, before I returned to the spot where, as I
had suspected, the cab they had ridden in was still waiting for them.

The driver was asleep inside. I awoke him; told him I had been sent
to say that he was not wanted again that night: and secured his ready
departure, by at once paying him on his own terms. He drove off; and
the first obstacle on the fatal path which I had resolved to tread
unopposed, was now removed.

As the cab disappeared from my sight, I looked up at the sky. It was
growing very dark. The ragged black clouds, fantastically parted from
each other in island shapes over the whole surface of the heavens, were
fast drawing together into one huge, formless, lowering mass, and
had already hidden the moon for, good. I went back to the street, and
stationed myself in the pitch darkness of a passage which led down a
mews, situated exactly opposite to the hotel.

In the silence and obscurity, in the sudden pause of action while I
now waited and watched, my Thought rose to my lips, and my speech
mechanically formed it into words. I whispered softly to myself: _I will
kill him when he comes out._ My mind never swerved for an instant from
this thought--never swerved towards myself; never swerved towards _her._
Grief was numbed at my heart; and the consciousness of my own misery was
numbed with grief. Death chills all before it--and Death and my Thought
were one.

Once, while I stood on the watch, a sharp agony of suspense tried me
fiercely.

Just as I had calculated that the time was come which would force them
to depart, in order to return to North Villa by the appointed hour, I
heard the slow, heavy, regular tramp of a footstep advancing along the
street. It was the policeman of the district going his round. As he
approached the entrance to the mews he paused, yawned, stretched his
arms, and began to whistle a tune. If Mannion should come out while he
was there! My blood seemed to stagnate on its course, while I thought
that this might well happen. Suddenly, the man ceased whistling, looked
steadily up and down the street, and tried the door of a house near
him--advanced a few steps--then paused again, and tried another
door--then muttered to himself, in drowsy tones--"I've seen all safe
here already: it's the other street I forgot just now." He turned, and
retraced his way. I fixed my aching eyes vigilantly on the hotel, while
I heard the sound of his footsteps grow fainter and fainter in the
distance. It ceased altogether; and still there was no change--still the
man whose life I was waiting for, never appeared.

Ten minutes after this, so far as I can guess, the door opened; and I
heard Mannion's voice, and the voice of the lad who had let me in. "Look
about you before you go out," said the waiter, speaking in the
passage; "the street's not safe for you." Disbelieving, or affecting to
disbelieve, what he heard, Mannion interrupted the waiter angrily; and
endeavoured to reassure his companion in guilt, by asserting that the
warning was nothing but an attempt to extort money by way of reward. The
man retorted sulkily, that he cared nothing for the gentleman's money,
or the gentleman either. Immediately afterwards an inner door in the
house banged violently; and I knew that Mannion had been left to his
fate.

There was a momentary silence; and then I heard him tell his accomplice
that he would go alone to look for the cab, and that she had better
close the door and wait quietly in the passage till he came back. This
was done. He walked out into the street. It was after twelve o'clock. No
sound of a strange footfall was audible--no soul was at hand to witness,
and prevent, the coming struggle. His life was mine. His death followed
him as fast as my feet followed, while I was now walking on his track.

He looked up and down, from the entrance to the street, for the cab.
Then, seeing that it was gone, he hastily turned back. At that instant I
met him face to face. Before a word could be spoken, even before a look
could be exchanged, my hands were on his throat.

He was a taller and heavier man than I was; and struggled with me,
knowing that he was struggling for his life. He never shook my grasp on
him for a moment; but he dragged me out into the road--dragged me away
eight or ten yards from the street. The heavy gasps of approaching
suffocation beat thick on my forehead from his open mouth: he swerved
to and fro furiously, from side to side; and struck at me, swinging his
clenched fists high above his head. I stood firm, and held him away at
arm's length. As I dug my feet into the ground to steady myself, I heard
the crunching of stones--the road had been newly mended with granite.
Instantly, a savage purpose goaded into fury the deadly resolution by
which I was possessed. I shifted my hold to the back of his neck, and
the collar of his coat, and hurled him, with the whole impetus of the
raging strength that was let loose in me, face downwards, on to the
stones.

In the mad triumph of that moment, I had already stooped towards him, as
he lay insensible beneath me, to lift him again, and beat out of him, on
the granite, not life only, but the semblance of humanity as well; when,
in the blank stillness that followed the struggle, I heard the door of
the hotel in the street open once more. I left him directly, and ran
back from the square--I knew not with what motive, or what idea--to the
spot.

On the steps of the house, on the threshold of that accursed place,
stood the woman whom God's minister had given to me in the sight of God,
as my wife.

One long pang of shame and despair shot through my heart as I looked at
her, and tortured out of its trance the spirit within me. Thousands on
thousands of thoughts seemed to be whirling in the wildest confusion
through and through my brain--thoughts, whose track was a track of
fire--thoughts that struck me with a hellish torment of dumbness, at
the very time when I would have purchased with my life the power of a
moment's speech. Voiceless and tearless, I went up to her, and took
her by the arm, and drew her away from the house. There was some vague
purpose in me, as I did this, of never quitting my hold of her, never
letting her stir from me by so much as an inch, until I had spoken
certain words to her. What words they were, and when I should utter
them, I could not tell.

The cry for mercy was on her lips, but the instant our eyes met, it died
away in long, low, hysterical moanings. Her cheeks were ghastly, her
features were rigid, her eyes glared like an idiot's; guilt and terror
had made her hideous to look upon already.

I drew her onward a few paces towards the Square. Then I stopped,
remembering the body that lay face downwards on the road. The savage
strength of a few moments before, had left me from the time when I first
saw her. I now reeled where I stood, from sheer physical weakness.
The sound of her pantings and shudderings, of her abject inarticulate
murmurings for mercy, struck me with a supernatural terror. My fingers
trembled round her arm, the perspiration dripped down my face, like
rain; I caught at the railings by my side, to keep myself from falling.
As I did so, she snatched her arm from my grasp, as easily as if I had
been a child; and, with a cry for help, fled towards the further end of
the street.

Still, the strange instinct of never losing hold of her, influenced me.
I followed, staggering like a drunken man. In a moment, she was out of
my reach; in another, out of my sight. I went on, nevertheless; on, and
on, and on, I knew not whither. I lost all ideas of time and distance.
Sometimes I went round and round the same streets, over and over again.
Sometimes I hurried in one direction, straight forward. Wherever I went,
it seemed to me that she was still just before; that her track and my
track were one; that I had just lost my hold of her, and that she was
just starting on her flight.

I remember passing two men in this way, in some great thoroughfare. They
both stopped, turned, and walked a few steps after me. One laughed at
me, as a drunkard. The other, in serious tones, told him to be silent;
for I was not drunk, but mad--he had seen my face as I passed under a
gas-lamp, and he knew that I was mad.

"MAD!"--that word, as I heard it, rang after me like a voice of
judgment. "MAD!"--a fear had come over me, which, in all its frightful
complication, was expressed by that one word--a fear which, to the man
who suffers it, is worse even than the fear of death; which no human
language ever has conveyed, or ever will convey, in all its horrible
reality, to others. I had pressed onward, hitherto, because I saw a
vision that led me after it--a beckoning shadow, ahead, darker even
than the night darkness. I still pressed on, now; but only because I was
afraid to stop.

I know not how far I had gone, when my strength utterly failed me, and
I sank down helpless, in a lonely place where the houses were few and
scattered, and trees and fields were dimly discernible in the obscurity
beyond. I hid my face in my hands, and tried to assure myself that I was
still in possession of my senses. I strove hard to separate my thoughts;
to distinguish between my recollections; to extricate from the confusion
within me any one idea, no matter what--and I could not do it. In that
awful struggle for the mastery over my own mind, all that had passed,
all the horror of that horrible night, became as nothing to me. I
raised myself, and looked up again, and tried to steady my reason by
the simplest means--even by endeavouring to count all the houses within
sight. The darkness bewildered me. Darkness?--_Was_ it dark? or was day
breaking yonder, far away in the murky eastern sky? Did I know what I
saw? Did I see the same thing for a few moments together? What was this
under me? Grass? yes! cold, soft, dewy grass. I bent down my forehead
upon it, and tried, for the last time, to steady my faculties by
praying; tried if I could utter the prayer which I had known and
repeated every day from childhood--the Lord's Prayer. The Divine Words
came not at my call--no! not one of them, from the beginning to the end!
I started up on my knees. A blaze of lurid sunshine flashed before my
eyes; a hell-blaze of brightness, with fiends by millions, raining
down out of it on my head; then a rayless darkness--the darkness of the
blind--then God's mercy at last--the mercy of utter oblivion.

                        * * * * *

When I recovered my consciousness, I was lying on the couch in my own
study. My father was supporting me on the pillow; the doctor had his
fingers on my pulse; and a policeman was telling them where he had found
me, and how he had brought me home.




PART III.


I.

WHEN the blind are operated on for the restoration of sight, the same
succouring hand which has opened to them the visible world, immediately
shuts out the bright prospect again, for a time. A bandage is passed
over the eyes, lest in the first tenderness of the recovered sense, it
should be fatally affected by the sudden transition from darkness to
light. But between the awful blank of total privation of vision, and
the temporary blank of vision merely veiled, there lies the widest
difference. In the moment of their restoration, the blind have had
one glimpse of light, flashing on them in an overpowering gleam of
brightness, which the thickest, closest veiling cannot extinguish. The
new darkness is not like the void darkness of old; it is filled with
changing visions of brilliant colours and ever-varying forms, rising,
falling, whirling hither and thither with every second. Even when
the handkerchief is passed over them, the once sightless eyes, though
bandaged fast, are yet not blinded as they were before.

It was so with my mental vision. After the utter oblivion and darkness
of a deep swoon, consciousness flashed like light on my mind, when I
found myself in my father's presence, and in my own home. But, almost
at the very moment when I first awakened to the bewildering influence
of that sight, a new darkness fell upon my faculties--a darkness, this
time, which was not utter oblivion; a peopled darkness, like that which
the bandage casts over the opened eyes of the blind.

I had sensations, I had thoughts, I had visions, now--but they all acted
in the frightful self-concentration of delirium. The lapse of time, the
march of events, the alternation of day and night, the persons who moved
about me, the words they spoke, the offices of kindness they did for
me--all these were annihilated from the period when I closed my eyes
again, after having opened them for an instant on my father, in my own
study.

My first sensation (how soon it came after I had been brought home, I
know not) was of a terrible heat; a steady, blazing heat, which seemed
to have shrivelled and burnt up the whole of the little world around me,
and to have left me alone to suffer, but never to consume in it. After
this, came a quick, restless, unintermittent toiling of obscure thought,
ever in the same darkened sphere, ever on the same impenetrable subject,
ever failing to reach some distant and visionary result. It was as if
something were imprisoned in my mind, and moving always to and fro in
it--moving, but never getting free.

Soon, these thoughts began to take a form that I could recognise.

In the clinging heat and fierce seething fever, to which neither waking
nor sleeping brought a breath of freshness or a dream of change, I
began to act my part over again, in the events that had passed, but in
a strangely altered character. Now, instead of placing implicit trust in
others, as I had done; instead of failing to discover a significance and
a warning in each circumstance as it arose, I was suspicious from the
first--suspicious of Margaret, of her father, of her mother, of Mannion,
of the very servants in the house. In the hideous phantasmagoria of
my own calamity on which I now looked, my position was reversed. Every
event of the doomed year of my probation was revived. But the doom
itself, the night-scene of horror through which I had passed, had
utterly vanished from my memory. This lost recollection, it was the one
unending toil of my wandering mind to recover, and I never got it back.
None who have not suffered as I suffered then, can imagine with what a
burning rage of determination I followed past events in my delirium, one
by one, for days and nights together,--followed, to get to the end which
I knew was beyond, but which I never could see, not even by glimpses,
for a moment at a time.

However my visions might alter in their course of succession, they
always began with the night when Mannion returned from the continent
to North Villa. I stood again in the drawing-room; I saw him enter; I
marked the slight confusion of Margaret; and instantly doubted her.
I noticed his unwillingness to meet her eye or mine; I looked on the
sinister stillness of his face; and suspected him. From that moment,
love vanished, and hatred came in its place. I began to watch; to garner
up slight circumstances which confirmed my suspicions; to wait craftily
for the day when I should discover, judge, and punish them both--the day
of disclosure and retribution that never came.

Sometimes, I was again with Mannion, in his house, on the night of the
storm. I detected in every word he spoke an artful lure to trap me into
trusting him as my second father, more than as my friend. I heard in
the tempest sounds which mysteriously interrupted, or mingled with, my
answers, voices supernaturally warning me of my enemy, each time that I
spoke to him. I saw once more the hideous smile of triumph on his face,
as I took leave of him on the doorstep: and saw it, this time, not as
an illusion produced by a flash of lightning, but as a frightful reality
which the lightning disclosed.

Sometimes, I was again in the garden at North Villa accidentally
overhearing the conversation between Margaret and her
mother--overhearing what deceit she was willing to commit, for the sake
of getting a new dress--then going into the room, and seeing her assume
her usual manner on meeting me, as if no such words as I had listened to
but the moment before, had ever proceeded from her lips. Or, I saw her
on that other morning, when, to revenge the death of her bird, she would
have killed with her own hand the one pet companion that her sick
mother possessed. Now, no generous, trusting love blinded me to the
real meaning of such events as these. Now, instead of regarding them as
little weaknesses of beauty, and little errors of youth, I saw them as
timely warnings, which bade me remember when the day of my vengeance
came, that in the contriving of the iniquity on which they were both
bent, the woman had been as vile as the man.

Sometimes, I was once more on my way to North Villa, after my week's
absence at our country house. I saw again the change in Margaret since
I had left her--the paleness, the restlessness, the appearance of
agitation. I took the hand of Mannion, and started as I felt its deadly
coldness, and remarked the strange alteration in his manner. When they
accounted for these changes by telling me that both had been ill, in
different ways, since my departure, I detected the miserable lie at
once; I knew that an evil advantage had been taken of my absence; that
the plot against me was fast advancing towards consummation: and that,
at the sight of their victim, even the two wretches who were compassing
my dishonour could not repress all outward manifestation of their guilt.

Sometimes, the figure of Mrs. Sherwin appeared to me, wan and weary, and
mournful with a ghostly mournfulness. Again I watched her, and listened
to her; but now with eager curiosity, with breathless attention. Once
more, I saw her shudder when Mannion's cold eyes turned on her face--I
marked the anxious, imploring look that she cast on Margaret and on
me--I heard her confused, unwilling answer, when I inquired the cause
of her dislike of the man in whom her husband placed the most implicit
trust--I listened to her abrupt, inexplicable injunction to "watch
continually over my wife, and keep bad people from her." All these
different circumstances occurred again as vividly as in the reality;
but I did not now account for them, as I had once accounted for them, by
convincing myself that Mrs. Sherwin's mind was wandering, and that her
bodily sufferings had affected her intellect. I saw immediately, that
she suspected Mannion, and dared not openly confess her suspicions; I
saw, that in the stillness, and abandonment, and self-concentration of
her neglected life, she had been watching more vigilantly than others
had watched; I detected in every one of her despised gestures, and
looks, and halting words, the same concealed warning ever lying beneath
the surface; I knew they had not succeeded in deceiving her; I was
determined they should not succeed in deceiving me.

It was oftenest at this point, that my restless memory recoiled before
the impenetrable darkness which forbade it to see further--to see on
to the last evening, to the fatal night. It was oftenest at this point,
that I toiled and struggled back, over and over again, to seek once more
the lost events of the End, through the events of the Beginning. How
often my wandering thoughts thus incessantly and desperately traced and
retraced their way over their own fever track, I cannot tell: but there
came a time when they suddenly ceased to torment me; when the heavy
burden that was on my mind fell off; when a sudden strength and fury
possessed me, and I plunged down through a vast darkness into a world
whose daylight was all radiant flame. Giant phantoms mustered by
millions, flashing white as lightning in the ruddy air. They rushed on
me with hurricane speed; their wings fanned me with fiery breezes; and
the echo of their thunder-music was like the groaning and rending of an
earthquake, as they tore me away with them on their whirlwind course.

Away! to a City of Palaces, to measureless halls, and arches, and domes,
soaring one above another, till their flashing ruby summits are lost
in the burning void, high overhead. On! through and through these
mountain-piles, into countless, limitless corridors, reared on pillars
lurid and rosy as molten lava. Far down the corridors rise visions
of flying phantoms, ever at the same distance before us--their raving
voices clanging like the hammers of a thousand forges. Still on and
on; faster and faster, for days, years, centuries together, till there
comes, stealing slowly forward to meet us, a shadow--a vast, stealthy,
gliding shadow--the first darkness that has ever been shed over that
world of blazing light! It comes nearer--nearer and nearer softly, till
it touches the front ranks of our phantom troop. Then in an instant, our
rushing progress is checked: the thunder-music of our wild march stops;
the raving voices of the spectres ahead, cease; a horror of blank
stillness is all about us--and as the shadow creeps onward and onward,
until we are enveloped in it from front to rear, we shiver with icy cold
under the fiery air and amid the lurid lava pillars which hem us in on
either side.

A silence, like no silence ever known on earth; a darkening of the
shadow, blacker than the blackest night in the thickest wood--a
pause--then, a sound as of the heavy air being cleft asunder; and then,
an apparition of two figures coming on out of the shadow--two monsters
stretching forth their gnarled yellow talons to grasp at us; leaving
on their track a green decay, oozing and shining with a sickly light.
Beyond and around me, as I stood in the midst of them, the phantom troop
dropped into formless masses, while the monsters advanced. They came
close to me; and I alone, of all the myriads around, changed not at
their approach. Each laid a talon on my shoulder--each raised a veil
which was one hideous net-work of twining worms. I saw through the
ghastly corruption of their faces the look that told me who they
were--the monstrous iniquities incarnate in monstrous forms; the
fiend-souls made visible in fiend-shapes--Margaret and Mannion!

A moment more! and I was alone with those two. Not a wreck of the
phantom-multitude remained; the towering city, the gleaming corridors,
the fire-bright radiance had vanished. We stood on a wilderness--a
still, black lake of dead waters was before us; a white, faint, misty
light shone on us. Outspread over the noisome ground lay the ruins of a
house, rooted up and overthrown to its foundations. The demon figures,
still watching on either side of me, drew me slowly forward to the
fallen stones, and pointed to two dead bodies lying among them.

My father!--my sister!--both cold and still, and whiter than the white
light that showed them to me. The demons at my side stretched out their
crooked talons, and forbade me to kneel before my father, or to kiss
Clara's wan face, before I went to torment. They struck me motionless
where I stood--and unveiled their hideous faces once more, jeering at me
in triumph. Anon, the lake of black waters heaved up and overflowed,
and noiselessly sucked us away into its central depths--depths that were
endless; depths of rayless darkness, in which we slowly eddied round
and round, deeper and deeper down at every turn. I felt the bodies of
my father and my sister touching me in cold contact: I stretched out my
arms to clasp them and sink with them; and the demon pair glided between
us, and separated me from them. This vain striving to join myself to my
dead kindred when we touched each other in the slow, endless whirlpool,
ever continued and was ever frustrated in the same way. Still we sank
apart, down the black gulphs of the lake; still there was no light,
no sound, no change, no pause of repose--and this was eternity: the
eternity of Hell!

                       * * * * *

Such was one dream-vision out of many that I saw. It must have been at
this time that men were set to watch me day and night (as I afterwards
heard), in order that I might be held down in my bed, when a paroxysm of
convulsive strength made me dangerous to myself and to all about me. The
period too when the doctors announced that the fever had seized on my
brain, and was getting the better of their skill, must have been _this_
period.

But though they gave up my life as lost, I was not to die. There came a
time, at last, when the gnawing fever lost its hold; and I awoke faintly
one morning to a new existence--to a life frail and helpless as the life
of a new-born babe.

I was too weak to move, to speak, to open my eyes, to exert in the
smallest degree any one faculty, bodily or mental, that I possessed. The
first sense of which I regained the use, was the sense of hearing;
and the first sound that I recognised, was of a light footstep which
mysteriously approached, paused, and then retired again gently outside
my door. The hearing of this sound was my first pleasure, the waiting
for its repetition my first source of happy expectation, since I had
been ill. Once more the footsteps approached--paused a moment--then
seemed to retire as before--then returned slowly. A sigh, very faint and
trembling; a whisper of which I could not yet distinguish the import,
caught my ear--and after that, there was silence. Still I waited (oh,
how happily and calmly!) to hear the whisper soon repeated, and to hear
it better when it next came. Ere long, for the third time, the footsteps
advanced, and the whispering accents sounded again. I could now hear
that they pronounced my name--once, twice, three times--very softly and
imploringly, as if to beg the answer which I was still too weak to give.
But I knew the voice: I knew it was Clara's. Long after it had ceased,
the whisper lingered gently on my ear, like a lullaby that alternately
soothed me to slumber, and welcomed me to wakefulness. It seemed to be
thrilling through my frame with a tender, reviving influence--the same
influence which the sunshine had, weeks afterwards, when I enjoyed it
for the first time out of doors.

The next sound that came to me was audible in my room; audible
sometimes, close at my pillow. It was the simplest sound
imaginable--nothing but the soft rustling of a woman's dress. And yet,
I heard in it innumerable harmonies, sweet changes, and pauses minute
beyond all definition. I could only open my eyes for a minute at a time,
and even then, could not fix them steadily on anything; but I knew that
the rustling dress was Clara's; and fresh sensations seemed to throng
upon me, as I listened to the sound which told me that she was in the
room. I felt the soft summer air on my face; I enjoyed the sweet scent
of flowers, wafted on that air; and once, when my door was left open for
a moment, the twittering of birds in the aviary down stairs, rang
with exquisite clearness and sweetness on my ear. It was thus that my
faculties strengthened, hour by hour, always in the same gradual way,
from the time when I first heard the footstep and the whisper outside my
chamber-door.

One evening I awoke from a cool, dreamless sleep; and, seeing Clara
sitting by my bedside, faintly uttered her name, and moved my wasted
hand to take hers. As I saw the calm, familiar face bending over me;
the anxious eyes looking tenderly and lovingly into mine--as the last
melancholy glory of sunset hovered on my bed, and the air, sinking
already into its twilight repose, came softly and more softly into
the room--as my sister took me in her arms, and raising me on my weary
pillow, bade me for her sake lie hushed and patient a little longer--the
memory of the ruin and the shame that had overwhelmed me; the memory of
my love that had become an infamy; and of my brief year's hope miserably
fulfilled by a life of despair, swelled darkly over my heart. The red,
retiring rays of sunset just lingered at that moment on my face. Clara
knelt down by my pillow, and held up her handkerchief to shade my
eyes--"God has given you back to us, Basil," she whispered, "to make us
happier than ever." As she spoke, the springs of the grief so long pent
up within me were loosened; hot tears dropped heavily and quickly from
my eyes; and I wept for the first time since the night of horror which
had stretched me where I now lay--wept in my sister's arms, at that
quiet evening hour, for the lost honour, the lost hope, the lost
happiness that had gone from me for ever in my youth!

II.

Darkly and wearily the days of my recovery went on. After that first
outburst of sorrow on the evening when I recognised my sister, and
murmured her name as she sat by my side, there sank over all my
faculties a dull, heavy trance of mental pain.

I dare not describe what remembrances of the guilty woman who had
deceived and ruined me, now gnawed unceasingly and poisonously at my
heart. My bodily strength feebly revived; but my mental energies
never showed a sign of recovering with them. My father's considerate
forbearance, Clara's sorrowful reserve in touching on the subject of my
long illness, or of the wild words which had escaped me in my delirium,
mutely and gently warned me that the time was come when I owed the tardy
atonement of confession to the family that I had disgraced; and still,
I had no courage to speak, no resolution to endure. The great misery
of the past, shut out from me the present and the future alike--every
active power of my mind seemed to be destroyed hopelessly and for ever.

There were moments--most often at the early morning hours, while
the heaviness of the night's sleep still hung over me in my
wakefulness--when I could hardly realise the calamity which had
overwhelmed me; when it seemed that I must have dreamt, during the
night, of scenes of crime and woe and heavy trial which had never
actually taken place. What was the secret of the terrible influence
which--let her even be the vilest of the vile--Mannion must have
possessed over Margaret Sherwin, to induce her to sacrifice me to him?
Even the crime itself was not more hideous and more incredible than the
mystery in which its evil motives, and the manner of its evil ripening,
were still impenetrably veiled.

Mannion! It was a strange result of the mental malady under which I
suffered, that, though the thought of Mannion was now inextricably
connected with every thought of Margaret, I never once asked myself, or
had an idea of asking myself, for days together, after my convalescence,
what had been the issue of our struggle, for him. In the despair of
first awakening to a perfect sense of the calamity which had been
hurled on me from the hand of my wife--in the misery of first clearly
connecting together, after the wanderings of delirium, the Margaret to
whom with my hand I had given all my heart, with the Margaret who had
trampled on the gift and ruined the giver--all minor thoughts and
minor feelings, all motives of revengeful curiosity or of personal
apprehension were suppressed. And yet, the time was soon to arrive when
that lost thought of inquiry into Mannion's fate, was to become the
one master-thought that possessed me--the thought that gave back its
vigilance to my intellect, and its manhood to my heart.

One evening I was sitting alone in my room. My father had taken Clara
out for a little air and exercise, and the servant had gone away at my
own desire. It was in this quiet and solitude, when the darkness was
fast approaching, when the view from my window was at its loneliest,
when my mind was growing listless and confused as the weary day
wore out--it was exactly at this time that the thought suddenly and
mysteriously flashed across me: Had Mannion been taken up from the
stones on which I had hurled him, a living man or a dead?

I instinctively started to my feet with something of the vigour of
my former health; repeating the question to myself; and feeling, as I
unconsciously murmured aloud the few words which expressed it, that my
life had purposes and duties, trials and achievements, which were yet to
be fulfilled. How could I instantly solve the momentous doubt which had
now, for the first time, crossed my mind?

One moment I paused in eager consideration--the next, I descended to the
library. A daily newspaper was kept there, filed for reference. I might
possibly decide the fatal question in a few moments by consulting it.
In my burning anxiety and impatience I could hardly handle the leaves or
see the letters, as I tried to turn back to the right date--the day (oh
anguish of remembrance!) on which I was to have claimed Margaret Sherwin
as my wife!

At last, I found the number I desired; but the closely-printed columns
swam before me as I looked at them. A glass of water stood on a table
near me--I dipped my handkerchief in it, and cooled my throbbing eyes.
The destiny of my future life might be decided by the discovery I was
now about to make!

I locked the door to guard against all intrusion, and then returned to
my task--returned to my momentous search--slowly tracing my way through
the paper, paragraph by paragraph, column by column.

On the last page, and close to the end, I read these lines:

                 "MYSTERIOUS OCCURRENCE.

"About one o'clock this morning, a gentleman was discovered lying on his
face in the middle of the road, in Westwood Square, by the policeman on
duty. The unfortunate man was to all appearance dead. He had fallen on
a part of the road which had been recently macadamised; and his face, we
are informed, is frightfully mutilated by contact with the granite.
The policeman conveyed him to the neighbouring hospital, where it was
discovered that he was still alive, and the promptest attentions were
immediately paid him. We understand that the surgeon in attendance
considers it absolutely impossible that he could have been injured as he
was, except by having been violently thrown down on his face, either
by a vehicle driven at a furious rate, or by a savage attack from some
person or persons unknown. In the latter case, robbery could not have
been the motive; for the unfortunate man's watch, purse, and ring were
all found about him. No cards of address or letters of any kind were
discovered in his pockets, and his linen and handkerchief were only
marked with the letter M. He was dressed in evening costume--entirely in
black. After what has been already said about the injuries to his
face, any recognisable personal description of him is, for the present,
unfortunately out of the question. We wait with much anxiety to gain
some further insight into this mysterious affair, when the sufferer is
restored to consciousness. The last particulars which our reporter was
able to collect at the hospital were, that the surgeon expected to save
his patient's life, and the sight of one of his eyes. The sight of the
other is understood to be entirely destroyed."



With sensations of horror which I could not then, and cannot now
analyse, I turned to the next day's paper; but found in it no further
reference to the object of my search. In the number for the day after,
however, the subject was resumed in these words:

"The mystery of the accident in Westwood Square thickens. The sufferer
is restored to consciousness; he is perfectly competent to hear and
understand what is said to him, and is able to articulate, but not very
plainly, and only for a moment or so, at a time. The authorities at the
hospital anticipated, as we did, that, on the patient's regaining his
senses, some information of the manner in which the terrible accident
from which he is suffering was caused, would be obtained from him. But,
to the astonishment of every one, he positively refuses to answer any
questions as to the circumstances under which his frightful injuries
were inflicted. With the same unaccountable secrecy, he declines to tell
his name, his place of abode, or the names of any friends to whom notice
of his situation might be communicated. It is quite in vain to press him
for any reason for this extraordinary course of conduct--he appears
to be a man of very unusual firmness of character; and his refusal to
explain himself in any way, is evidently no mere caprice of the moment.
All this leads to the conjecture that the injuries he has sustained were
inflicted on him from some motive of private vengeance; and that certain
persons are concerned in this disgraceful affair, whom he is unwilling
to expose to public odium, for some secret reason which it is impossible
to guess at. We understand that he bears the severe pain consequent
upon his situation, in such a manner as to astonish every person about
him--no agony draws from him a word or a sigh. He displayed no emotion
even when the surgeons informed him that the sight of one of his eyes
was hopelessly destroyed; and merely asked to be supplied with writing
materials as soon as he could see to use them, when he was told that the
sight of the other would be saved. He further added, we are informed,
that he was in a position to reward the hospital authorities for any
trouble he gave, by making a present to the funds of the charity, as
soon as he should be discharged as cured. His coolness in the midst of
sufferings which would deprive most other men of all power of thinking
or speaking, is as remarkable as his unflinching secrecy--a secrecy
which, for the present at least, we cannot hope to penetrate."



I closed the newspaper. Even then, a vague forewarning of what Mannion's
inexplicable reserve boded towards me, crossed my mind. There was yet
more difficulty, danger, and horror to be faced, than I had hitherto
confronted. The slough of degradation and misery into which I had
fallen, had its worst perils yet in store for me.

As I became impressed by this conviction, the enervating remembrance
of the wickedness to which I had been sacrificed, grew weaker in its
influence over me; the bitter tears that I had shed in secret for so
many days past, dried sternly at their sources; and I felt the power
to endure and to resist coming back to me with my sense of the coming
strife. On leaving the library, I ascended again to my own room. In a
basket, on my table, lay several unopened letters, which had arrived
for me during my illness. There were two which I at once suspected,
in hastily turning over the collection, might be all-important in
enlightening me on the vile subject of Mannion's female accomplice. The
addresses of both these letters were in Mr. Sherwin's handwriting. The
first that I opened was dated nearly a month back, and ran thus:


                             "North Villa, Hollyoake Square.

"DEAR SIR,

"With agonised feelings which no one but a parent, and I will add, an
affectionate parent, can possibly form an idea of, I address you on
the subject of the act of atrocity committed by that perjured villain,
Mannion. You will find that I and my innocent daughter have been, like
you, victims of the most devilish deceit that ever was practised on
respectable and unsuspecting people.

"Let me ask you, Sir, to imagine the state of my feelings on the night
of that most unfortunate party, when I saw my beloved Margaret, instead
of coming home quietly as usual, rush into the room in a state bordering
on distraction, with a tale the most horrible that ever was addressed
to a father's ears. The double-faced villain (I really can't mention his
name again) had, I blush to acknowledge, attempted to take advantage of
her innocence and confidence--all our innocences and confidences, I may
say--but my dear Margaret showed a virtuous courage beyond her years,
the natural result of the pious principles and the moral bringing up
which I have given her from her cradle. Need I say what was the upshot?
Virtue triumphed, as virtue always does, and the villain left her to
herself. It was when she was approaching the door-step to fly to
the bosom of her home that, I am given to understand, you, by a most
remarkable accident, met her. As a man of the world, you will easily
conceive what must have been the feelings of a young female, under such
peculiar and shocking circumstances. Besides this, your manner, as I am
informed, was so terrifying and extraordinary, and my poor Margaret felt
so strongly that deceitful appearances might be against her, that she
lost all heart, and fled at once, as I said before, to the bosom of her
home.

"She is still in a very nervous and unhappy state; she fears that
you may be too ready to believe appearances; but I know better. Her
explanation will be enough for you, as it was for me. We may have our
little differences on minor topics, but we have both the same manly
confidence, I am sure--you in your wife, and me in my daughter.

"I called at your worthy father's mansion, to have a fuller
explanation with you than I can give here, the morning after this
to-all-parties-most-distressing occurrence happened: and was then
informed of your serious illness, for which pray accept my best
condolences. The next thing I thought of doing was to write to your
respected father, requesting a private interview. But on maturer
consideration, I thought it perhaps slightly injudicious to take such a
step, while you, as the principal party concerned, were ill in bed, and
not able to come forward and back me. I was anxious, you will observe,
to act for your interests, as well as the interests of my darling
girl--of course, knowing at the same time that I had the marriage
certificate in my possession, if needed as a proof, and supposing I was
driven to extremities and obliged to take my own course in the matter.
But, as I said before, I have a fatherly and friendly confidence in your
feeling as convinced of the spotless innocence of my child as I do. So
will write no more on this head.

"Having determined, as best under all circumstances, to wait till your
illness was over, I have kept my dear Margaret in strict retirement
at home (which, as she is your wife, you will acknowledge I had no
obligation to do), until you were well enough to come forward and do her
justice before her family and yours. I have not omitted to make almost
daily inquiries after you, up to the time of penning these lines, and
shall continue so to do until your convalescence, which I sincerely
hope may be speedily at hand; I am unfortunately obliged to ask that our
first interview, when you are able to see me and my daughter, may not
take place at North Villa, but at some other place, any you like to fix
on. The fact is, my wife, whose wretched health has been a trouble and
annoyance to us for years past, has now, I grieve to say, under pressure
of this sad misfortune, quite lost her reason. I am sorry to say that
she would be capable of interrupting us here, in a most undesirable
manner to all parties, and therefore request that our first happy
meeting may not take place at my house.

"Trusting that this letter will quite remove all unpleasant feelings
from your mind, and that I shall hear from you soon, on your
much-to-be-desired recovery,

"I remain, dear Sir,

"Your faithful, obedient servant,

                          "STEPHEN SHERWIN.

"P. S.--I have not been able to find out where that scoundrel Mannion,
has betaken himself to; but if you should know, or suspect, I wish to
tell you, as a proof that my indignation at his villany is as great as
yours, that I am ready and anxious to pursue him with the utmost rigour
of the law, if law can only reach him--paying out of my own pocket all
expenses of punishing him and breaking him for the rest of his life, if
I go through every court in the country to do it!--S. S."



Hurriedly as I read over this wretched and revolting letter, I detected
immediately how the new plot had been framed to keep me still deceived;
to heap wrong after wrong on me with the same impunity. She was not
aware that I had followed her into the house, and had heard all from
her voice and Mannion's--she believed that I was still ignorant of
everything, until we met at the door-step; and in this conviction she
had forged the miserable lie which her father's hand had written down.
Did he really believe it, or was he writing as her accomplice? It was
not worth while to inquire: the worst and darkest discovery which it
concerned me to make, had already proclaimed itself--she was a liar and
a hypocrite to the very last!

And it was this woman's lightest glance which had once been to me as
the star that my life looked to!---it was for this woman that I had
practised a deceit on my family which it now revolted me to think
of; had braved whatever my father's anger might inflict; had risked
cheerfully the loss of all that birth and fortune could bestow! Why had
I ever risen from my weary bed of sickness?--it would have been better,
far better, that I had died!

But, while life remained, life had its trials and its toils, from which
it was useless to shrink. There was still another letter to be opened:
there was yet more wickedness which I must know how to confront.

The second of Mr. Sherwin's letters was much shorter than the first, and
had apparently been written not more than a day or two back. His tone
was changed; he truckled to me no longer--he began to threaten. I
was reminded that the servant's report pronounced me to have been
convalescent for several days past: and was asked why, under these
circumstances, I had never even written. I was warned that my silence
had been construed greatly to my disadvantage; and that if it continued
longer, the writer would assert his daughter's cause loudly and
publicly, not to my father only, but to all the world. The letter
ended by according to me three days more of grace, before the fullest
disclosure would be made.

For a moment, my indignation got the better of me. I rose, to go that
instant to North Villa and unmask the wretches who still thought to
make their market of me as easily as ever. But the mere momentary delay
caused by opening the door of my room, restored me to myself. I felt
that my first duty, my paramount obligation, was to confess all to my
father immediately; to know and accept my future position in my own
home, before I went out from it to denounce others. I returned to the
table, and gathered up the letters scattered on it. My heart beat fast,
my head felt confused; but I was resolute in my determination to tell
my father, at all hazards, the tale of degradation which I have told in
these pages.

I waited in the stillness and loneliness, until it grew nearly dark. The
servant brought in candles. Why could I not ask him whether my father
and Clara had come home yet? Was I faltering in my resolution already?

Shortly after this, I heard a step on the stairs and a knock at my
door.--My father? No! Clara. I tried to speak to her unconcernedly, when
she came in.

"Why, you have been walking till it is quite dark, Clara!"

"We have only been in the garden of the Square--neither papa nor I
noticed how late it was. We were talking on a subject of the deepest
interest to us both."

She paused a moment, and looked down; then hurriedly came nearer to me,
and drew a chair to my side. There was a strange expression of sadness
and anxiety in her face, as she continued:

"Can't you imagine what the subject was? It was you, Basil. Papa is
coming here directly, to speak to you."

She stopped once more. Her cheeks reddened a little, and she
mechanically busied herself in arranging some books that lay on the
table. Suddenly, she abandoned this employment; the colour left her
face; it was quite pale when she addressed me again, speaking in very
altered tones; so altered, that I hardly recognised them as hers.

"You know, Basil, that for a long time past, you have kept some secret
from us; and you promised that I should know it first; but I--I have
changed my mind; I have no wish to know it, dear: I would rather we
never said anything about it." (She coloured, and hesitated a little
again, then proceeded quickly and earnestly:) "But I hope you will tell
it all to papa: he is coming here to ask you--oh, Basil! be candid with
him, and tell him everything; let us all be to one another what we were
before this time last year! You have nothing to fear, if you only speak
openly; for I have begged him to be gentle and forgiving with you, and
you know he refuses me nothing. I only came here to prepare you; to beg
you to be candid and patient. Hush! there is a step on the stairs. Speak
out, Basil, for my sake--pray, pray, speak out, and then leave the rest
to me."

She hurriedly left the room. The next minute, my father entered it.

Perhaps my guilty conscience deceived me, but I thought he looked at me
more sadly and severely than I had ever seen him look before. His voice,
too, was troubled when he spoke. This was a change, which meant much in
him.

"I have come to speak to you," he said, "on a subject about which I had
much rather you had spoken to me first."

"I think, Sir, I know to what subject you refer. I--"

"I must beg you will listen to me as patiently as you can," he rejoined;
"I have not much to say."

He paused, and sighed heavily. I thought he looked at me more kindly. My
heart grew very sad; and I yearned to throw my arms round his neck, to
give freedom to the repressed tears which half choked me, to weep out on
his bosom my confession that I was no more worthy to be called his son.
Oh, that I had obeyed the impulse which moved me to do this!

"Basil," pursued my father, gravely and sadly; "I hope and believe that
I have little to reproach myself with in my conduct towards you. I think
I am justified in saying, that very few fathers would have acted towards
a son as I have acted for the last year or more. I may often have
grieved over the secresy which has estranged you from us; I may even
have shown you by my manner that I resented it; but I have never used my
authority to force you into the explanation of your conduct, which you
have been so uniformly unwilling to volunteer. I rested on that implicit
faith in the honour and integrity of my son, which I will not yet
believe to have been ill-placed, but which, I fear, has led me
to neglect too long the duty of inquiry which I owed to your own
well-being, and to my position towards you. I am now here to atone for
this omission; circumstances have left me no choice. It deeply concerns
my interest as a father, and my honour as the head of our family, to
know what heavy misfortune it was (I can imagine it to be nothing else)
that stretched my son senseless in the open street, and afflicted him
afterwards with an illness which threatened his reason and his life.
You are now sufficiently recovered to reveal this; and I only use my
legitimate authority over my own children, when I tell you that I must
now know all. If you persist in remaining silent, the relations between
us must henceforth change for life."

"I am ready to make my confession, Sir. I only ask you to believe
beforehand, that if I have sinned grievously against you, I have been
already heavily punished for the sin. I am afraid it is impossible that
your worst forebodings can have prepared you--"

"The words you spoke in your delirium--words which I heard, but will not
judge you by--justified the worst forebodings."

"My illness has spared me the hardest part of a hard trial, Sir, if it
has prepared you for what I have to confess; if you suspect--"

"I do not _suspect_--I feel but too _sure,_ that you, my second son,
from whom I had expected far better things, have imitated in secret--I
am afraid, outstripped--the worst vices of your elder brother."

"My brother!--my brother's faults mine! Ralph!"

"Yes, Ralph. It is my last hope that you will now imitate Ralph's
candour. Take example from that best part of him, as you have already
taken example from the worst."

My heart grew faint and cold as he spoke. Ralph's example! Ralph's
vices!--vices of the reckless hour, or the idle day!--vices whose stain,
in the world's eye, was not a stain for life!--convenient, reclaimable
vices, that men were mercifully unwilling to associate with grinning
infamy and irreparable disgrace! How far--how fearfully far, my father
was from the remotest suspicion of what had really happened! I tried to
answer his last words, but the apprehension of the life-long humiliation
and grief which my confession might inflict on him--absolutely
incapable, as he appeared to be, of foreboding even the least degrading
part of it--kept me speechless. When he resumed, after a momentary
silence, his tones were stern, his looks searching--pitilessly
searching, and bent full upon my face.

"A person has been calling, named Sherwin," he said, "and inquiring
about you every day. What intimate connection between you authorises
this perfect stranger to me to come to the house as frequently as he
does, and to make his inquiries with a familiarity of tone and manner
which has struck every one of the servants who have, on different
occasions, opened the door to him? Who is this Mr. Sherwin?"

"It is not with him, Sir, that I can well begin. I must go back--"

"You must go back farther, I am afraid, than you will be able to return.
You must go back to the time when you had nothing to conceal from me,
and when you could speak to me with the frankness and directness of a
gentleman."

"Pray be patient with me, Sir; give me a few minutes to collect myself.
I have much need for a little self-possession before I tell you all."

"All? your tones mean more than your words--_they_ are candid, at least!
Have I feared the worst, and yet not feared as I ought? Basil!--do you
hear me, Basil? You are trembling very strangely; you are growing pale!"

"I shall be better directly, Sir. I am afraid I am not quite so strong
yet as I thought myself. Father! I am heart-broken and spirit-broken: be
patient and kind to me, or I cannot speak to you."

I thought I saw his eyes moisten. He shaded them a moment with his hand,
and sighed again--the same long, trembling sigh that I had heard before.
I tried to rise from my chair, and throw myself on my knees at his feet.
He mistook the action, and caught me by the arm, believing that I was
fainting.

"No more to-night, Basil," he said, hurriedly, but very gently; "no more
on this subject till to-morrow."

"I can speak now, Sir; it is better to speak at once."

"No: you are too much agitated; you are weaker than I thought.
To-morrow, in the morning, when you are stronger after a night's rest.
No! I will hear nothing more. Go to bed now; I will tell your sister not
to disturb you to-night. To-morrow, you shall speak to me; and speak in
your own way, without interruption. Good-night, Basil, good-night."

Without waiting to shake hands with me, he hastened to the door, as if
anxious to hide from my observation the grief and apprehension which had
evidently overcome him. But, just at the moment when he was leaving
the room, he hesitated, turned round, looked sorrowfully at me for an
instant, and then, retracing his steps, gave me his hand, pressed mine
for a moment in silence, and left me.

After the morrow was over, would he ever give me that hand again?

III.

The morning which was to decide all between my father and me, the
morning on whose event hung the future of my home life, was the
brightest and loveliest that my eyes ever looked on. A cloudless sky,
a soft air, sunshine so joyous and dazzling that the commonest objects
looked beautiful in its light, seemed to be mocking at me for my heavy
heart, as I stood at my window, and thought of the hard duty to be
fulfilled, on the harder judgment that might be pronounced, before the
dawning of another day.

During the night, I had arranged no plan on which to conduct the
terrible disclosure which I was now bound to make--the greatness of the
emergency deprived me of all power of preparing myself for it. I thought
on my father's character, on the inbred principles of honour which ruled
him with the stern influence of a fanaticism: I thought on his pride of
caste, so unobtrusive, so rarely hinted at in words, and yet so firmly
rooted in his nature, so intricately entwined with every one of his
emotions, his aspirations, his simplest feelings and ideas: I thought
on his almost feminine delicacy in shrinking from the barest mention of
impurities which other men could carelessly discuss, or could laugh over
as good material for an after-dinner jest. I thought over all this,
and when I remembered that it was to such a man that I must confess the
infamous marriage which I had contracted in secret, all hope from his
fatherly affection deserted me; all idea of appealing to his chivalrous
generosity became a delusion in which it was madness to put a moment's
trust.

The faculties of observation are generally sharpened, in proportion
as the faculties of reflection are dulled, under the influence of
an absorbing suspense. While I now waited alone in my room, the most
ordinary sounds and events in the house, which I never remembered
noticing before, absolutely enthralled me. It seemed as if the noise of
a footstep, the echo of a voice, the shutting or opening of doors down
stairs, must, on this momentous day, presage some mysterious calamity,
some strange discovery, some secret project formed against me, I
knew not how, or by whom. Two or three times I found myself listening
intently on the staircase, with what object I could hardly tell. It was
always, however, on those occasions, that a dread, significant quiet
appeared to have fallen suddenly on the house. Clara never came to
me, no message arrived from my father; the door-bell seemed strangely
silent, the servants strangely neglectful of their duties above stairs.
I caught myself returning to my own room softly, as if I expected that
some hidden catastrophe might break forth, if sound of my footsteps were
heard.

Would my father seek me again in my own room, or would he send for me
down stairs? It was not long before the doubt was decided. One of the
servants knocked at my door--the servant whose special duty it had
been to wait on me in my illness. I longed to take the man's hand, and
implore his sympathy and encouragement while he addressed me.

"My master, Sir, desires me to say that, if you feel well enough, he
wishes to see you in his own room."

I rose, and immediately followed the servant. On our way, we passed the
door of Clara's private sitting-room--it opened, and my sister came
out and laid her hand on my arm. She smiled as I looked at her; but the
tears stood thick in her eyes, and her face was deadly pale.

"Think of what I said last night, Basil," she whispered, "and, if hard
words are spoken to you, think of _me._ All that our mother would have
done for you, if she had been still among us, _I_ will do. Remember
that, and keep heart and hope to the very last."

She hastily returned to her room, and I went on down stairs. In the
hall, the servant was waiting for me, with a letter in his hand.

"This was left for you, Sir, a little while ago. The messenger who
brought it said he was not to wait for an answer."

It was no time for reading letters--the interview with my father was too
close at hand. I hastily put the letter into my pocket, barely noticing,
as I did so, that the handwriting on the address was very irregular, and
quite unknown to me.

I went at once into my father's room.

He was sitting at his table, cutting the leaves of some new books
that lay on it. Pointing to a chair placed opposite to him, he briefly
inquired after my health; and then added, in a lower tone--

"Take any time you like, Basil, to compose and collect yourself. This
morning my time is yours."

He turned a little away from me, and went on cutting the leaves of the
books placed before him. Still utterly incapable of preparing myself in
any way for the disclosure expected from me; without thought or hope,
or feeling of any kind, except a vague sense of thankfulness for the
reprieve granted me before I was called on to speak--I mechanically
looked round and round the room, as if I expected to see the sentence
to be pronounced against me, already written on the walls, or grimly
foreshadowed in the faces of the old family portraits which hung above
the fireplace.

What man has ever felt that all his thinking powers were absorbed, even
by the most poignant mental misery that could occupy them? In moments
of imminent danger, the mind can still travel of its own accord over the
past, in spite of the present--in moments of bitter affliction, it can
still recur to every-day trifles, in spite of ourselves. While I now
sat silent in my father's room, long-forgotten associations of childhood
connected with different parts of it, began to rise on my memory in the
strangest and most startling independence of any influence or control,
which my present agitation and suspense might be supposed to exercise
over them. The remembrances that should have been the last to be
awakened at this time of heavy trial, were the very remembrances which
now moved within me.

With burdened heart and aching eyes I looked over the walls around me.
There, in that corner, was the red cloth door which led to the library.
As children, how often Ralph and I had peeped curiously through that
very door, to see what my father was about in his study, to wonder
why he had so many letters to write, and so many books to read. How
frightened we both were, when he discovered us one day, and reproved
us severely! How happy the moment afterwards, when we had begged him
to pardon us, and were sent back to the library again with a great
picture-book to look at, as a token that we were both forgiven! Then,
again, there was the high, old-fashioned, mahogany press before the
window, with the same large illustrated folio about Jewish antiquities
lying on it, which, years and years ago, Clara and I were sometimes
allowed to look at, as a special treat, on Sunday afternoons; and which
we always examined and re-examined with never-ending delight--standing
together on two chairs to reach up to the thick, yellow-looking leaves,
and turn them over with our own hands. And there, in the recess between
two bookcases, still stood the ancient desk-table, with its rows of
little inlaid drawers; and on the bracket above it the old French clock,
which had once belonged to my mother, and which always chimed the hours
so sweetly and merrily. It was at that table that Ralph and I always
bade my father farewell, when we were going back to school after the
holidays, and were receiving our allowance of pocket-money, given to us
out of one of the tiny inlaid drawers, just before we started. Near that
spot, too, Clara--then a little rosy child--used to wait gravely and
anxiously, with her doll in her arms, to say good-bye for the last time,
and to bid us come back soon, and then never go away again. I turned,
and looked abruptly towards the window; for such memories as the room
suggested were more than I could bear.

Outside, in the dreary strip of garden, the few stunted, dusky trees
were now rustling as pleasantly in the air, as if the breeze that
stirred them came serenely over an open meadow, or swept freshly under
their branches from the rippling surface of a brook. Distant, but yet
well within hearing, the mighty murmur from a large thoroughfare--the
great mid-day voice of London--swelled grandly and joyously on the ear.
While, nearer still, in a street that ran past the side of the house,
the notes of an organ rang out shrill and fast; the instrument was
playing its liveliest waltz tune--a tune which I had danced to in
the ball-room over and over again. What mocking memories within, what
mocking sounds without, to herald and accompany such a confession as I
had now to make!

Minute after minute glided on, inexorably fast; and yet I never broke
silence. My eyes turned anxiously and slowly on my father.

He was still looking away from me, still cutting the leaves of the books
before him. Even in that trifling action, the strong emotions which he
was trying to conceal, were plainly and terribly betrayed. His hand,
usually so steady and careful, trembled perceptibly; and the paper-knife
tore through the leaves faster and faster--cutting them awry, rending
them one from another, so as to spoil the appearance of every page.
I believe he _felt_ that I was looking at him; for he suddenly
discontinued his employment, turned round towards me, and spoke--

"I have resolved to give you your own time," he said, "and from that
resolve I have no wish to depart--I only ask you to remember that every
minute of delay adds to the suffering and suspense which I am enduring
on your account." He opened the books before him again, adding in lower
and colder tones, as he did so--"In _your_ place, Ralph would have
spoken before this."

Ralph, and Ralph's example quoted to me again!--I could remain silent no
longer.

"My brother's faults towards you, and towards his family, are not such
faults as mine, Sir," I began. "I have _not_ imitated his vices; I have
acted as he would _not_ have acted. And yet, the result of my error will
appear far more humiliating, and even disgraceful, in your eyes, than
the results of any errors of Ralph's."

As I pronounced the word "disgraceful," he suddenly looked me full in
the face. His eyes lightened up sternly, and the warning red spot rose
on his pale cheeks.

"What do you mean by 'disgraceful?'" he asked abruptly; "what do you
mean by associating such a word as _disgrace_ with your conduct--with
the conduct of a son of mine?"

"I must reply to your question indirectly, Sir," I continued. "You asked
me last night who the Mr. Sherwin was who has called here so often--"

"And this morning I ask it again. I have other questions to put to you,
besides--you called constantly on a woman's name in your delirium. But I
will repeat last night's question first--who _is_ Mr. Sherwin?"

"He lives--"

"I don't ask where he lives. Who is he? What is he?"

"Mr. Sherwin is a linen-draper--"

"You owe him money?--you have borrowed money of him? Why did you not
tell me this before? You have degraded my house by letting a man call at
the door--I know it!--in the character of a dun. He has inquired about
you as his 'friend,'--the servants told me of it. This money-lending
tradesman, your _'friend!'_ If I had heard that the poorest labourer
on my land called you 'friend,' I should have held you honoured by the
attachment and gratitude of an honest man. When I hear that name given
to you by a tradesman and money-lender, I hold you contaminated by
connection with a cheat. You were right, Sir!--this _is_ disgrace; how
much do you owe? Where are your dishonoured acceptances? Where have you
used _my_ name and _my_ credit? Tell me at once--I insist on it!"

He spoke rapidly and contemptuously, and rising from his chair as he
ended, walked impatiently up and down the room.

"I owe no money to Mr. Sherwin, Sir--no money to any one."

He stopped suddenly:

"No money to any one?" he repeated very slowly, and in very altered
tones. "You spoke of disgrace just now. There is a worse disgrace then
that you have hidden from me, than debts dishonourably contracted?"

At this moment, a step passed across the hall. He instantly turned
round, and locked the door on that side of the room--then continued:

"Speak! and speak honestly if you can. How have you been deceiving me?
A woman's name escaped you constantly, when your delirium was at its
worst. You used some very strange expressions about her, which it was
impossible altogether to comprehend; but you said enough to show that
her character was one of the most abandoned; that her licentiousness--it
is too revolting to speak of _her_--I return to _you._ I insist on
knowing how far your vices have compromised you with that vicious
woman."

"She has wronged me--cruelly, horribly, wronged me--" I could say no
more. My head drooped on my breast; my shame overpowered me.

"Who is she? You called her Margaret, in your illness--who is she?"

"She is Mr. Sherwin's daughter--" The words that I would fain have
spoken next, seemed to suffocate me. I was silent again.

I heard him mutter to himself:

_"That_ man's daughter!--a worse bait than the bait of money!"

He bent forward, and looked at me searchingly. A frightful paleness flew
over his face in an instant.

"Basil!" he cried, "in God's name, answer me at once! What is Mr.
Sherwin's daughter to _you?_"

"She is my wife!"

I heard no answer--not a word, not even a sigh. My eyes were blinded
with tears, my face was bent down; I saw nothing at first. When I raised
my head, and dashed away the blinding tears, and looked up, the blood
chilled at my heart.

My father was leaning against one of the bookcases, with his hands
clasped over his breast. His head was drawn back; his white lips moved,
but no sound came from them. Over his upturned face there had passed
a ghastly change, as indescribable in its awfulness as the change of
death.

I ran horror-stricken to his side, and attempted to take his hand.
He started instantly into an erect position, and thrust me from him
furiously, without uttering a word. At that fearful moment, in that
fearful silence, the sounds out of doors penetrated with harrowing
distinctness and merriment into the room. The pleasant rustling of
the trees mingled musically with the softened, monotonous rolling of
carriages in the distant street, while the organ-tune, now changed to
the lively measure of a song, rang out clear and cheerful above both,
and poured into the room as lightly and happily as the very sunshine
itself.

For a few minutes we stood apart, and neither of us moved or spoke. I
saw him take out his handkerchief, and pass it over his face, breathing
heavily and thickly, and leaning against the bookcase once more. When he
withdrew the handkerchief and looked at me again, I knew that the sharp
pang of agony had passed away, that the last hard struggle between his
parental affection and his family pride was over, and that the great
gulph which was hence-forth to separate father and son, had now opened
between us for ever.

He pointed peremptorily to me to go back to my former place, but did not
return to his own chair. As I obeyed, I saw him unlock the door of the
bookcase against which he had been leaning, and place his hand on one of
the books inside. Without withdrawing it from its place, without turning
or looking towards me, he asked if I had anything more to say to him.

The chilling calmness of his tones, the question itself, and the time at
which he put it, the unnatural repression of a single word of rebuke,
of passion, or of sorrow, after such a confession as I had just made,
struck me speechless. He turned a little away from the bookcase--still
keeping his hand on the book inside--and repeated the question. His
eyes, when they met mine, had a pining, weary look, as if they had been
long condemned to rest on woeful and revolting objects; his expression
had lost its natural refinement, its gentleness of repose, and had
assumed a hard, lowering calmness, under which his whole countenance
appeared to have shrunk and changed--years of old age seemed to have
fallen on it, since I had spoken the last fatal words!

"Have you anything more to say to me?"

On the repetition of that terrible question, I sank down in the chair at
my side, and hid my face in my hands. Unconscious how I spoke, or why I
spoke; with no hope in myself, or in him; with no motive but to invite
and bear the whole penalty of my disgrace, I now disclosed the miserable
story of my marriage, and of all that followed it. I remember nothing of
the words I used---nothing of what I urged in my own defence. The sense
of bewilderment and oppression grew heavier and heavier on my brain;
I spoke more and more rapidly, confusedly, unconsciously, until I was
again silenced and recalled to myself by the sound of my father's voice.
I believe I had arrived at the last, worst part of my confession, when
he interrupted me.

"Spare me any more details," he said, bitterly, "you have humiliated me
sufficiently--you have spoken enough."

He removed the book on which his hand had hitherto rested from the case
behind him, and advanced with it to the table--paused for a moment, pale
and silent--then slowly opened it at the first page, and resumed his
chair.

I recognised the book instantly. It was a biographical history of his
family, from the time of his earliest ancestors down to the date of
the births of his own children. The thick quarto pages were beautifully
illuminated in the manner of the ancient manuscripts; and the narrative,
in written characters, had been produced under his own inspection. This
book had cost him years of research and perseverance. The births and
deaths, the marriages and possessions, the battle achievements and
private feuds of the old Norman barons from whom he traced his descent,
were all enrolled in regular order on every leaf--headed, sometimes
merely by representations of the Knight's favourite weapon; sometimes by
copies of the Baron's effigy on his tombstone in a foreign land. As
the history advanced to later dates, beautiful miniature portraits were
inlaid at the top of each leaf; and the illuminations were so managed as
to symbolize the remarkable merits or the peculiar tastes of the subject
of each biography. Thus, the page devoted to my mother was surrounded
by her favourite violets, clustering thickest round the last melancholy
lines of writing which told the story of her death.

Slowly and in silence, my father turned over the leaves of the book
which, next to the Bible, I believe he most reverenced in the world,
until he came to the last-written page but one--the page which I knew,
from its position, to be occupied by my name. At the top, a miniature
portrait of me, when a child, was let into the leaf. Under it, was the
record of my birth and names, of the School and College at which I had
been taught, and of the profession that I had adopted. Below, a large
blank space was left for the entry of future particulars. On this page
my father now looked, still not uttering a word, still with the same
ghastly calmness on his face. The organ-notes sounded no more; but
the trees rustled as pleasantly, and the roar of the distant carriages
swelled as joyously as ever on the ear. Some children had come out to
play in the garden of a neighbouring house. As their voices reached
us, so fresh, and clear, and happy--but another modulation of the
thanksgiving song to God which the trees were singing in the summer
air--I saw my father, while he still looked on the page before him,
clasp his trembling hands over my portrait so as to hide it from sight.

Then he spoke; but without looking up, and more as if he were speaking
to himself than to me. His voice, at other times clear and gentle in its
tones, was now so hard and harsh in its forced calmness and deliberation
of utterance, that it sounded like a stranger's.

"I came here, this morning," he began, "prepared to hear of faults and
misfortunes which should pain me to the heart; which I might never,
perhaps, be able to forget, however willing and even predetermined
to forgive. But I did _not_ come prepared to hear, that unutterable
disgrace had been cast on me and mine, by my own child. I have no words
of rebuke or of condemnation for this: the reproach and the punishment
have fallen already where the guilt was--and not there only. My son's
infamy defiles his brother's birthright, and puts his father to shame.
Even his sister's name--"

He stopped, shuddering. When he proceeded, his voice faltered, and his
head drooped low.

"I say it again:--you are below all reproach and all condemnation; but I
have a duty to perform towards my two who are absent, and I have a last
word to say to _you_ when that duty is done. On this page--" (as he
pointed to the family history, his tones strengthened again)--"on this
page there is a blank space left, after the last entry, for writing the
future events of your life. Here, then, if I still acknowledge you to
be my son; if I think your presence and the presence of my daughter
possible in the same house, must be written such a record of dishonour
and degradation as has never yet defiled a single page of this
book--here, the foul stain of your marriage, and its consequences, must
be admitted to spread over all that is pure before it, and to taint to
the last whatever comes after. This shall not be. I have no faith or
hope in you more. I know you now, only as an enemy to me and to my
house--it is mockery and hypocrisy to call you son; it is an insult to
Clara, and even to Ralph, to think of you as my child. In this record
your place is destroyed--and destroyed for ever. Would to God I could
tear the past from my memory, as I tear the leaf from this book!"

As he spoke, the hour struck; and the old French clock rang out gaily
the same little silvery chime which my mother had so often taken me
into her room to listen to, in the bygone time. The shrill, lively peal
mingled awfully with the sharp, tearing sound, as my father rent out
from the book before him the whole of the leaf which contained my name;
tore it into fragments, and cast them on the floor.

He rose abruptly, after he had closed the book again. His cheeks flushed
once more; and when he next spoke, his voice grew louder and louder
with every word he uttered. It seemed as if he still distrusted his
resolution to abandon me; and sought, in his anger, the strength of
purpose which, in his calmer mood, he might even yet have been unable to
command.

"Now, Sir," he said, "we treat together as strangers. You are Mr.
Sherwin's son--not mine. You are the husband of his daughter--not a
relation of my family. Rise, as I do: we sit together no longer in the
same room. Write!" (he pushed pen, ink, and paper before me,)
"write your terms there--I shall find means to keep you to a written
engagement--the terms of your absence, for life, from this country;
and of hers: the terms of your silence, and of the silence of your
accomplices; of all of them. Write what you please; I am ready to pay
dearly for your absence, your secrecy, and your abandonment of the name
you have degraded. My God! that I should live to bargain for hushing up
the dishonour of my family, and to bargain for it with _you._"

I had listened to him hitherto without pleading a word in my own behalf;
but his last speech roused me. Some of _his_ pride stirred in my heart
against the bitterness of his contempt. I raised my head, and met his
eye steadily for the first time--then, thrust the writing materials away
from me, and left my place at the table.

"Stop!" he cried. "Do you pretend that you have not understood me?"

"It is _because_ I have understood you, Sir, that I go. I have deserved
your anger, and have submitted without a murmur to all that it could
inflict. If you see in my conduct towards you no mitigation of my
offence; if you cannot view the shame and wrong inflicted on me, with
such grief as may have some pity mixed with it--I have, I think, the
right to ask that your contempt may be silent, and your last words to
me, not words of insult."

"Insult! After what has happened, is it for _you_ to utter that word in
the tone in which you have just spoken it? I tell you again, I insist
on your written engagement as I would insist on the engagement of a
stranger--I will have it, before you leave this room!"

"All, and more than all, which that degrading engagement could imply, I
will do. But I have not fallen so low yet, as to be bribed to perform
a duty. You may be able to forget that you are my father; I can never
forget that I am your son."

"The remembrance will avail you nothing as long as I live. I tell you
again, I insist on your written engagement, though it were only to show
that I have ceased to believe in your word. Write at once--do you hear
me?--Write!"

I neither moved nor answered. His face changed again, and grew livid;
his fingers trembled convulsively, and crumpled the sheet of paper, as
he tried to take it up from the table on which it lay.

"You refuse?" he said quickly.

"I have already told you, Sir--"

"Go!" he interrupted, pointing passionately to the door, "go out from
this house, never to return to it again--go, not as a stranger to me,
but as an enemy! I have no faith in a single promise you have made:
there is no baseness which I do not believe you will yet be guilty of.
But I tell you, and the wretches with whom you are leagued, to take
warning: I have wealth, power, and position; and there is no use to
which I will not put them against the man or woman who threatens the
fair fame of this family. Leave me, remembering that--and leave me for
ever!"

Just as he uttered the last word, just as my hand was on the lock of
the door, a faint sound--something between breathing and speaking--was
audible in the direction of the library. He started, and looked round.
Impelled, I know not how, I paused on the point of going out. My eyes
followed his, and fixed on the cloth door which led into the library.

It opened a little--then shut again--then opened wide. Slowly and
noiselessly, Clara came into the room.

The silence and suddenness of her entrance at such a moment; the look
of terror which changed to unnatural vacancy the wonted softness and
gentleness of her eyes, her pale face, her white dress, and slow,
noiseless step, made her first appearance in the room seem almost
supernatural; it was as if an apparition had been walking towards us,
and not Clara herself! As she approached my father, he pronounced her
name in astonishment; but his voice sank to a whisper, while he spoke
it. For an instant, she paused, hesitating--I saw her tremble as her
eyes met his--then, as they turned towards me, the brave girl came on;
and, taking my hand, stood and faced my father, standing by my side.

"Clara!" he exclaimed again, still in the same whispering tones.

I felt her cold hand close fast on mine; the grasp of the chill,
frail fingers was almost painful to me. Her lips moved, but her quick,
hysterical breathing made the few words she uttered inarticulate.

"Clara!" repeated my father, for the third time, his voice rising, but
sinking again immediately--when he spoke his next words, "Clara," he
resumed, sadly and gently, "let go his hand; this is not a time for
your presence, I beg you to leave us. You must not take his hand! He has
ceased to be my son, or your brother. Clara, do you not hear me?"

"Yes, Sir, I hear you," she answered. "God grant that my mother in
heaven may not hear you too!"

He was approaching while she replied; but at her last words, he
stopped instantly, and turned his face away from us. Who shall say what
remembrances of other days shook him to the heart?

"You have spoken, Clara, as you should not have spoken," he went on,
without looking up. "Your mother--" his voice faltered and failed him.
"Can you still hold his hand after what I have said? I tell you
again, he is unworthy to be in your presence; my house is his home no
longer--must I _command_ you to leave him?"

The deeply planted instinct of gentleness and obedience prevailed; she
dropped my hand, but did not move away from me, even yet.

"Now leave us, Clara," he said. "You were wrong, my love, to be in that
room, and wrong to come in here. I will speak to you up-stairs--you must
remain here no longer."

She clasped her trembling fingers together, and sighed heavily.

"I cannot go, Sir," she said quickly and breathlessly.

"Must I tell you for the first time in your life, that you are acting
disobediently?" he asked.

"I cannot go," she repeated in the same manner, "till you have said you
will let him atone for his offence, and will forgive him."

"For _his_ offence there is neither atonement nor forgiveness. Clara!
are you so changed, that you can disobey me to my face?"

He walked away from us as he said this.

"Oh, no! no!" She ran towards him; but stopped halfway, and looked back
at me affrightedly, as I stood near the door. "Basil," she cried, "you
have not done what you promised me; you have not been patient. Oh, Sir,
if I have ever deserved kindness from you, be kind to him for _my_ sake!
Basil! speak, Basil! Ask his pardon on your knees. Father, I promised
him he should be forgiven, if I asked you. Not a word; not a word from
either? Basil! you are not going yet--not going at all! Remember, Sir,
how good and kind he has always been to _me._ My poor mother, (I _must_
speak of her), my poor mother's favourite son--you have told me so
yourself! and he has always been my favourite brother; I think because
my mother loved him so! His first fault, too! his first grief! And will
you tell him for this, that our home is _his_ home no longer? Punish
_me,_ Sir! I have done wrong like him; when I heard your voices so loud,
I listened in the library. He's going! No, no, no! not yet!"

She ran to the door as I opened it, and pushed it to again. Overwhelmed
by the violence of her agitation, my father had sunk into a chair while
she was speaking.

"Come back--come back with me to his knees!" she whispered, fixing her
wild, tearless eyes on mine, flinging her arms round my neck, and trying
to lead me with her from the door. "Come back, or you will drive me
mad!" she repeated loudly, drawing me away towards my father.

He rose instantly from his chair.

"Clara," he said, "I command you, leave him!" He advanced a few steps
towards me. "Go!" he cried; "if you are human in your villany, you will
release me from this!"

I whispered in her ear, "I will write, love--I will write," and
disengaged her arms from my neck--they were hanging round it weakly,
already! As I passed the door, I turned back, and looked again into the
room for the last time.

Clara was in my father's arms, her head lay on his shoulder, her face
was as still in its heavenly calmness as if the world and the world's
looks knew it no more, and the only light that fell on it now, was light
from the angel's eyes. She had fainted.

He was standing with one arm round her, his disengaged hand was
searching impatiently over the wall behind him for the bell, and his
eyes were fixed in anguish and in love unutterable on the peaceful face,
hushed in its sad repose so close beneath his own. For one moment, I saw
him thus, ere I closed the door--the next, I had left the house.

I never entered it again--I have never seen my father since.

IV.

We are seldom able to discover under any ordinary conditions of
self-knowledge, how intimately that spiritual part of us, which is
undying, can attach to itself and its operations the poorest objects
of that external world around us, which is perishable. In the ravelled
skein, the slightest threads are the hardest to follow. In analysing the
associations and sympathies which regulate the play of our passions, the
simplest and homeliest are the last that we detect. It is only when the
shock comes, and the mind recoils before it--when joy is changed into
sorrow, or sorrow into joy--that we really discern what trifles in the
outer world our noblest mental pleasures, or our severest mental pains,
have made part of themselves; atoms which the whirlpool has drawn into
its vortex, as greedily and as surely as the largest mass.

It was reserved for me to know this, when--after a moment's pause before
the door of my father's house, more homeless, then, than the poorest
wretch who passed me on the pavement, and had wife or kindred to shelter
him in a garret that night--my steps turned, as of old, in the direction
of North Villa.

Again I passed over the scene of my daily pilgrimage, always to the same
shrine, for a whole year; and now, for the first time, I knew that
there was hardly a spot along the entire way, which my heart had not
unconsciously made beautiful and beloved to me by some association with
Margaret Sherwin. Here was the friendly, familiar shop-window, filled
with the glittering trinkets which had so often lured me in to buy
presents for her, on my way to the house. There was the noisy street
corner, void of all adornment in itself, but once bright to me with the
fairy-land architecture of a dream, because I knew that at that place
I had passed over half the distance which separated my home from hers.
Farther on, the Park trees came in sight--trees that no autumn decay or
winter nakedness could make dreary, in the bygone time; for she and I
had walked under them together. And further yet, was the turning which
led from the long, suburban road into Hollyoake Square--the lonely,
dust-whitened place, around which my past happiness and my wasted hopes
had flung their golden illusions, like jewels hung round the coarse
wooden image of a Roman saint. Dishonoured and ruined, it was among
such associations as these--too homely to have been recognised by me in
former times--that I journeyed along the well-remembered way to North
Villa.

I went on without hesitating, without even a thought of turning back. I
had said that the honour of my family should not suffer by the calamity
which had fallen on me; and, while life remained, I was determined that
nothing should prevent me from holding to my word. It was from this
resolution that I drew the faith in myself, the confidence in my
endurance, the sustaining calmness under my father's sentence of
exclusion, which nerved me to go on. I must inevitably see Mr. Sherwin
(perhaps even suffer the humiliation of seeing her!)--must inevitably
speak such words, disclose such truths, as should show him that deceit
was henceforth useless. I must do this and more, I must be prepared to
guard the family to which--though banished from it--I still belonged,
from every conspiracy against them that detected crime or shameless
cupidity could form, whether in the desire of revenge, or in the hope of
gain.. A hard, almost an impossible task--but, nevertheless, a task that
must be done!

I kept the thought of this necessity before my mind unceasingly; not
only as a duty, but as a refuge from another thought, to which I dared
not for a moment turn. The still, pale face which I had seen lying
hushed on my father's breast--CLARA!--That way, lay the grief that
weakens, the yearning and the terror that are near despair; that way was
not it for _me._

The servant was at the garden-gate of North Villa--the same servant whom
I had seen and questioned in the first days of my fatal delusion. She
was receiving a letter from a man, very poorly dressed, who walked away
the moment I approached. Her confusion and surprise were so great as she
let me in, that she could hardly look at, or speak to me. It was only
when I was ascending the door-steps that she said--

"Miss Margaret"--(she still gave her that name!)--"Miss Margaret is
upstairs, Sir. I suppose you would like--"

"I have no wish to see her: I want to speak to Mr. Sherwin."

Looking more bewildered, and even frightened, than before, the girl
hurriedly opened one of the doors in the passage. I saw, as I entered,
that she had shown me, in her confusion, into the wrong room. Mr.
Sherwin, who was in the apartment, hastily drew a screen across the
lower end of it, apparently to hide something from me; which, however, I
had not seen as I came in.

He advanced, holding out his hand; but his restless eyes wandered
unsteadily, looking away from me towards the screen.

"So you have come at last, have you? Just let's step into the
drawing-room: the fact is--I thought I wrote to you about it--?"

He stopped suddenly, and his outstretched arm fell to his side. I had
not said a word. Something in my look and manner must have told him
already on what errand I had come.

"Why don't you speak?" he said, after a moment's pause. "What are you
looking at me like that for? Stop! Let's say our say in the other room."
He walked past me towards the door, and half opened it.

Why was he so anxious to get me away? Who, or what, was he hiding behind
the screen? The servant had said his daughter was upstairs; remembering
this, and suspecting every action or word that came from him, I
determined to remain in the room, and discover his secret. It was
evidently connected with me.

"Now then," he continued, opening the door a little wider, "it's only
across the hall, you know; and I always receive visitors in the best
room."

"I have been admitted here," I replied, "and have neither time nor
inclination to follow you from room to room, just as you like. What
I have to say is not much; and, unless you give me fit reasons to the
contrary, I shall say it here."

"You will, will you? Let me tell you that's damned like what we plain
mercantile men call downright incivility. I say it again--incivility;
and rudeness too, if you like it better." He saw I was determined, and
closed the door as he spoke, his face twitching and working violently,
and his quick, evil eyes turned again in the direction of the screen.

"Well," he continued, with a sulky defiance of manner and look, "do as
you like; stop here--you'll wish you hadn't before long, I'll be bound!
You don't seem to hurry yourself much about speaking, so _I_ shall sit
down. _You_ can do as you please. Now then! just let's cut it short--do
you come here in a friendly way, to ask me to send for _my_ girl
downstairs, and to show yourself the gentleman, or do you not?"

"You have written me two letters, Mr. Sherwin--"

"Yes: and took devilish good care you should get them--I left them
myself."

"In writing those letters, you were either grossly deceived; and, in
that case, are only to be pitied, or--"

"Pitied! what the devil do you mean by that? Nobody wants your pity
here."

"Or you have been trying to deceive me; and in that case, I have to
tell you that deceit is henceforth useless. I know all--more than you
suspect: more, I believe, than you would wish me to have known."

"Oh, that's your tack, is it? By God, I expected as much the moment you
came in! What! you don't believe _my_ girl--don't you? You're going to
fight shy, and behave like a scamp--are you? Damn your infernal coolness
and your aristocratic airs and graces! You shall see I'll be even with
you--you shall. Ha! ha! look here!--here's the marriage certificate safe
in my pocket. You won't do the honourable by my poor child--won't you?
Come out! Come away! You'd better--I'm off to your father to blow the
whole business; I am, as sure as my name's Sherwin!"

He struck his fist on the table, and started up, livid with passion. The
screen trembled a little, and a slight rustling noise was audible behind
it, just as he advanced towards me. He stopped instantly, with an oath,
and looked back.

"I warn you to remain here," I said. "This morning, my father has heard
all from my lips. He has renounced me as his son, and I have left his
house for ever."

He turned round quickly, staring at me with a face of mingled fury and
dismay.

"Then you come to me a beggar!" he burst out; "a beggar who has taken
me in about his fine family, and his fine prospects; a beggar who can't
support my child--Yes! I say it again, a beggar who looks me in the
face, and talks as you do. I don't care a damn about you or your father!
I know my rights; I'm an Englishman, thank God! I know my rights, and
_my_ Margaret's rights; and I'll have them in spite of you both. Yes!
you may stare as angry as you like; staring don't hurt. I'm an honest
man, and _my_ girl's an honest girl!"

I was looking at him, at that moment, with the contempt that I really
felt; his rage produced no other sensation in me. All higher and quicker
emotions seemed to have been dried at their sources by the events of the
morning.

"I say _my_ girl's an honest girl," he repeated, sitting down again;
"and I dare you, or anybody--I don't care who--to prove the contrary.
You told me you knew all, just now. What _all?_ Come! we'll have this
out before we do anything else. She says she's innocent, and I say she's
innocent: and if I could find out that damnation scoundrel Mannion, and
get him here, I'd make him say it too. Now, after all that, what have
you got against her?--against your lawful wife; and I'll make you own
her as such, and keep her as such, I can promise you!"

"I am not here to ask questions, or to answer them," I replied--"my
errand in this house is simply to tell you, that the miserable
falsehoods contained in your letter, will avail you as little as the
foul insolence of language by which you are now endeavouring to support
them. I told you before, and I now tell you again, I know all. I had
been inside that house, before I saw your daughter at the door; and had
heard, from _her_ voice and _his_ voice, what such shame and misery as
you cannot comprehend forbid me to repeat. To your past duplicity, and
to your present violence, I have but one answer to give:--I will never
see your daughter again."

"But you _shall_ see her again--yes! and keep her too! Do you think I
can't see through you and your precious story? Your father's cut you
off with a shilling; and now you want to curry favour with him again
by trumping up a case against _my_ girl, and trying to get her off your
hands that way. But it won't do! You've married her, my fine gentleman,
and you shall stick to her! Do you think I wouldn't sooner believe her,
than believe you? Do you think I'll stand this? Here she is up-stairs,
half heart-broken, on my hands; here's my wife"--(his voice sank
suddenly as he said this)--"with her mind in such a state that I'm kept
away from business, day after day, to look after her; here's all this
crying and misery and mad goings-on in my house, because you choose to
behave like a scamp--and do you think I'll put up with it quietly? I'll
make you do your duty to _my_ girl, if she goes to the parish to appeal
against you! _Your_ story indeed! Who'll believe that a young female,
like Margaret, could have taken to a fellow like Mannion? and kept it
all a secret from you? Who believes that, I should like to know?"

_"I believe it!"_

The third voice which pronounced those words was Mrs. Sherwin's.

But was the figure that now came out from behind the screen, the same
frail, shrinking figure which had so often moved my pity in the past
time? the same wan figure of sickness and sorrow, ever watching in the
background of the fatal love-scenes at North Villa; ever looking like
the same spectre-shadow, when the evenings darkened in as I sat by
Margaret's side?

Had the grave given up its dead? I stood awe-struck, neither speaking
nor moving while she walked towards me. She was clothed in the white
garments of the sick-room--they looked on _her_ like the raiment of the
tomb. Her figure, which I only remembered as drooping with premature
infirmity, was now straightened convulsively to its proper height; her
arms hung close at her side, like the arms of a corpse; the natural
paleness of her face had turned to an earthy hue; its natural
expression, so meek, so patient, so melancholy in uncomplaining sadness,
was gone; and, in its stead, was left a pining stillness that never
changed; a weary repose of lifeless waking--the awful seal of Death
stamped ghastly on the living face; the awful look of Death staring out
from the chill, shining eyes.

Her husband kept his place, and spoke to her as she stopped opposite to
me. His tones were altered, but his manner showed as little feeling as
ever.

"There now!" he began, "you said you were sure he'd come here, and that
you'd never take to your bed, as the Doctor wanted you, till you'd seen
him and spoken to him. Well, he _has_ come; there he is. He came in
while you were asleep, I rather think; and I let him stop, so that if
you woke up and wanted to see him, you might. You can't say--nobody can
say--I haven't given in to your whims and fancies after that. There!
you've had your way, and you've said you believe him; and now, if I ring
for the nurse, you'll go upstairs at last, and make no more worry about
it--Eh?"

She moved her head slowly, and looked at him. As those dying eyes met
his, as that face on which the light of life was darkening fast, turned
on him, even _his_ gross nature felt the shock. I saw him shrink--his
sallow cheeks whitened, he moved his chair away, and said no more.

She looked back to me again, and spoke. Her voice was still the same
soft, low voice as ever. It was fearful to hear how little it had
altered, and then to look on the changed face.

"I am dying," she said to me. "Many nights have passed since that night
when Margaret came home by herself and I felt something moving down into
my heart, when I looked at her, which I knew was death--many nights,
since I have been used to say my prayers, and think I had said them
for the last time, before I dared shut my eyes in the darkness and the
quiet. I have lived on till to-day, very weary of my life ever since
that night when Margaret came in; and yet, I could not die, because I
had an atonement to make to _you,_ and you never came to hear it and
forgive me. I was not fit for God to take me till you came--I know that,
know it to be truth from a dream."

She paused, still looking at me, but with the same deathly blank of
expression. The eye had ceased to speak already; nothing but the voice
was left.

"My husband has asked, who will believe you?" she went on; her weak
tones gathering strength with every fresh word she uttered. "I have
answered that _I_ will; for you have spoken the truth. Now, when the
light of this world is fading from my eyes; here, in this earthly home
of much sorrow and suffering, which I must soon quit--in the presence of
my husband--under the same roof with my sinful child--I bear you witness
that you have spoken the truth. I, her mother, say it of her: Margaret
Sherwin is guilty; she is no more worthy to be called your wife."

She pronounced the last words slowly, distinctly, solemnly. Till that
fearful denunciation was spoken, her husband had been looking sullenly
and suspiciously towards us, as we stood together; but while she uttered
it, his eyes fell, and he turned away his head in silence.

He never looked up, never moved, or interrupted her, as she continued,
still addressing me; but now speaking very slowly and painfully, pausing
longer and longer between every sentence.

"From this room I go to my death-bed. The last words I speak in this
world shall be to my husband, and shall change his heart towards you. I
have been weak of purpose," (as she said this, a strange sweetness and
mournfulness began to steal over her tones,) "miserably, guiltily weak,
all my life. Much sorrow and pain and heavy disappointment, when I was
young, did some great harm to me which I have never recovered since. I
have lived always in fear of others, and doubt of myself; and this has
made me guilty of a great sin towards _you._ Forgive me before I die! I
suspected the guilt that was preparing--I foreboded the shame that was
to come--they hid it from others' eyes; but, from the first, they could
not hide it from mine--and yet I never warned you as I ought! _That_ man
had the power of Satan over me! I always shuddered before him, as I used
to shudder at the darkness when I was a little child! My life has been
all fear--fear of _him;_ fear of my husband, and even of my daughter;
fear, worse still, of my own thoughts, and of what I had discovered that
should be told to _you._ When I tried to speak, you were too generous
to understand me--I was afraid to think my suspicions were right, long
after they should have been suspicions no longer. It was misery!--oh,
what misery from then till now!"

Her voice died away for a moment, in faint, breathless murmurings. She
struggled to recover it, and repeated in a whisper:

"Forgive me before I die! I have made a terrible atonement; I have borne
witness against the innocence of my own child. My own child! I dare
not bid God bless her, if they bring her to my bedside!--forgive
me!--forgive me before I die!"

She took my hand, and pressed it to her cold lips. The tears gushed into
my eyes, as I tried to speak to her.

"No tears for _me!_" she murmured gently. "Basil!--let me call you as
your mother would call you if she was alive--Basil! pray that I may be
forgiven in the dreadful Eternity to which I go, as _you_ have forgiven
me! And, for _her?_--oh! who will pray for _her_ when I am gone?"

Those words were the last I heard her pronounce. Exhausted beyond the
power of speaking more, though it were only in a whisper, she tried to
take my hand again, and express by a gesture the irrevocable farewell.
But her strength failed her even for this--failed her with awful
suddenness. Her hand moved halfway towards mine; then stopped, and
trembled for a moment in the air; then fell to her side, with the
fingers distorted and clenched together. She reeled where she stood, and
sank helplessly as I stretched out my arms to support her.

Her husband rose fretfully from his chair, and took her from me. When
his eyes met mine, the look of sullen self-restraint in his countenance
was crossed, in an instant, by an expression of triumphant
malignity. He whispered to me: "If you don't change your tone by
to-morrow!"--paused--and then, without finishing the sentence, moved
away abruptly, and supported his wife to the door.

Just when her face was turned towards where I stood, as he took her out,
I thought I saw the cold, vacant eyes soften as they rested on me, and
change again tenderly to the old look of patience and sadness which I
remembered so well. Was my imagination misleading me? or had the light
of that meek spirit shone out on earth, for the last time at parting, in
token of farewell to mine? She was gone to me, gone for ever--before I
could look nearer, and know.

                * * * * *

I was told, afterwards, how she died.

For the rest of that day, and throughout the night, she lay speechless,
but still alive. The next morning, the faint pulse still fluttered. As
the day wore on, the doctors applied fresh stimulants, and watched her
in astonishment; for they had predicted her death as impending every
moment, at least twelve hours before. When they spoke of this to her
husband, his behaviour was noticed as very altered and unaccountable by
every one. He sulkily refused to believe that her life was in danger; he
roughly accused anybody who spoke of her death, as wanting to fix on
him the imputation of having ill-used her, and so being the cause of her
illness; and more than this, he angrily vindicated himself to every one
about her--even to the servants--by quoting the indulgence he had shown
to her fancy for seeing me when I called, and his patience while she
was (as he termed it) wandering in her mind in trying to talk to me. The
doctors, suspecting how his uneasy conscience was accusing him, forbore
in disgust all expostulation. Except when he was in his daughter's room,
he was shunned by everybody in the house.

Just before noon, on the second day, Mrs. Sherwin rallied a little under
the stimulants administered to her, and asked to see her husband
alone. Both her words and manner gave the lie to his assertion that her
faculties were impaired--it was observed by all her attendants, that
whenever she had strength to speak, her speech never wandered in the
slightest degree. Her husband quitted her room more fretfully uneasy,
more sullenly suspicious of the words and looks of those about him than
ever--went instantly to seek his daughter--and sent her in alone to her
mother's bedside. In a few minutes, she hurriedly came out again, pale,
and violently agitated; and was heard to say, that she had been spoken
to so unnaturally, and so shockingly, that she could not, and would not,
enter that room again until her mother was better. Better! the father
and daughter were both agreed in that; both agreed that she was not
dying, but only out of her mind.

During the afternoon, the doctors ordered that Mrs. Sherwin should
not be allowed to see her husband or her child again, without their
permission. There was little need of taking such a precaution to
preserve the tranquillity of her last moments. As the day began to
decline, she sank again into insensibility: her life was just not death,
and that was all. She lingered on in this quiet way, with her eyes
peacefully closed, and her breathing so gentle as to be quite inaudible,
until late in the evening. Just as it grew quite dark, and the candle
was lit in the sick room, the servant who was helping to watch by her,
drew aside the curtain to look at her mistress; and saw that, though
her eyes were still closed, she was smiling. The girl turned round,
and beckoned to the nurse to come to the bedside. When they lifted the
curtains again to look at her, she was dead.

                    * * * * *

Let me return to the day of my last visit to North Villa. More remains
to be recorded, before my narrative can advance to the morrow.

After the door had closed, and I knew that I had looked my last on Mrs.
Sherwin in this world, I remained a few minutes alone in the room, until
I had steadied my mind sufficiently to go out again into the streets. As
I walked down the garden-path to the gate, the servant whom I had seen
on my entrance, ran after me, and eagerly entreated that I would wait
one moment and speak to her.

When I stopped and looked at the girl, she burst into tears. "I'm afraid
I've been doing wrong, Sir," she sobbed out, "and at this dreadful time
too, when my poor mistress is dying! If you please, Sir, I _must_ tell
you about it!"

I gave her a little time to compose herself; and then asked what she had
to say.

"I think you must have seen a man leaving a letter with me, Sir," she
continued, "just when you came up to the door, a little while ago?"

"Yes: I saw him."

"It was for Miss Margaret, Sir, that letter; and I was to keep it
secret; and--and--it isn't the first I've taken in for her. It's weeks
and weeks ago, Sir, that the same man came with a letter, and gave me
money to let nobody see it but Miss Margaret--and that time, Sir, he
waited; and she sent me with an answer to give him, in the same secret
way. And now, here's this second letter; I don't know who it comes
from--but I haven't taken it to her yet; I waited to show it to you,
Sir, as you came out, because--"

"Why, Susan?--tell me candidly why?"

"I hope you won't take it amiss, Sir, if I say that having lived in the
family so long as I have, I can't help knowing a little about what
you and Miss Margaret used to be to each other, and that something's
happened wrong between you lately; and so, Sir, it seems to be very
bad and dishonest in me (after first helping you to come together, as I
did), to be giving her strange letters, unknown to you. They may be bad
letters. I'm sure I wouldn't wish to say anything disrespectful, or that
didn't become my place; but--"

"Go on, Susan--speak as freely and as truly to me as ever."

"Well, Sir, Miss Margaret's been very much altered, ever since that
night when she came home alone, and frightened us so. She shuts herself
up in her room, and won't speak to anybody except my master; she doesn't
seem to care about anything that happens; and sometimes she looks so at
me, when I'm waiting on her, that I'm almost afraid to be in the same
room with her. I've never heard her mention your name once, Sir; and I'm
fearful there's something on her mind that there oughtn't to be. He's
a very shabby man that leaves the letters--would you please to look at
this, and say whether you think it's right in me to take it up-stairs."

She held out a letter. I hesitated before I looked at it.

"Oh, Sir! please, please do take it!" said the girl earnestly. "I did
wrong, I'm afraid, in giving her the first; but I can't do wrong again,
when my poor mistress is dying in the house. I can't keep secrets, Sir,
that may be bad secrets, at such a dreadful time as this; I couldn't
have laid down in my bed to-night, when there's likely to be death in
the house, if I hadn't confessed what I've done; and my poor mistress
has always been so kind and good to us servants--better than ever we
deserved."

Weeping bitterly as she said this, the kind-hearted girl held out the
letter to me once more. This time I took it from her, and looked at the
address.

Though I did not know the handwriting, still there was something in
those unsteady characters which seemed familiar to me. Was it possible
that I had ever seen them before? I tried to consider; but my memory
was confused, my mind wearied out, after all that had happened since the
morning. The effort was fruitless: I gave back the letter.

"I know as little about it, Susan, as you do."

"But ought I to take it up-stairs, Sir? only tell me that!"

"It is not for me to say. All interest or share on my part, Susan, in
what she--in what your young mistress receives, is at an end."

"I'm very sorry to hear you say that, Sir; very, very sorry. But what
would you advise me to do?"

"Let me look at the letter once more."

On a second view, the handwriting produced the same effect on me as
before, ending too with just the same result. I returned the letter
again.

"I respect your scruples, Susan, but I am not the person to remove or
to justify them. Why should you not apply in this difficulty to your
master?"

"I dare not, Sir; I dare not for my life. He's been worse than ever,
lately; if I said as much to him as I've said to you, I believe he'd
kill me!" She hesitated, then continued more composedly; "Well, at any
rate I've told _you,_ Sir, and that's made my mind easier; and--and I'll
give her the letter this once, and then take in no more--if they come,
unless I hear a proper account of them."

She curtseyed; and, bidding me farewell very sadly and anxiously,
returned to the house with the letter in her hand. If I had guessed at
that moment who it was written by! If I could only have suspected what
were its contents!

I left Hollyoake Square in a direction which led to some fields a little
distance on. It was very strange; but that unknown handwriting still
occupied my thoughts: that wretched trifle absolutely took possession of
my mind, at such a time as this; in such a position as mine was now.

I stopped wearily in the fields at a lonely spot, away from the
footpath. My eyes ached at the sunlight, and I shaded them with my hand.
Exactly at the same instant, the lost recollection flashed back on me so
vividly that I started almost in terror. The handwriting shown me by the
servant at North Villa, was the same as the handwriting on that unopened
and forgotten letter in my pocket, which I had received from the servant
at home--received in the morning, as I crossed the hall to enter my
father's room.

I took out the letter, opened it with trembling fingers, and looked
through the cramped, closely-written pages for the signature.

It was "ROBERT MANNION."

V.

Mannion! I had never suspected that the note shown to me at North Villa
might have come from him. And yet, the secrecy with which it had been
delivered; the person to whom it was addressed; the mystery connected
with it even in the servant's eyes, all pointed to the discovery which
I had so incomprehensibly failed to make. I had suffered a letter, which
might contain written proof of her guilt, to be taken, from under my own
eyes, to Margaret Sherwin! How had my perceptions become thus strangely
blinded? The confusion of my memory, the listless incapacity of all my
faculties, answered the question but too readily, of themselves.

"Robert Mannion!" I could not take my eyes from that name: I still held
before me the crowded, closely-written lines of his writing, and delayed
to read them. Something of the horror which the presence of the man
himself would have inspired in me, was produced by the mere sight of his
letter, and that letter addressed to _me._ The vengeance which my
own hands had wreaked on him, he was, of all men the surest to repay.
Perhaps, in these lines, the dark future through which his way and mine
might lie, would be already shadowed forth. Margaret too! Could he write
so much, and not write of _her?_ not disclose the mystery in which the
motives of _her_ crime were still hidden? I turned back again to the
first page, and resolved to read the letter. It began abruptly, in the
following terms:--



                                    "St. Helen's Hospital.

"You may look at the signature when you receive this, and may be tempted
to tear up my letter, and throw it from you unread. I warn you to read
what I have written, and to estimate, if you can, its importance to
yourself. Destroy these pages afterwards if you like--they will have
served their purpose.

"Do you know where I am, and what I suffer? I am one of the patients
of this hospital, hideously mutilated for life by your hand. If I could
have known certainly the day of my dismissal, I should have waited to
tell you with my own lips what I now write--but I am ignorant of this.
At the very point of recovery I have suffered a relapse.

"You will silence any uneasy upbraidings of conscience, should you feel
them, by saying that I have deserved death at your hands. I will tell
you, in answer, what you deserve and shall receive at mine.

"But I will first assume that it was knowledge of your wife's guilt
which prompted your attack on me. I am well aware that she has declared
herself innocent, and that her father supports her declaration. By the
time you receive this letter (my injuries oblige me to allow myself
a whole fortnight to write it in), I shall have taken measures which
render further concealment unnecessary. Therefore, if my confession
avail you aught, you have it here:--She is guilty: _willingly_ guilty,
remember, whatever she may say to the contrary. You may believe this,
and believe all I write hereafter. Deception between us two is at an
end.

"I have told you Margaret Sherwin is guilty. Why was she guilty? What
was the secret of my influence over her?

"To make you comprehend what I have now to communicate, it is necessary
for me to speak of myself; and of my early life. To-morrow, I will
undertake this disclosure--to-day, I can neither hold the pen, nor see
the paper any longer. If you could look at my face, where I am now laid,
you would know why!"

                         *****

"When we met for the first time at North Villa, I had not been five
minutes in your presence before I detected your curiosity to know
something about me, and perceived that you doubted, from the first,
whether I was born and bred for such a situation as I held under Mr.
Sherwin. Failing--as I knew you would fail--to gain any information
about me from my employer or his family, you tried, at various times,
to draw me into familiarity, to get me to talk unreservedly to you; and
only gave up the attempt to penetrate my secret, whatever it might
be, when we parted after our interview at my house on the night of the
storm. On that night, I determined to baulk your curiosity, and yet to
gain your confidence; and I succeeded. You little thought, when you
bade me farewell at my own door, that you had given your hand and your
friendship to a man, who--long before you met with Margaret Sherwin--had
inherited the right to be the enemy of your father, and of every
descendant of your father's house.

"Does this declaration surprise you? Read on, and you will understand
it.

"I am the son of a gentleman. My father's means were miserably limited,
and his family was not an old family, like yours. Nevertheless, he was a
gentleman in anybody's sense of the word; he knew it, and that knowledge
was his ruin. He was a weak, kind, careless man; a worshipper of
conventionalities; and a great respecter of the wide gaps which lay
between social stations in his time. Thus, he determined to live like
a gentleman, by following a gentleman's pursuit--a profession, as
distinguished from a trade. Failing in this, he failed to follow out his
principle, and starve like a gentleman. He died the death of a felon;
leaving me no inheritance but the name of a felon's son.

"While still a young man, he contrived to be introduced to a gentleman
of great family, great position, and great wealth. He interested, or
fancied he interested, this gentleman; and always looked on him as the
patron who was to make his fortune, by getting him the first government
sinecure (they were plenty enough in those days!) which might fall
vacant. In firm and foolish expectation of this, he lived far beyond his
little professional income--lived among rich people without the courage
to make use of them as a poor man. It was the old story: debts and
liabilities of all kinds pressed heavy on him--creditors refused to
wait--exposure and utter ruin threatened him--and the prospect of the
sinecure was still as far off as ever.

"Nevertheless he believed in the advent of this office; and all the more
resolutely now, because he looked to it as his salvation. He was quite
confident of the interest of his patron, and of its speedy exertion
in his behalf. Perhaps, that gentleman had overrated his own
political influence; perhaps, my father had been too sanguine, and had
misinterpreted polite general promises into special engagements. However
it was, the bailiffs came into his house one morning, while help from
a government situation, or any situation, was as unattainable as
ever--came to take him to prison: to seize everything, in execution,
even to the very bed on which my mother (then seriously ill) was lying.
The whole fabric of false prosperity which he had been building up
to make the world respect him, was menaced with instant and shameful
overthrow. He had not the courage to let it go; so he took refuge from
misfortune in a crime.

"He forged a bond, to prop up his credit for a little time longer.
The name he made use of was the name of his patron. In doing this, he
believed--as all men who commit crime believe--that he had the best
possible chance of escaping consequences. In the first place, he might
get the long-expected situation in time to repay the amount of the bond
before detection. In the second place, he had almost the certainty of a
legacy from a rich relative, old and in ill-health, whose death might
be fairly expected from day to day. If both these prospects failed (and
they _did_ fail), there was still a third chance--the chance that his
rich patron would rather pay the money than appear against him. In those
days they hung for forgery. My father believed it to be impossible that
a man at whose table he had sat, whose relatives and friends he had
amused and instructed by his talents, would be the man to give evidence
which should condemn him to be hanged on the public scaffold.

"He was wrong. The wealthy patron held strict principles of honour
which made no allowance for temptations and weaknesses; and was moreover
influenced by high-flown notions of his responsibilities as a legislator
(he was a member of Parliament) to the laws of his country. He appeared
accordingly, and gave evidence against the prisoner; who was found
guilty, and left for execution.

"Then, when it was too late, this man of pitiless honour thought himself
at last justified in leaning to the side of mercy, and employed his
utmost interest, in every direction, to obtain a mitigation of the
sentence to transportation for life. The application failed; even a
reprieve of a few days was denied. At the appointed time, my father died
on the scaffold by the hangman's hand.

"Have you suspected, while reading this part of my letter, who the
high-born gentleman was whose evidence hung him? If you have not, I
will tell you. That gentleman was _your father._ You will now wonder
no longer how I could have inherited the right to be his enemy, and the
enemy of all who are of his blood.

"The shock of her husband's horrible death deprived my mother of reason.
She lived a few months after his execution; but never recovered her
faculties. I was their only child; and was left penniless to begin life
as the son of a father who had been hanged, and of a mother who had died
in a public madhouse.

"More of myself to-morrow--my letter will be a long one: I must pause
often over it, as I pause to-day."

                         *****

"Well: I started in life with the hangman's mark on me--with the
parent's shame for the son's reputation. Wherever I went, whatever
friends I kept, whatever acquaintances I made--people knew how my father
had died: and showed that they knew it. Not so much by shunning or
staring at me (vile as human nature is, there were not many who did
that), as by insulting me with over-acted sympathy, and elaborate
anxiety to sham entire ignorance of my father's fate. The gallows-brand
was on my forehead; but they were too benevolently blind to see it. The
gallows-infamy was my inheritance; but they were too resolutely generous
to discover it! This was hard to bear. However, I was strong-hearted
even then, when my sensations were quick, and my sympathies young: so I
bore it.

"My only weakness was my father's weakness--the notion that I was born
to a station ready made for me, and that the great use of my life was to
live up to it. My station! I battled for that with the world for years
and years, before I discovered that the highest of all stations is the
station a man makes for himself: and the lowest, the station that is
made for him by others.

"At starting in life, your father wrote to make me offers of
assistance--assistance, after he had ruined me! Assistance to the child,
from hands which had tied the rope round the parent's neck! I sent him
back his letter. He knew that I was his enemy, his son's enemy, and his
son's son's enemy, as long as I lived. I never heard from him again.

"Trusting boldly to myself to carve out my own way, and to live down my
undeserved ignominy; resolving in the pride of my integrity to combat
openly and fairly with misfortune, I shrank, at first, from disowning my
parentage and abandoning my father's name. Standing on my own character,
confiding in my intellect and my perseverance, I tried pursuit after
pursuit, and was beaten afresh at every new effort. Whichever way I
turned, the gallows still rose as the same immovable obstacle between me
and fortune, between me and station, between me and my fellowmen. I
was morbidly sensitive on this point. The slightest references to my
father's fate, however remote or accidental, curdled my blood. I saw
open insult, or humiliating compassion, or forced forbearance, in the
look and manner of every man about me. So I broke off with old friends,
and tried new; and, in seeking fresh pursuits, sought fresh connections,
where my father's infamy might be unknown. Wherever I went, the old
stain always broke out afresh, just at the moment when I had deceived
myself into the belief that it was utterly effaced. I had a warm heart
then--it was some time before it turned to stone, and felt nothing.
Those were the days when failure and humiliation could still draw tears
from me: that epoch in my life is marked in my memory as the epoch when
I could weep.

"At last, I gave way before difficulty, and conceded the first step to
the calamity which had stood front to front with me so long. I left the
neighbourhood where I was known, and assumed the name of a schoolfellow
who had died. For some time this succeeded; but the curse of my
father's death followed me, though I saw it not. After various
employments--still, mind, the employments of a gentleman!--had first
supported, then failed me, I became an usher at a school. It was there
that my false name was detected, and my identity discovered again--I
never knew through whom. The exposure was effected by some enemy,
anonymously. For several days, I thought everybody in the school treated
me in an altered way. The cause came out, first in whispers, then in
reckless jests, while I was taking care of the boys in the playground.
In the fury of the moment I struck one of the most insolent, and the
eldest of them, and hurt him rather seriously. The parents heard of it,
and threatened me with prosecution; the whole neighbourhood was aroused.
I had to leave my situation secretly, by night, or the mob would have
pelted the felon's son out of the parish.

"I went back to London, bearing another assumed name; and tried, as a
last resource to save me from starvation, the resource of writing. I
served my apprenticeship to literature as a hack-author of the lowest
degree. Knowing I had talents which might be turned to account, I tried
to vindicate them by writing an original work. But my experience of the
world had made me unfit to dress my thoughts in popular costume: I could
only tell bitter truths bitterly; I exposed licenced hypocrisies too
openly; I saw the vicious side of many respectabilities, and said I saw
it--in short, I called things by their right names; and no publisher
would treat with me. So I stuck to my low task-work; my penny-a lining
in third-class newspapers; my translating from Frenchmen and Germans,
and plagiarising from dead authors, to supply the raw material for
bookmongering by more accomplished bookmongers than I. In this life,
there was one advantage which compensated for much misery and meanness,
and bitter, biting disappointment: I could keep my identity securely
concealed. Character was of no consequence to me; nobody cared to know
who I was, or to inquire what I had been--the gallows-mark was smoothed
out at last!

"While I was living thus on the offal of literature, I met with a woman
of good birth, and fair fortune, whose sympathies or whose curiosity
I happened to interest. She and her father and mother received me
favourably, as a gentleman who had known better days, and an author
whom the public had undeservedly neglected. How I managed to gain their
confidence and esteem, without alluding to my parentage, it is not worth
while to stop to describe. That I did so you will easily imagine, when
I tell you that the woman to whom I refer, consented, with her father's
full approval, to become my wife.

"The very day of the marriage was fixed. I believed I had successfully
parried all perilous inquiries--but I was wrong. A relation of the
family, whom I had never seen, came to town a short time before the
wedding. We disliked each other on our first introduction. He was a
clever, resolute man of the world, and privately inquired about me to
much better purpose in a few days, than his family had done in
several months. Accident favoured him strangely, everything was
discovered--literally everything--and I was contemptuously dismissed the
house. Could a lady of respectability marry a man (no matter how worthy
in _her_ eyes) whose father had been hanged, whose mother had died in a
madhouse, who had lived under assumed names, who had been driven from an
excellent country neighbourhood, for cruelty to a harmless school-boy?
Impossible!

"With this event, my long strife and struggle with the world ended.

"My eyes opened to a new view of life, and the purpose of life. My first
aspirations to live up to my birth-right position, in spite of adversity
and dishonour, to make my name sweet enough in men's nostrils, to
cleanse away the infamy on my father's, were now no more. The ambition
which--whether I was a hack-author, a travelling portrait-painter, or
an usher at a school--had once whispered to me: low down as you are in
dark, miry ways, you are on the path which leads upward to high places
in the sunshine afar-off; you are not working to scrape together wealth
for another man; you are independent, self-reliant, labouring in your
own cause--the daring ambition which had once counselled thus, sank
dead within me at last. The strong, stern spirit was beaten by spirits
stronger and sterner yet--Infamy and Want.

"I wrote to a man of character and wealth; one of my friends of early
days, who had ceased to hold communication with me, like other friends,
but, unlike them, had given me up in genuine sorrow: I wrote, and asked
him to meet me privately by night. I was too ragged to go to his house,
too sensitive still (even if I had gone and had been admitted) to risk
encountering people there, who either knew my father, or knew how he
had died. I wished to speak to my former friend, unseen, and made the
appointment accordingly. He kept it.

"When we met, I said to him:--I have a last favour to ask of you. When
we parted years ago, I had high hopes and brave resolutions--both are
worn out. I then believed that I could not only rise superior to my
misfortune, but could make that very misfortune the motive of my rise.
You told me I was too quick of temper, too morbidly sensitive about
the slightest reference to my father's death, too fierce and changeable
under undeserved trial and disappointment. This might have been true
then; but I am altered now: pride and ambition have been persecuted and
starved out of me. An obscure, monotonous life, in which thought and
spirit may be laid asleep, never to wake again, is the only life I care
for. Help me to lead it. I ask you, first, as a beggar, to give me from
your superfluity, apparel decent enough to bear the daylight. I ask you
next, to help me to some occupation which will just give me my bread, my
shelter, and my hour or two of solitude in the evening. You have plenty
of influence to do this, and you know I am honest. You cannot choose me
too humble and obscure an employment; let me descend low enough to be
lost to sight beneath the world I have lived in; let me go among people
who want to know that I work honestly for them, and want to know nothing
more. Get me a mean hiding-place to conceal myself and my history in for
ever, and then neither attempt to see me nor communicate with me again.
If former friends chance to ask after me, tell them I am dead, or gone
into another country. The wisest life is the life the animals lead: I
want, like them, to serve my master for food, shelter, and liberty to
lie asleep now and then in the sunshine, without being driven away as a
pest or a trespasser. Do you believe in this resolution?--it is my last.

"He _did_ believe in it; and he granted what I asked. Through his
interference and recommendation, I entered the service of Mr. Sherwin.--

"I must stop here for to-day. To-morrow I shall come to disclosures of
vital interest to you. Have you been surprised that I, your enemy by
every cause of enmity that one man can have against another, should
write to you so fully about the secrets of my early life? I have done
so, because I wish the strife between us to be an open strife on my
side; because I desire that you should know thoroughly what you have
to expect from my character, after such a life as I have led. There
was purpose in my deceit, when I deceived you--there is purpose in my
frankness, when I now tell you all."

                         *****

"I began in Mr. Sherwin's employment, as the lowest clerk in his office.
Both the master and the men looked a little suspiciously on me, at
first. My account of myself was always the same--simple and credible;
I had entered the counting-house with the best possible recommendation,
and I acted up to it. These circumstances in my favour, joined to a
manner that never varied, and to a steadiness at my work that never
relaxed, soon produced their effect--all curiosity about me gradually
died away: I was left to pursue my avocations in peace. The friend who
had got me my situation, preserved my secret as I had desired him; of
all the people whom I had formerly known, pitiless enemies and lukewarm
adherents, not one ever suspected that my hiding-place was the back
office of a linen-draper's shop. For the first time in my life, I felt
that the secret of my father's misfortune was mine, and mine only; that
my security from exposure was at length complete.

"Before long, I rose to the chief place in the counting-house. It was no
very difficult matter for me to discover, that my new master's character
had other elements besides that of the highest respectability. In plain
terms, I found him to be a pretty equal compound by nature, of the fool,
the tyrant, and the coward. There was only one direction in which what
grovelling sympathies he had, could be touched to some purpose. Save
him waste, or get him profit; and he was really grateful. I succeeded
in working both these marvels. His managing man cheated him; I found
it out; refused to be bribed to collusion; and exposed the fraud to Mr.
Sherwin. This got me his confidence, and the place of chief clerk. In
that position, I discovered a means, which had never occurred to my
employer, of greatly enlarging his business and its profits, with the
least possible risk. He tried my plan, and it succeeded. This gained me
his warmest admiration, an increase of salary, and a firm footing in his
family circle. My projects were more than fulfilled: I had money enough,
and leisure enough; and spent my obscure existence exactly as I had
proposed.

"But my life was still not destined to be altogether devoid of an
animating purpose. When I first knew Margaret Sherwin, she was just
changing from childhood to girlhood. I marked the promise of future
beauty in her face and figure; and secretly formed the resolution which
you afterwards came forward to thwart, but which I have executed, and
will execute, in spite of you.

"The thoughts out of which that resolution sprang, counselled me more
calmly than you can suppose. I said within myself: 'The best years of my
life have been irrevocably wasted; misery and humiliation and disaster
have followed my steps from my youth; of all the pleasant draughts which
other men drink to sweeten existence, not one has passed my lips. I will
know happiness before I die; and this girl shall confer it. She shall
grow up to maturity for _me:_ I will imperceptibly gain such a hold on
her affections, while they are yet young and impressible, that, when the
time comes, and I speak the word--though my years more than double hers,
though I am dependent on her father for the bread I eat, though parents'
voice and lover's voice unite to call her back--she shall still come to
my side, and of her own free will put her hand in mine, and follow me
wherever I go; my wife, my mistress, my servant, which I choose.

"This was my project. To execute it, time and opportunity were mine; and
I steadily and warily made use of them, hour by hour, day by day, year
by year. From first to last, the girl's father never suspected me.
Besides the security which he felt in my age, he had judged me by his
own small commercial standard, and had found me a model of integrity.
A man who had saved him from being cheated, who had so enlarged and
consolidated his business as to place him among the top dignitaries of
the trade; who was the first to come to the desk in the morning, and the
last to remain there in the evening; who had not only never demanded,
but had absolutely refused to take, a single holiday--such a man as
this was, morally and intellectually, a man in ten thousand; a man to be
admired and trusted in every relation of life!

"His confidence in me knew no bounds. He was uneasy if I was not by to
advise him in the simplest matters. My ears were the first to which he
confided his insane ambition on the subject of his daughter--his anxiety
to see her marry above her station--his stupid resolution to give
her the false, flippant, fashionable education which she subsequently
received. I thwarted his plans in nothing, openly--counteracted them in
everything, secretly. The more I strengthened my sources of influence
over Margaret, the more pleased he was. He was delighted to hear her
constantly referring to me about her home-lessons; to see her coming to
me, evening after evening, to learn new occupations and amusements. He
suspected I had been a gentleman; he had been told I spoke pure English;
he felt sure I had received a first-rate education--I was nearly as good
for Margaret as good society itself! When she grew older, and went to
the fashionable school, as her father had declared she should, my offer
to keep up her lessons in the holidays, and to examine what progress she
had made, when she came home regularly every fortnight for the Sunday,
was accepted with greedy readiness, and acknowledged with servile
gratitude. At this time, Mr. Sherwin's own estimate of me, among his
friends, was, that he had got me for half nothing, and that I was worth
more to him than a thousand a-year.

"But there was one member of the family who suspected my intentions from
the first. Mrs. Sherwin--the weak, timid, sickly woman, whose opinion
nobody regarded, whose character nobody understood--Mrs. Sherwin, of
all those who dwelt in the house, or came to the house, was the only one
whose looks, words, and manner kept me constantly on my guard. The very
first time we saw each other, that woman doubted _me,_ as I doubted
_her;_ and for ever afterwards, when we met, she was on the watch.
This mutual distrust, this antagonism of our two natures, never openly
proclaimed itself, and never wore away. My chance of security lay, not
so much in my own caution, and my perfect command of look and action
under all emergencies, as in the self-distrust and timidity of her
nature; in the helpless inferiority of position to which her husband's
want of affection, and her daughter's want of respect, condemned her
in her own house; and in the influence of repulsion--at times, even of
absolute terror--which my presence had the power of communicating to
her. Suspecting what I am assured she suspected--incapable as she was
of rendering her suspicions certainties--knowing beforehand, as she
must have known, that no words she could speak would gain the smallest
respect or credit from her husband or her child--that woman's life,
while I was at North Villa, must have been a life of the direst mental
suffering to which any human being was ever condemned.

"As time passed, and Margaret grew older, her beauty both of face and
form approached nearer to perfection than I had foreseen, closely as I
watched her. But neither her mind nor her disposition kept pace with
her beauty. I studied her closely, with the same patient, penetrating
observation, which my experience of the world has made it a habit with
me to direct on every one with whom I am brought in contact--I studied
her, I say, intently; and found her worthy of nothing, not even of the
slave-destiny which I had in store for her.

"She had neither heart nor mind, in the higher sense of those words. She
had simply instincts--most of the bad instincts of an animal; none of
the good. The great motive power which really directed her, was
Deceit. I never met with any human being so inherently disingenuous,
so naturally incapable of candour even in the most trifling affairs of
life, as she was. The best training could never have wholly overcome
this vice in her: the education she actually got--an education under
false pretences--encouraged it. Everybody has read, some people
have known, of young girls who have committed the most extraordinary
impostures, or sustained the most infamous false accusations; their
chief motive being often the sheer enjoyment of practising deceit. Of
such characters was the character of Margaret Sherwin.

"She had strong passions, but not their frequent accompaniment--strong
will, and strong intellect. She had some obstinacy, but no firmness.
Appeal in the right way to her vanity, and you could make her do the
thing she had declared she would not do, the minute after she had
made the declaration. As for her mind, it was of the lowest schoolgirl
average. She had a certain knack at learning this thing, and remembering
that; but she understood nothing fairly, felt nothing deeply. If I had
not had my own motive in teaching her, I should have shut the books
again, the first time she and I opened them together, and have given her
up as a fool.

"All, however, that I discovered of bad in her character, never made
me pause in the prosecution of my design; I had carried it too far for
that, before I thoroughly knew her. Besides, what mattered her duplicity
to _me?_--I could see through it. Her strong passions?--I could control
them. Her obstinacy?--I could break it. Her poverty of intellect?--I
cared nothing about her intellect. What I wanted was youth and beauty;
she was young and beautiful and I was sure of her.

"Yes; sure. Her showy person, showy accomplishments, and showy manners
dazzled all eyes but mine--Of all the people about her, I alone found
out what she really was; and in that lay the main secret of my influence
over her. I dreaded no rivalry. Her father, prompted by his ambitious
hopes, kept most young men of her class away from the house; the few who
did come were not dangerous; _they_ were as incapable of inspiring, as
_she_ was of feeling, real love. Her mother still watched me, and
still discovered nothing; still suspected me behind my back, and still
trembled before my face. Months passed on monotonously, year succeeded
to year; and I bided my time as patiently, and kept my secret as
cautiously as at the first. No change occurred, nothing happened to
weaken or alter my influence at North Villa, until the day arrived when
Margaret left school and came home for good.

                         *****

"Exactly at the period to which I have referred, certain business
transactions of great importance required the presence of Mr. Sherwin,
or of some confidential person to represent him, at Lyons. Secretly
distrusting his own capabilities, he proposed to me to go; saying that
it would be a pleasant trip for me, and a good introduction to his
wealthy manufacturing correspondents. After some consideration, I
accepted his offer.

"I had never hinted a word of my intentions towards her to Margaret;
but she understood them well enough--I was certain of that, from many
indications which no man could mistake. For reasons which will presently
appear, I resolved not to explain myself until my return from Lyons. My
private object in going there, was to make interest secretly with Mr.
Sherwin's correspondents for a situation in their house. I knew that
when I made my proposals to Margaret, I must be prepared to act on them
on the instant; I knew that her father's fury when he discovered that I
had been helping to educate his daughter only for myself, would lead
him to any extremities; I knew that we must fly to some foreign country;
and, lastly, I knew the importance of securing a provision for our
maintenance, when we got there. I had saved money, it is true--nearly
two-thirds of my salary, every year--but had not saved enough for two.
Accordingly, I left England to push my own interests, as well as my
employer's; left it, confident that my short absence would not weaken
the result of years of steady influence over Margaret. The sequel showed
that, cautious and calculating as I was, I had nevertheless overlooked
the chances against me, which my own experience of her vanity and
duplicity ought to have enabled me thoroughly to foresee.

"Well: I had been some time at Lyons; had managed my employer's business
(from first to last, I was faithful, as I had engaged to be, to his
commercial interests); and had arranged my own affairs securely and
privately. Already, I was looking forward, with sensations of happiness
which were new to me, to my return and to the achievement of the
one success, the solitary triumph of my long life of humiliation and
disaster, when a letter arrived from Mr. Sherwin. It contained the news
of your private marriage, and of the extraordinary conditions that had
been attached to it with your consent.

"Other people were in the room with me when I read that letter; but my
manner betrayed nothing to them. My hand never trembled when I folded
the sheet of paper again; I was not a minute late in attending a
business engagement which I had accepted; the slightest duties of
other kinds which I had to do, I rigidly fulfilled. Never did I more
thoroughly and fairly earn the evening's leisure by the morning's work,
than I earned it that day.

"Leaving the town at the close of afternoon, I walked on till I came to
a solitary place on the bank of the great river which runs near Lyons.
There I opened the letter for the second time, and read it through again
slowly, with no necessity now for self-control, because no human being
was near to look at me. There I read your name, constantly repeated in
every line of writing; and knew that the man who, in my absence, had
stepped between me and my prize--the man who, in his insolence of youth,
and birth, and fortune, had snatched from me the one long-delayed reward
for twenty years of misery, just as my hands were stretched forth to
grasp it, was the son of that honourable and high-born gentleman who had
given my father to the gallows, and had made me the outcast of my social
privileges for life.

"The sun was setting when I looked up from the letter; flashes of
rose-light leapt on the leaping river; the birds were winging nestward
to the distant trees, and the ghostly stillness of night was sailing
solemnly over earth and sky, as the first thought of the vengeance I
would have on father and son began to burn fiercely at my heart, to move
like a new life within me, to whisper to my spirit--Wait: be patient;
they are both in your power; you can now foul the father's name as the
father fouled yours--you can yet thwart the son, as the son has thwarted
_you._

"In the few minutes that passed, while I lingered in that lonely
place after reading the letter, I imagined the whole scheme which it
afterwards took a year to execute. I laid the whole plan against you and
your father, the first half of which, through the accident that led you
to your discovery, has alone been carried out. I believed then, as I
believe now, that I stood towards you both in the place of an injured
man, whose right it was, in self-defence and self-assertion, to injure
you. Judged by your ideas, this may read wickedly; but to me, after
having lived and suffered as I have, the modern common-places current
in the world are so many brazen images which society impudently
worships--like the Jews of old--in the face of living Truth.

                         *****

"Let us get back to England.

"That evening, when we met for the first time, did you observe that
Margaret was unusually agitated before I came in? I detected some
change, the moment I saw her. Did you notice that I avoided speaking
to her, or looking at her? it was because I was afraid to do so. I saw
that, with my return, my old influence over her was coming back: and
I still believe that, hypocritical and heartless though she was, and
blinded though you were by your passion for her, she would unconsciously
have betrayed everything to you on that evening, if I had not acted as
I did. Her mother, too! how her mother watched me from the moment when I
came in!

"Afterwards, while you were trying hard to open, undetected, the sealed
history of my early life, I was warily discovering from Margaret all
that I desired to know. I say 'warily,' but the word poorly expresses my
consummate caution and patience, at that time. I never put myself in her
power, never risked offending, or frightening, or revolting her;
never lost an opportunity of bringing her back to her old habits
of familiarity; and, more than all, never gave her mother a single
opportunity of detecting me. This was the sum of what I gathered up, bit
by bit, from secret and scattered investigations, persevered in through
many weeks.

"Her vanity had been hurt, her expectations disappointed, at my having
left her for Lyons, with no other parting words than such as I might
have spoken to any other woman whom I looked on merely as a friend. That
she felt any genuine love for me I never have believed, and never shall:
but I had that practical ability, that firmness of will, that obvious
personal ascendancy over most of those with whom I came in contact,
which extorts the respect and admiration of women of all characters,
and even of women of no character at all. As far as her senses, her
instincts, and her pride could take her, I had won her over to me but
no farther--because no farther could she go. I mention pride among her
motives, advisedly. She was proud of being the object of such attentions
as I had now paid to her for years, because she fancied that, through
those attentions, I, who, more or less, ruled everyone else in her
sphere, had yielded to her the power of ruling _me._ The manner of my
departure from England showed her too plainly that she had miscalculated
her influence, and that the power, in her case, as in the case of
others, was all on my side. Hence the wound to her vanity, to which I
have alluded.

"It was while this wound was still fresh that you met her, and appealed
to her self-esteem in a new direction. You must have seen clearly
enough, that such proposals as yours far exceeded the most ambitious
expectations formed by her father. No man's alliance could have lifted
her much higher out of her own class: she knew this, and from that
knowledge married you--married you for your station, for your name,
for your great friends and connections, for your father's money, and
carriages, and fine houses; for everything, in short, but yourself.

"Still, in spite of the temptations of youth, wealth, and birth which
your proposals held out to her, she accepted them at first (I made her
confess it herself) with a secret terror and misgiving, produced by
the remembrance of me. These sensations, however, she soon quelled,
or fancied she quelled; and these, it was now my last, best chance to
revive. I had a whole year for the work before me; and I felt certain of
success.

"On your side, you had immense advantages. You had social superiority;
you had her father's full approbation; and you were married to her. If
she had loved you for yourself, loved you for anything besides her
own sensual interests, her vulgar ambition, her reckless vanity, every
effort I could have made against you would have been defeated from the
first. But, setting this out of the question, in spite of the utter
heartlessness of her attachment to you, if you had not consented to that
condition of waiting a year for her after marriage; or, consenting to
it, if you had broken it long before the year was out--knowing, as you
should have known, that in most women's eyes a man is not dishonoured by
breaking his promise, so long as he breaks it for a woman's sake--if,
I say, you had taken either of these courses, I should still have
been powerless against you. But you remained faithful to your promise,
faithful to the condition, faithful to the ill-directed modesty of your
love; and that very fidelity put you in my power. A pure-minded girl
would have loved you a thousand times better for acting as you did--but
Margaret Sherwin was not a pure-minded girl, not a maidenly girl: I have
looked into her thoughts, and I know it.

"Such were your chances against me; and such was the manner in which
you misused them. On _my_ side, I had indefatigable patience; personal
advantages equal, with the exception of birth and age, to yours:
long-established influence; freedom to be familiar; and more than all,
that stealthy, unflagging strength of purpose which only springs from
the desire of revenge. I first thoroughly tested your character, and
discovered on what points it was necessary for me to be on my guard
against you, when you took shelter under my roof from the storm. If your
father had been with you on that night, there were moments, while the
tempest was wrought to its full fury, when, if my voice could have
called the thunder down on the house to crush it and every one in it to
atoms, I would have spoken the word, and ended the strife for all of
us. The wind, the hail, and the lightning maddened my thoughts of your
father and you--I was nearly letting you see it, when that flash came
between us as we parted at my door.

"How I gained your confidence, you know; and you know also, how I
contrived to make you use me, afterwards, as the secret friend who
procured you privileges with Margaret which her father would not grant
at your own request. This, at the outset, secured me from suspicion
on your part; and I had only to leave it to your infatuation to do
the rest. With you my course was easy--with her it was beset by
difficulties; but I overcame them. Your fatal consent to wait through
a year of probation, furnished me with weapons against you, which I
employed to the most unscrupulous purpose. I can picture to myself what
would be your indignation and your horror, if I fully described the use
which I made of the position in which your compliance with her father's
conditions placed you towards Margaret. I spare you this avowal--it
would be useless now. Consider me what you please; denounce my conduct
in any terms you like: my justification will always be the same. I
was the injured man, you were the aggressor; I was righting myself by
getting back a possession of which you had robbed me, and any means were
sanctified by such an end as that.

"But my success, so far, was of little avail, in itself; against the
all-powerful counter-attraction which you possessed. Contemptible, or
not, you still had this superiority over me--you could make a fine
lady of her. From that fact sprang the ambition which all my influence,
dating as it did from her childhood, could not destroy. There, was
fastened the main-spring which regulated her selfish devotion to you,
and which it was next to impossible to snap asunder. I never made the
attempt.

"The scheme which I proposed to her, when she was fully prepared to hear
it, and to conceal that she had heard it, left her free to enjoy all the
social advantages which your alliance could bestow--free to ride in her
carriage, and go into her father's shop (that was one of her ambitions!)
as a new customer added to his aristocratic connection--free even to
become one of your family, unsuspected, in case your rash marriage was
forgiven. Your credulity rendered the execution of this scheme easy.
In what manner it was to be carried out, and what object I proposed to
myself in framing it, I abstain from avowing; for the simple reason that
the discovery at which you arrived by following us on the night of the
party, made my plan abortive, and has obliged me since to renounce it. I
need only say, in this place, that it threatened your father as well as
you, and that Margaret recoiled from it at first--not from any horror of
the proposal, but through fear of discovery. Gradually, I overcame her
apprehensions: very gradually, for I was not thoroughly secure of her
devotion to my purpose, until your year of probation was nearly out.

"Through all that year, daily visitor as you were at North Villa,
you never suspected either of us! And yet, had you been one whit less
infatuated, how many warnings you might have discovered, which, in
spite of her duplicity and my caution, would then have shown themselves
plainly enough to put you on your guard! Those abrupt changes in her
manner, those alternate fits of peevish silence and capricious gaiety,
which sometimes displayed themselves even in your presence, had every
one of them their meaning--though you could not discern it. Sometimes,
they meant fear of discovery, sometimes fear of me: now, they might be
traced back to hidden contempt; now, to passions swelling under fancied
outrage; now, to secret remembrance of disclosures I had just made, or
eager anticipation of disclosures I had yet to reveal. There were times
at which every step of the way along which I was advancing was marked,
faintly yet significantly, in her manner and her speech, could you only
have interpreted them aright. My first renewal of my old influence over
her, my first words that degraded you in her eyes, my first successful
pleading of my own cause against yours, my first appeal to those
passions in her which I knew how to move, my first proposal to her
of the whole scheme which I had matured in solitude, in the foreign
country, by the banks of the great river--all these separate and gradual
advances on my part towards the end which I was vowed to achieve, were
outwardly shadowed forth in her, consummate as were her capacities for
deceit, and consummately as she learnt to use them against you.

"Do you remember noticing, on your return from the country, how ill
Margaret looked, and how ill I looked? We had some interviews during
your absence, at which I spoke such words to her as would have left
their mark on the face of a Jezebel, or a Messalina. Have you forgotten
how often, during the latter days of your year of expectation, I
abruptly left the room after you had called me in to bear you company
in your evening readings? My pretext was sudden illness; and illness it
was, but not of the body. As the time approached, I felt less and less
secure of my own caution and patience. With you, indeed, I might still
have considered myself safe: it was the presence of Mrs. Sherwin that
drove me from the room. Under that woman's fatal eye I shrank, when the
last days drew near--I, who had defied her detection, and stood firmly
on my guard against her sleepless, silent, deadly vigilance, for months
and months--gave way as the end approached! I knew that she had once
or twice spoken strangely to you, and I dreaded lest her wandering,
incoherent words might yet take in time a recognisable direction, a
palpable shape. They did not; the instinct of terror bound her tongue
to the last. Perhaps, even if she had spoken plainly, you would not have
believed her; you would have been still true to yourself and to your
confidence in Margaret. Enemy as I am to you, enemy as I will be to the
day of your death, I will do you justice for the past:--Your love for
that girl was a love which even the purest and best of women could never
have thoroughly deserved.

                         *****

"My letter is nearly done: my retrospect is finished. I have brought
it down to the date of events, about which you know as much as I do.
Accident conducted you to a discovery which, otherwise, you might not
have made, perhaps for months, perhaps not at all, until I had led you
to it of my own accord. I say accident, positively; knowing that from
first to last I trusted no third person. What you know, you knew by
accident alone.

"But for that chance discovery, you would have seen me bring her back to
North Villa at the appointed time, in my care, just as she went out. I
had no dread of her meeting you. But enough of her! I shall dispose of
her future, as I had resolved to dispose of it years ago; careless how
she may be affected when she first sees the hideous alteration which
your attack has wrought in me. Enough, I say, of the Sherwins--father,
mother, and daughter--your destiny lies not with _them,_ but with _me._

"Do you still exult in having deformed me in every feature, in having
given me a face to revolt every human being who looks at me? Do you
triumph in the remembrance of this atrocity, as you triumphed in the
acting of it--believing that you had destroyed my future with Margaret,
in destroying my very identity as a man? I tell you, that with the hour
when I leave this hospital your day of triumph will be over, and your
day of expiation will begin--never to end till the death of one of us.
You shall live--refined educated gentleman as you are--to wish, like a
ruffian, that you had killed me; and your father shall live to wish it
too.

"Am I trying to awe you with the fierce words of a boaster and a bully?
Test me, by looking back a little, and discovering what I have abstained
from for the sake of my purpose, since I have been here. A word or two
from my lips, in answer to the questions with which I have been baited,
day after day, by those about me, would have called you before a
magistrate to answer for an assault--a shocking and a savage assault,
even in this country, where hand to hand brutality is a marketable
commodity between the Prisoner and the Law. Your father's name might
have been publicly coupled with your dishonour, if I had but spoken; and
I was silent. I kept the secret--kept it, because to avenge myself
on you by a paltry scandal, which you and your family (opposing to it
wealth, position, previous character, and general sympathy) would live
down in a few days, was not my revenge: because to be righted before
magistrates and judges by a beggarman's exhibition of physical injury,
and a coward's confession of physical defeat, was not my way of righting
myself. I have a lifelong retaliation in view, which laws and lawgivers
are powerless either to aid or to oppose--the retaliation which set a
mark upon Cain (as I will set a mark on you); and then made his life his
punishment (as I will make your life yours).

"How? Remember what my career has been; and know that I will make
your career like it. As my father's death by the hangman affected _my_
existence, so the events of that night when you followed me shall affect
_yours._ Your father shall see you living the life to which his evidence
against _my_ father condemned _me_--shall see the foul stain of your
disaster clinging to you wherever you go. The infamy with which I am
determined to pursue you, shall be your own infamy that you cannot get
quit of--for you shall never get quit of me, never get quit of the wife
who has dishonoured you. You may leave your home, and leave England; you
may make new friends, and seek new employments; years and years may pass
away--and still, you shall not escape us: still, you shall never know
when we are near, or when we are distant; when we are ready to appear
before you, or when we are sure to keep out of your sight. My deformed
face and her fatal beauty shall hunt you through the world. The terrible
secret of your dishonour, and of the atrocity by which you avenged it,
shall ooze out through strange channels, in vague shapes, by tortuous
intangible processes; ever changing in the manner of its exposure,
never remediable by your own resistance, and always directed to the same
end--your isolation as a marked man, in every fresh sphere, among every
new community to which you retreat.

"Do you call this a very madness of malignity and revenge? It is the
only occupation in life for which your mutilation of me has left me
fit; and I accept it, as work worthy of my deformity. In the prospect of
watching how you bear this hunting through life, that never quite hunts
you down; how long you resist the poison-influence, as slow as it
is sure, of a crafty tongue that cannot be silenced, of a denouncing
presence that cannot be fled, of a damning secret torn from you and
exposed afresh each time you have hidden it--there is the promise of a
nameless delight which it sometimes fevers, sometimes chills my blood to
think of. Lying in this place at night, in those hours of darkness and
stillness when the surrounding atmosphere of human misery presses heavy
on me in my heavy sleep, prophecies of dread things to come between
us, trouble my spirit in dreams. At those times, I know, and shudder
in knowing, that there is something besides the motive of retaliation,
something less earthly and apparent than that, which urges me horribly
and supernaturally to link myself to you for life; which makes me feel
as the bearer of a curse that shall follow you; as the instrument of a
fatality pronounced against you long ere we met--a fatality beginning
before our fathers were parted by the hangman; perpetuating itself in
you and me; ending who shall say how, or when?

"Beware of comforting yourself with a false security, by despising my
words, as the wild words of a madman, dreaming of the perpetration of
impossible crimes. Throughout this letter I have warned you of what
you may expect; because I will not assail you at disadvantage, as you
assailed me; because it is my pleasure to ruin you, openly resisting
me at every step. I have given you fair play, as the huntsmen give fair
play at starting to the animal they are about to run down. Be warned
against seeking a false hope in the belief that my faculties are shaken,
and that my resolves are visionary--false, because such a hope is only
despair in disguise.

"I have done. The time is not far distant when my words will become
deeds. They cure fast in a public hospital: we shall meet soon!

                                "ROBERT MANNION."



"We shall meet soon!"

How? Where? I looked back at the last page of writing. But my attention
wandered strangely; I confused one paragraph with another; the longer I
read, the less I was able to grasp the meaning, not of sentences merely,
but even of the simplest words.

From the first lines to the last, the letter had produced no distinct
impressions on my mind. So utterly was I worn out by the previous events
of the day, that even those earlier portions of Mannion's confession,
which revealed the connection between my father and his, and the
terrible manner of their separation, hardly roused me to more than a
momentary astonishment. I just called to remembrance that I had never
heard the subject mentioned at home, except once or twice in vague hints
dropped mysteriously by an old servant, and little regarded by me at the
time, as referring to matters which had happened before I was born.
I just reflected thus briefly and languidly on the narrative at the
commencement of the letter; and then mechanically read on. Except the
passages which contained the exposure of Margaret's real character,
and those which described the origin and progress of Mannion's infamous
plot, nothing in the letter impressed me, as I was afterwards destined
to be impressed by it, on a second reading. The lethargy of all feeling
into which I had now sunk, seemed a very lethargy of death.

I tried to clear and concentrate my faculties by thinking of other
subjects; but without success. All that I had heard and seen since the
morning, now recurred to me more and more vaguely and confusedly. I
could form no plan either for the present or the future. I knew
as little how to meet Mr. Sherwin's last threat of forcing me to
acknowledge his guilty daughter, as how to defend myself against the
life-long hostility with which I was menaced by Mannion. A feeling of
awe and apprehension, which I could trace to no distinct cause, stole
irresistibly and mysteriously over me. A horror of the searching
brightness of daylight, a suspicion of the loneliness of the place to
which I had retreated, a yearning to be among my fellow-creatures again,
to live where there was life--the busy life of London--overcame me. I
turned hastily, and walked back from the suburbs to the city.

It was growing towards evening as I gained one of the great
thoroughfares. Seeing some of the inhabitants of the houses, as I walked
along, sitting at their open windows to enjoy the evening air, the
thought came to me for the first time that day:--where shall I lay my
head tonight? Home I had none. Friends who would have gladly received me
were not wanting; but to go to them would oblige me to explain myself;
to disclose something of the secret of my calamity; and this I was
determined to keep concealed, as I had told my father I would keep
it. My last-left consolation was my knowledge of still preserving that
resolution, of still honourably holding by it at all hazards, cost what
it might.

So I thought no more of succour or sympathy from any one of my friends.
As a stranger I had been driven from my home, and as a stranger I was
resigned to live, until I had learnt how to conquer my misfortune by
my own vigour and endurance. Firm in this determination, though firm
in nothing else, I now looked around me for the first shelter I could
purchase from strangers--the humbler the better.

I happened to be in the poorest part, and on the poorest side of the
great street along which I was walking--among the inferior shops, and
the houses of few stories. A room to let was not hard to find here. I
took the first I saw; escaped questions about names and references
by paying my week's rent in advance; and then found myself left in
possession of the one little room which I must be resigned to look on
for the future--perhaps for a long future!--as my home.

Home! A dear and a mournful remembrance was revived in the reflections
suggested by that simple word. Through the darkness that thickened over
my mind, there now passed one faint ray of light which gave promise of
the morning--the light of the calm face that I had last looked on when
it was resting on my father's breast.

Clara! My parting words to her, when I had unclasped from my neck those
kind arms which would fain have held me to home for ever, had expressed
a promise that was yet unfulfilled. I trembled as I now thought on my
sister's situation. Not knowing whither I had turned my steps on
leaving home; uncertain to what extremities my despair might hurry me;
absolutely ignorant even whether she might ever see me again--it was
terrible to reflect on the suspense under which she might be suffering,
at this very moment, on my account. My promise to write to her, was of
all promises the most vitally important, and the first that should be
fulfilled.

My letter was very short. I communicated to her the address of the
house in which I was living (well knowing that nothing but positive
information on this point would effectually relieve her anxiety)--I
asked her to write in reply, and let me hear some news of her, the best
that she could give--and I entreated her to believe implicitly in my
patience and courage under every disaster; and to feel assured that,
whatever happened, I should never lose the hope of soon meeting her
again. Of the perils that beset me, of the wrong and injury I might yet
be condemned to endure, I said nothing. Those were truths which I was
determined to conceal from her, to the last. She had suffered for me
more than I dared think of, already!

I sent my letter by hand, so as to ensure its immediate delivery. In
writing those few simple lines, I had no suspicion of the important
results which they were destined to produce. In thinking of to-morrow,
and of all the events which to-morrow might bring with it, I little
thought whose voice would be the first to greet me the next day, whose
hand would be held out to me as the helping hand of a friend.

VI.

It was still early in the morning, when a loud knock sounded at
the house-door, and I heard the landlady calling to the servant: "A
gentleman to see the gentleman who came in last night." The moment the
words reached me, my thoughts recurred to the letter of yesterday--Had
Mannion found me out in my retreat? As the suspicion crossed my mind,
the door opened, and the visitor entered.

I looked at him in speechless astonishment. It was my elder brother! It
was Ralph himself who now walked into the room!

"Well, Basil! how are you?" he said, with his old off-hand manner and
hearty voice.

"Ralph! You in England!--you here!"

"I came back from Italy last night. Basil, how awfully you're changed! I
hardly know you again."

His manner altered as he spoke the last words. The look of sorrow and
alarm which he fixed on me, went to my heart. I thought of holiday-time,
when we were boys; of Ralph's boisterous ways with me; of his
good-humoured school-frolics, at my expense; of the strong bond of union
between us, so strangely compounded of my weakness and his strength; of
my passive and of his active nature; I saw how little _he_ had changed
since that time, and knew, as I never knew before, how miserably _I_ was
altered. All the shame and grief of my banishment from home came back on
me, at sight of his friendly, familiar face. I struggled hard to keep my
self-possession, and tried to bid him welcome cheerfully; but the effort
was too much for me. I turned away my head, as I took his hand; for the
old school-boy feeling of not letting Ralph see that I was in tears,
influenced me still.

"Basil! Basil! what are you about? This won't do. Look up, and listen
to me. I have promised Clara to pull you through this wretched mess; and
I'll do it. Get a chair, and give me a light. I'm going to sit on your
bed, smoke a cigar, and have a long talk with you."

While he was lighting his cigar, I looked more closely at him than
before. Though he was the same as ever in manner; though his expression
still preserved its reckless levity of former days, I now detected that
he had changed a little in some other respects. His features had become
coarser--dissipation had begun to mark them. His spare, active, muscular
figure had filled out; he was dressed rather carelessly; and of all
his trinkets and chains of early times, not one appeared about him now.
Ralph looked prematurely middle-aged, since I had seen him last.

"Well," he began, "first of all, about my coming back. The fact is, the
morganatic Mrs. Ralph--" (he referred to his last mistress) "wanted to
see England, and I was tired of being abroad. So I brought her back
with me; and we're going to live quietly, somewhere in the Brompton
neighbourhood. That woman has been my salvation--you must come and see
her. She has broke me of gaming altogether; I was going to the devil
as fast as I could, when she stopped me--but you know all about it, of
course. Well: we got to London yesterday afternoon; and in the evening
I left her at the hotel, and went to report myself at home. There, the
first thing I heard, was that you had cut me out of my old original
distinction of being the family scamp. Don't look distressed, Basil; I'm
not laughing at you; I've come to do something better than that. Never
mind my talk: nothing in the world ever was serious to _me,_ and nothing
ever will be."

He stopped to knock the ash off his cigar, and settle himself more
comfortably on my bed; then proceeded.

"It has been my ill-luck to see my father pretty seriously offended on
more than one occasion; but I never saw him so very quiet and so very
dangerous as last night when he was telling me about you. I remember
well enough how he spoke and looked, when he caught me putting away
my trout-flies in the pages of that family history of his; but it was
nothing to see him or hear him then, to what it is now. I can tell you
this, Basil--if I believed in what the poetical people call a broken
heart (which I don't), I should be almost afraid that _he_ was
broken-hearted. I saw it was no use to say a word for you just yet, so
I sat quiet and listened to him till I got my dismissal for the evening.
My next proceeding was to go up-stairs, and see Clara. Upstairs, I give
you my word of honour, it was worse still. Clara was walking about the
room with your letter in her hand--just reach me the matches: my cigar's
out. Some men can talk and smoke in equal proportions--I never could.

"You know as well as I do," he continued when he had relit his cigar,
"that Clara is not usually demonstrative. I always thought her rather a
cold temperament--but the moment I put my head in at the door, I found
I'd been just as great a fool on that point as on most others. Basil,
the scream Clara gave when she first saw me, and the look in her eyes
when she talked about you, positively frightened me. I can't describe
anything; and I hate descriptions by other men (most likely on that very
account): so I won't describe what she said and did. I'll only tell you
that it ended in my promising to come here the first thing this morning;
promising to get you out of the scrape; promising, in short, everything
she asked me. So here I am, ready for your business before my own. The
fair partner of my existence is at the hotel, half-frantic because I
won't go lodging-hunting with her; but Clara is paramount, Clara is the
first thought. Somebody must be a good boy at home; and now you have
resigned, I'm going to try and succeed you, by way of a change!"

"Ralph! Ralph! can you mention Clara's name, and that woman's name, in
the same breath? Did you leave Clara quieter and better! For God's sake
be serious about that, though serious about nothing else!"

"Gently, Basil! _Doucement mon ami!_ I did leave her quieter: my promise
made her look almost like herself again. As for what you say about
mentioning Clara and Mrs. Ralph in the same breath, I've been talking
and smoking till I have no second breaths left to devote to second-rate
virtue. There is an unanswerable reason for you, if you want one! And
now let us get to the business that brings me here. I don't want to
worry you by raking up this miserable mess again, from beginning to end,
in your presence; but I must make sure at the same time that I have got
hold of the right story, or I can't be of any use to you. My father
was a little obscure on certain points. He talked enough, and more than
enough, about consequences to the family, about his own affliction,
about his giving you up for ever; and, in short, about everything but
the case itself as it really stands against us. Now that is just what I
ought to be put up to, and must be put up to. Let me tell you in three
words what I was told last night."

"Go on, Ralph: speak as you please."

"Very good. First of all, I understand that you took a fancy to some
shopkeeper's daughter--so far, mind, I don't blame you: I've spent
time very pleasantly among the ladies of the counter myself. But in the
second place, I'm told that you actually married the girl! I don't
wish to be hard upon you, my good fellow, but there was an unparalleled
insanity about that act, worthier of a patient in Bedlam than of my
brother. I am not quite sure whether I understand exactly what virtuous
behaviour is; but if _that_ was virtuous behaviour--there! there! don't
look shocked. Let's have done with the marriage, and get on. Well, you
made the girl your wife; and then innocently consented to a very
queer condition of waiting a year for her (virtuous behaviour again, I
suppose!) At the end of that time--don't turn away your head, Basil! I
_may_ be a scamp; but I am not blackguard enough to make a joke--either
in your presence, or out of it--of this part of the story. I will pass
it over altogether, if you like; and only ask you a question or two. You
see, my father either could not or would not speak plainly of the worst
part of the business; and you know him well enough to know why. But
somebody must be a little explicit, or I can do nothing. About that man?
You found the scoundrel out? Did you get within arm's length of him?"

I told my brother of the struggle with Mannion in the Square.

He heard me almost with his former schoolboy delight, when I had
succeeded, to his satisfaction, in a feat of strength or activity. He
jumped off the bed, and seized both my hands in his strong grasp; his
face radiant, his eyes sparkling. "Shake hands, Basil! Shake hands, as
we haven't shaken hands yet: this makes amends for everything! One word
more, though, about that fellow; where is he now?"

"In the hospital."

Ralph laughed heartily, and jumped back on the bed. I remembered
Mannion's letter, and shuddered as I thought of it.

"The next question is about the girl," said my brother. "What has become
of her? Where was she all the time of your illness?"

"At her father's house; she is there still."

"Ah, yes! I see; the old story; innocent, of course. And her father
backs her, doesn't he? To be sure, that's the old story too. I have got
at our difficulty now; we are threatened with an exposure, if you don't
acknowledge her. Wait a minute! Have you any evidence against her,
besides your own?"

"I have a letter, a long letter from her accomplice, containing a
confession of his guilt and hers."

"She is sure to call that confession a conspiracy. It's of no use to us,
unless we dared to go to law--and we daren't. We must hush the thing up
at any price; or it will be the death of my father. This is a case for
money, just as I thought it would be. Mr. and Miss Shopkeeper have got
a large assortment of silence to sell; and we must buy it of them, over
the domestic counter, at so much a yard. Have you been there yet, Basil,
to ask the price and strike the bargain?"

"I was at the house, yesterday."

"The deuce you were! And who did you see?--The father? Did you bring him
to terms? did you do business with Mr. Shopkeeper?"

"His manner was brutal: his language, the language of a bully--?"

"So much the better. Those men are easiest dealt with: if he will only
fly into a passion with me, I engage for success beforehand. But the
end--how did it end?"

"As it began:--in threats on his part, in endurance on mine."

"Ah! we'll see how he likes my endurance next: he'll find it rather a
different sort of endurance from yours. By-the-bye, Basil, what money
had you to offer him?"

"I made no offer to him then. Circumstances happened which rendered me
incapable of thinking of it. I intended to go there again, to-day; and
if money would bribe him to silence, and save my family from sharing the
dishonour which has fallen on _me,_ to abandon to him the only money I
have of my own--the little income left me by our mother."

"Do you mean to say that your only resource is in that wretched trifle,
and that you ever really intend to let it go, and start in the world
without a rap? Do you mean to say that my father gave you up without
making the smallest provision for you, in such a mess as your's? Hang
it! do him justice. He has been hard enough on you, I know; but he can't
have coolly turned you over to ruin in that way."

"He offered me money, at parting; but with such words of contempt and
insult that I would have died rather than take it. I told him that,
unaided by his purse, I would preserve him, and preserve his family from
the infamous consequences of my calamity--though I sacrificed my own
happiness and my own honour for ever in doing it. And I go to-day to
make that sacrifice. The loss of the little I have to depend on, is the
least part of it. He may not see his injustice in doubting me, till too
late; but he _shall_ see it."

"I beg your pardon, Basil; but this is almost as great an insanity,
as the insanity of your marriage. I honour the independence of your
principle, my dear fellow; but, while I am to the fore, I'll take good
care that you don't ruin yourself gratuitously, for the sake of any
principles whatever! Just listen to me, now. In the first place,
remember that what my father said to you, he said in a moment of violent
exasperation. You had been trampling the pride of his life in the mud:
no man likes that--my father least of any. And, as for the offer of your
poor little morsel of an income to stop these people's greedy mouths,
it isn't a quarter enough for them. They know our family is a wealthy
family; and they will make their demand accordingly. Any other
sacrifice, even to taking the girl back (though you never could bring
yourself to do that!), would be of no earthly use. Nothing but money
will do; money cunningly doled out, under the strongest possible
stipulations. Now, I'm just the man to do that, and I have got the
money--or, rather, my father has, which comes to the same thing. Write
me the fellow's name and address; there's no time to be lost--I'm off to
see him at once!"

"I can't allow you, Ralph, to ask my father for what I would not ask him
myself--"

"Give me the name and address, or you will sour my excellent temper for
the rest of my life. Your obstinacy won't do with _me,_ Basil--it didn't
at school, and it won't now. I shall ask my father for money for myself;
and use as much of it as I think proper for your interests. He'll
give me anything I want, now I have turned good boy. I don't owe fifty
pounds, since my last debts were paid off--thanks to Mrs. Ralph, who
is the most managing woman in the world. By-the-bye, when you see her,
don't seem surprised at her being older than I am. Oh! this is the
address, is it? Hollyoake Square? Where the devil's that! Never mind,
I'll take a cab, and shift the responsibility of finding the place on
the driver. Keep up your spirits, and wait here till I come back. You
shall have such news of Mr. Shopkeeper and his daughter as you little
expect! _Au revoir,_ my dear fellow--_au revoir._"

He left the room as rapidly as he had entered it. The minute afterwards,
I remembered that I ought to have warned him of the fatal illness of
Mrs. Sherwin. She might be dying--dead for aught I knew--when he reached
the house. I ran to the window, to call him back: it was too late. Ralph
was gone.

Even if he were admitted at North Villa, would he succeed? I was little
capable of estimating the chances. The unexpectedness of his visit; the
strange mixture of sympathy and levity in his manner, of worldly wisdom
and boyish folly in his conversation, appeared to be still confusing
me in his absence, just as they had confused me in his presence. My
thoughts imperceptibly wandered away from Ralph, and the mission he had
undertaken on my behalf, to a subject which seemed destined, for the
future, to steal on my attention, irresistibly and darkly, in all my
lonely hours. Already, the fatality denounced against me in Mannion's
letter had begun to act: already, that terrible confession of past
misery and crime, that monstrous declaration of enmity which was to last
with the lasting of life, began to exercise its numbing influence on my
faculties, to cast its blighting shadow over my heart.

I opened the letter again, and re-read the threats against me at its
conclusion. One by one, the questions now arose in my mind: how can I
resist, or how escape the vengeance of this evil spirit? how shun the
dread deformity of that face, which is to appear before me in secret?
how silence that fiend's tongue, or make harmless the poison which it
will pour drop by drop into my life? When should I first look for that
avenging presence?--now, or not till months hence? Where should I first
see it? in the house?--or in the street? At what time would it steal
to my side? by night--or by day? Should I show the letter to Ralph?--it
would be useless. What would avail any advice or assistance which his
reckless courage could give, against an enemy who combined the ferocious
vigilance of a savage with the far-sighted iniquity of a civilised man?

As this last thought crossed my mind, I hastily closed the letter;
determining (alas! how vainly!) never to open it again. Almost at the
same instant, I heard another knock at the house-door. Could Ralph have
returned already? impossible! Besides, the knock was very different from
his--it was only just loud enough to be audible where I now sat.

Mannion? But would he come thus? openly, fairly, in the broad daylight,
through the populous street?

A light, quick step ascended the stairs--my heart bounded; I started to
my feet. It was the same step which I used to listen for, and love to
hear, in my illness. I ran to the door, and opened it. My instinct had
not deceived me! it was my sister!

"Basil!" she exclaimed, before I could speak--"has Ralph been here?"

"Yes, love--yes."

"Where has he gone? what has he done for you? He promised me--"

"And he has kept his promise nobly, Clara: he is away helping me now."

"Thank God! thank God!"

She sank breathless into a chair, as she spoke. Oh, the pang of looking
at her at that moment, and seeing how she was changed!--seeing the
dimness and weariness of the gentle eyes; the fear and the sorrow that
had already overshadowed the bright young face!

"I shall be better directly," she said, guessing from my expression what
I then felt--"but, seeing you in this strange place, after what happened
yesterday; and having come here so secretly, in terror of my father
finding it out--I can't help feeling your altered position and mine a
little painfully at first. But we won't complain, as long as I can get
here sometimes to see you: we will only think of the future now. What a
mercy, what a happiness it is that Ralph has come back! We have always
done him injustice; he is far kinder and far better than we ever thought
him. But, Basil, how worn and ill you are looking! Have you not told
Ralph everything? Are you in any danger?"

"None, Clara--none, indeed!"

"Don't grieve too deeply about yesterday! Try and forget that horrible
parting, and all that brought it about. He has not spoken of it since,
except to tell me that I must never know more of your fault and your
misfortune, than the little--the very little--I know already. And I have
resolved not to think about it, as well as not to ask about it, for the
future. I have a hope already, Basil--very, very far off fulfilment--but
still a hope. Can you not think what it is?"

"Your hope is far off fulfilment, indeed, Clara, if it is hope from my
father!"

"Hush! don't say so; I know better. Something occurred, even so soon as
last night--a very trifling event--but enough to show that he thinks of
you, already, in grief far more than in anger."

"I wish I could believe it, love; but my remembrance of yesterday--"

"Don't trust that remembrance; don't recall it! I will tell you what
occurred. Some time after you had gone, and after I had recovered myself
a little in my own room, I went downstairs again to see my father; for
I was too terrified and too miserable at what had happened, to be alone.
He was not in his room when I got there. As I looked round me for a
moment, I saw the pieces of your page in the book about our family,
scattered on the floor; and the miniature likeness of you, when you were
a child, was lying among the other fragments. It had been torn out of
its setting in the paper, but not injured. I picked it up, Basil, and
put it on the table, at the place where he always sits; and laid my own
little locket, with your hair in it, by the side, so that he might know
that the miniature had not been accidentally taken up and put there by
the servant. Then, I gathered together the pieces of the page and took
them away with me, thinking it better that he should not see them again.
Just as I had got through the door that leads into the library, and was
about to close it, I heard the other door, by which you enter the study
from the hall, opening; and he came in, and went directly to the table.
His back was towards me, so I could look at him unperceived. He observed
the miniature directly and stood quite still with it in his hand; then
sighed--sighed so bitterly!--and then took the portrait of our dear
mother from one of the drawers of the table, opened the case in which
it is kept, and put your miniature inside, very gently and tenderly. I
could not trust myself to see any more, so I went up to my room again:
and shortly afterwards he came in with my locket, and gave it me back,
only saying--'You left this on my table, Clara.' But if you had seen his
face then, you would have hoped all things from him in the time to come,
as I hope now."

"And as I _will_ hope, Clara, though it be from no stronger motive than
gratitude to you."

"Before I left home," she proceeded, after a moment's silence, "I
thought of your loneliness in this strange place--knowing that I could
seldom come to see you, and then only by stealth; by committing a fault
which, if my father found it out--but we won't speak of that! I thought
of your lonely hours here; and I have brought with me an old, forgotten
companion of yours, to bear you company, and to keep you from thinking
too constantly on what you have suffered. Look, Basil! won't you welcome
this old friend again?"

She gave me a small roll of manuscript, with an effort to resume her
kind smile of former days, even while the tears stood thick in her eyes.
I untied the leaves, glanced at the handwriting, and saw before me, once
more, the first few chapters of my unfinished romance! Again I looked on
the patiently-laboured pages, familiar relics of that earliest and best
ambition which I had abandoned for love; too faithful records of the
tranquil, ennobling pleasures which I had lost for ever! Oh, for one
Thought-Flower now, from the dream-garden of the happy Past!

"I took more care of those leaves of writing, after you had thrown them
aside, than of anything else I had," said Clara. "I always thought the
time would come, when you would return again to the occupation which it
was once your greatest pleasure to pursue, and my greatest pleasure to
watch. And surely that time has arrived. I am certain, Basil, your book
will help you to wait patiently for happier times, as nothing else can.
This place must seem very strange and lonely; but the sight of those
pages, and the sight of me sometimes (when I can come), may make it look
almost like home to you! The room is not--not very--"

She stopped suddenly. I saw her lip tremble, and her eyes grow dim
again, as she looked round her. When I tried to speak all the
gratitude I felt, she turned away quickly, and began to busy herself
in re-arranging the wretched furniture; in setting in order the glaring
ornaments on the chimney-piece; in hiding the holes in the ragged
window-curtains; in changing, as far as she could, all the tawdry
discomfort of my one miserable little room. She was still absorbed in
this occupation, when the church-clocks of the neighbourhood struck the
hour--the hour that warned her to stay no longer.

"I must go," she said; "it is later than I thought. Don't be afraid
about my getting home: old Martha came here with me, and is waiting
downstairs to go back (you know we can trust her). Write to me as often
as you can; I shall hear about you every day, from Ralph; but I should
like a letter sometimes, as well. Be as hopeful and as patient yourself,
dear, under misfortune, as you wish me to be; and I shall despair of
nothing. Don't tell Ralph I have been here--he might be angry. I will
come again, the first opportunity. Good-bye, Basil! Let us try and part
happily, in the hope of better days. Good-bye, dear--good-bye, only for
the present!"

Her self-possession nearly failed her, as she kissed me, and then turned
to the door. She just signed to me not to follow her down-stairs, and,
without looking round again, hurried from the room.

It was well for the preservation of our secret, that she had so
resolutely refrained from delaying her departure. She had been gone but
for a few minutes--the lovely and consoling influence of her presence
was still fresh in my heart--I was still looking sadly over the once
precious pages of manuscript which she had restored to me--when Ralph
returned from North Villa. I heard him leaping, rather than running, up
the ricketty wooden stairs. He burst into my room more impetuously than
ever.

"All right!" he said, jumping back to his former place on the bed. "We
can buy Mr. Shopkeeper for anything we like--for nothing at all, if
we choose to be stingy. His innocent daughter has made the best of all
confessions, just at the right time. Basil, my boy, she has left her
father's house!"

"What do you mean?"

"She has eloped to the hospital!"

"Mannion!"

"Yes, Mannion: I have got his letter to her. She is criminated by it,
even past her father's contradiction--and he doesn't stick at a trifle!
But I'll begin at the beginning, and tell you everything. Hang it,
Basil, you look as if I'd brought you bad news instead of good!"

"Never mind how I look, Ralph--pray go on!"

"Well: the first thing I heard, on getting to the house, was that
Sherwin's wife was dying. The servant took in my name: but I thought of
course I shouldn't be admitted. No such thing! I was let in at once, and
the first words this fellow, Sherwin, said to me, were, that his wife
was only ill, that the servants were exaggerating, and that he was quite
ready to hear what Mr. Basil's 'highly-respected' brother (fancy calling
_me_ 'highly-respected!') had to say to him. The fool, however, as
you see, was cunning enough to try civility to begin with. A more
ill-looking human mongrel I never set eyes on! I took the measure of
my man directly, and in two minutes told him exactly what I came for,
without softening a single word."

"And how did he answer you?"

"As I anticipated, by beginning to bluster immediately. I took him down,
just as he swore his second oath. 'Sir,' I said very politely, 'if you
mean to make a cursing and a swearing conference of this, I think it
only fair to inform you before-hand that you are likely to get the worst
of it. When the whole collection of British oaths is exhausted, I
can swear fluently in five foreign languages: I have always made it a
principle to pay back abuse at compound interest, and I don't exaggerate
in saying, that I am quite capable of swearing you out of your senses,
if you persist in setting me the example. And now, if you like to go on,
pray do--I'm ready to hear you.' While I was speaking, he stared at
me in a state of helpless astonishment; when I had done, he began to
bluster again--but it was a pompous, dignified, parliamentary sort of
bluster, now, ending in his pulling your unlucky marriage-certificate
out of his pocket, asserting for the fiftieth time, that the girl was
innocent, and declaring that he'd make you acknowledge her, if he went
before a magistrate to do it. That's what he said when you saw him, I
suppose?"

"Yes: almost word for word."

"I had my answer ready for him, before he could put the certificate back
in his pocket. 'Now, Mr. Sherwin,' I said, 'have the goodness to listen
to me. My father has certain family prejudices and nervous delicacies,
which I do not inherit from him, and which I mean to take good care to
prevent you from working on. At the same time, I beg you to understand
that I have come here without his knowledge. I am not my father's
ambassador, but my brother's--who is unfit to deal with you, himself;
because he is not half hard-hearted, or half worldly enough. As my
brother's envoy, therefore, and out of consideration for my father's
peculiar feelings, I now offer you, from my own resources, a certain
annual sum of money, far more than sufficient for all your daughter's
expenses--a sum payable quarterly, on condition that neither you nor she
shall molest us; that you shall never make use of our name anywhere;
and that the fact of my brother's marriage (hitherto preserved a secret)
shall for the future be consigned to oblivion. _We_ keep our opinion of
your daughter's guilt--_you_ keep your opinion of her innocence. _We_
have silence to buy, and _you_ have silence to sell, once a quarter; and
if either of us break our conditions, we both have our remedy--_your's_
the easy remedy, _our's_ the difficult. This arrangement--a very unfair
and dangerous for us; a very advantageous and safe one for you--I
understand that you finally refuse?' 'Sir,' says he, solemnly, 'I should
be unworthy the name of a father--' 'Thank you'--I remarked, feeling
that he was falling back on paternal sentiment--'thank you; I quite
understand. We will get on, if you please, to the reverse side of the
question.'"

"The reverse side! What reverse side, Ralph? What could you possibly say
more?"

"You shall hear. 'Being, on your part, thoroughly determined,' I said,
'to permit no compromise, and to make my brother (his family of course
included) acknowledge a woman, of whose guilt they entertain not the
slightest doubt, you think you can gain your object by threatening
an exposure. Don't threaten any more! Make your exposure! Go to the
magistrate at once, if you like! Gibbet our names in the newspaper
report, as a family connected by marriage with Mr. Sherwin the
linen-draper's daughter, whom they believe to have disgraced herself
as a woman and a wife for ever. Do your very worst; make public every
shameful particular that you can--what advantage will you get by it?
Revenge, I grant you. But will revenge put a halfpenny into your pocket?
Will revenge pay a farthing towards your daughter's keep? Will revenge
make us receive her? Not a bit of it! We shall be driven into a corner;
we shall have no exposure to dread after you have exposed us; we
shall have no remedy left, but a desperate remedy, and we'll go to
law--boldly, openly go to law, and get a divorce. We have written
evidence, which you know nothing about, and can call testimony which you
cannot gag. I am no lawyer, but I'll bet you five hundred to one (quite
in a friendly way, my dear Sir!) that we get our case. What follows? We
send you back your daughter, without a shred of character left to cover
her; and we comfortably wash our hands of _you_ altogether.'"

"Ralph! Ralph! how could you--"

"Stop! hear the end of it. Of course I knew that we couldn't carry out
this divorce-threat, without its being the death of my father; but
I thought a little quiet bullying on my part might do Mr. Shopkeeper
Sherwin some good. And I was right. You never saw a man sit sorer on the
sharp edges of a dilemma than he did. I stuck to my point in spite of
everything; silence and money, or exposure and divorce--just which
he pleased. 'I deny every one of your infamous imputations,' said he.
'That's not the question,' said I. 'I'll go to your father,' said he.
'You won't be let in,' said I. 'I'll write to him,' said he. 'He won't
receive your letter,' said I. There we came to a pull-up. _He_ began
to stammer, and _I_ refreshed myself with a pinch of snuff. Finding it
wouldn't do, he threw off the Roman at last, and resumed the Tradesman.
'Even supposing I consented to this abominable compromise, what is to
become of my daughter?' he asked. 'Just what becomes of other people who
have comfortable annuities to live on,' I answered. 'Affection for my
deeply-wronged child half inclines me to consult her wishes, before we
settle anything--I'll go up-stairs,' said he. 'And I'll wait for you
down here,' said I."

"Did he object to that?"

"Not he. He went up-stairs, and in a few minutes ran down again, with
an open letter in his hand, looking as if the devil was after him before
his time. At the last three or four stairs, he tripped, caught at the
bannisters, dropped the letter over them in doing so, tumbled into the
passage in such a fury and fright that he looked like a madman, tore his
hat off a peg, and rushed out. I just heard him say his daughter should
come back, if he put a straight waistcoat on her, as he passed the door.
Between his tumble, his passion, and his hurry, he never thought of
coming back for the letter he had dropped over the bannisters. I picked
it up before I went away, suspecting it might be good evidence on our
side; and I was right. Read it yourself; Basil; you have every moral and
legal claim on the precious document--and here it is."

I took the letter, and read (in Mannion's handwriting) these words,
dated from the hospital:--



"I have received your last note, and cannot wonder that you are getting
impatient under restraint. But, remember, that if you had not acted as
I warned you beforehand to act in case of accidents--if you had not
protested innocence to your father, and preserved total silence towards
your mother; if you had not kept in close retirement, behaving like
a domestic martyr, and avoiding, in your character of a victim, all
voluntary mention of your husband's name--your position might have been
a very awkward one. Not being able to help you, the only thing I could
do was to teach you how to help yourself. I gave you the lesson, and you
have been wise enough to profit by it.

"The time has now come for a change in my plans. I have suffered
a relapse; and the date of my discharge from this place is still
uncertain. I doubt the security, both on your account, and on mine, of
still leaving you at your father's house, to await my cure. Come to
me here, therefore, to-morrow, at any hour when you can get away
unperceived. You will be let in as a visitor, and shown to my bedside,
if you ask for Mr. Turner--the name I have given to the hospital
authorities. Through the help of a friend outside these walls, I have
arranged for a lodging in which you can live undiscovered, until I am
discharged and can join you. You can come here twice a week, if you
like, and you had better do so, to accustom yourself to the sight of
my injuries. I told you in my first letter how and where they had
been inflicted--when you see them with your own eyes, you will be best
prepared to hear what my future purposes are, and how you can aid them.

"R. M."


This was evidently the letter about which I had been consulted by the
servant at North Villa; the date corresponded with the date of Mannion's
letter to me. I noticed that the envelope was missing, and asked Ralph
whether he had got it.

"No," he replied; "Sherwin dropped the letter just in the state in which
I have given it to you. I suspect the girl took away the envelope with
her, thinking that the letter which she left behind her was inside.
But the loss of the envelope doesn't matter. Look there: the fellow has
written her name at the bottom of the leaf; as coolly as if it was an
ordinary correspondence. She is identified with the letter, and that's
all we want in our future dealings with her father."

"But, Ralph, do you think--"

"Do I think her father will get her back? If he's in time to catch her
at the hospital, he assuredly will. If not, we shall have some little
trouble on our side, I suspect. This seems to me to be how the matter
stands now, Basil:--After that letter, and her running away, Sherwin
will have nothing for it but to hold his tongue about her innocence; we
may consider _him_ as settled and done with. As for the other rascal,
Mannion, he certainly writes as if he meant to do something dangerous.
If he really does attempt to annoy us, we will mark him again (I'll
do it next time, by way of a little change!); _he_ has no marriage
certificate to shake over our heads, at any rate. What's the matter
now?--you're looking pale again."

I _felt_ that my colour was changing, while he spoke. There was
something ominous in the contrast which, at that moment, I could not
fail to draw between Mannion's enmity, as Ralph ignorantly estimated it,
and as I really knew it. Already the first step towards the conspiracy
with which I was threatened, had been taken by the departure of
Sherwin's daughter from her father's house. Should I, at this earliest
warning of coming events, show my brother the letter I had received from
Mannion? No! such defence against the dangers threatened in it as Ralph
would be sure to counsel, and to put in practice, might only include
_him_ in the life-long persecution which menaced _me._ When he repeated
his remark about my sudden paleness, I merely accounted for it by some
common-place excuse, and begged him to proceed.

"I suppose, Basil," he said, "the truth is, that you can't help being a
little shocked--though you could expect nothing better from the girl--at
her boldly following this fellow Mannion, even to the hospital" (Ralph
was right; in spite of myself, this feeling was one among the many which
now influenced me.) "Setting that aside, however, we are quite ready, I
take it, to let her stick to her choice, and live just as she pleases,
so long as she doesn't live under our name. There is the great fear and
great difficulty now! If Sherwin can't find her, we must; otherwise, we
can never feel certain that she is not incurring all sorts of debts as
your wife. If her father gets her back, I shall be able to bring her
to terms at North Villa; if not, I must get speech of her, wherever she
happens to be hidden. She's the only thorn in our side now, and we must
pull her out with gold pincers immediately. Don't you see that, Basil?"

"I see it, Ralph!"

"Very well. Either to-night or to-morrow morning, I'll communicate with
Sherwin, and find out whether he has laid hands on her. If he hasn't,
we must go to the hospital, and see what we can discover for ourselves.
Don't look miserable and downhearted, Basil, I'll go with you: you
needn't see her again, or the man either; but you must come with me,
for I may be obliged to make use of you. And now, I'm off for to-day, in
good earnest. I must get back to Mrs. Ralph (unfortunately she happens
to be one of the most sensitive women in the world), or she will be
sending to advertise me in the newspapers. We shall pull through this,
my dear fellow--you will see we shall! By the bye, you don't know of a
nice little detached house in the Brompton neighbourhood, do you? Most
of my old theatrical friends live about there--a detached house, mind!
The fact is, I have taken to the violin lately (I wonder what I shall
take to next?); Mrs. Ralph accompanies me on the pianoforte; and we
might be an execrable nuisance to very near neighbours--that's all! You
don't know of a house? Never mind; I can go to an agent, or something of
that sort. Clara shall know to-night that we are moving prosperously,
if I can only give the worthiest creature in the world the slip: she's a
little obstinate, but, I assure you, a really superior woman. Only think
of my dropping down to playing the fiddle, and paying rent and taxes
in a suburban villa! How are the fast men fallen! Good bye, Basil, good
bye!"

VII.

The next morning, Ralph never appeared--the day passed on, and I heard
nothing--at last, when it was evening, a letter came from him.

The letter informed me that my brother had written to Mr. Sherwin,
simply asking whether he had recovered his daughter. The answer to
this question did not arrive till late in the day; and was in the
negative--Mr. Sherwin had not found his daughter. She had left the
hospital before he got there; and no one could tell him whither she
had gone. His language and manner, as he himself admitted, had been so
violent that he was not allowed to enter the ward where Mannion lay.
When he returned home, he found his wife at the point of death; and on
the same evening she expired. Ralph described his letter, as the letter
of a man half out of his senses. He only mentioned his daughter, to
declare, in terms almost of fury, that he would accuse her before his
wife's surviving relatives, of having been the cause of her mother's
death; and called down the most terrible denunciations on his own head,
if he ever spoke to his child again, though he should see her starving
before him in the streets. In a postscript, Ralph informed me that he
would call the next morning, and concert measures for tracking Sherwin's
daughter to her present retreat.

Every sentence in this letter bore warning of the crisis which was now
close at hand; yet I had as little of the desire as of the power to
prepare for it. A superstitious conviction that my actions were governed
by a fatality which no human foresight could alter or avoid, began to
strengthen within me. From this time forth, I awaited events with the
uninquiring patience, the helpless resignation of despair.

My brother came, punctual to his appointment. When he proposed that I
should at once accompany him to the hospital, I never hesitated at doing
as he desired. We reached our destination; and Ralph approached the
gates to make his first enquiries.

He was still speaking to the porter, when a gentleman advanced towards
them, on his way out of the hospital. I saw him recognise my brother,
and heard Ralph exclaim:

"Bernard! Jack Bernard! Have you come to England, of all the men in the
world!"

"Why not?" was the answer. "I got every surgical testimonial the _Hotel
Dieu_ could give me, six months ago; and couldn't afford to stay
in Paris only for my pleasure. Do you remember calling me a 'mute,
inglorious Liston,' long ago, when we last met? Well, I have come to
England to soar out of my obscurity and blaze into a shining light of
the profession. Plenty of practice at the hospital, here--very little
anywhere else, I am sorry to say."

"You don't mean that you belong to _this_ hospital?"

"My dear fellow, I am regularly on the staff; I'm here every day of my
life."

"You're the very man to enlighten us. Here, Basil, cross over, and
let me introduce you to an old Paris friend of mine. Mr. Bernard--my
brother. You've often heard me talk, Basil, of a younger son of old Sir
William Bernard's, who preferred a cure of bodies to a cure of souls;
and actually insisted on working in a hospital when he might have
idled in a family living. This is the man--the best of doctors and good
fellows."

"Are you bringing your brother to the hospital to follow my mad
example?" asked Mr. Bernard, as he shook hands with me.

"Not exactly, Jack! But we really have an object in coming here. Can you
give us ten minutes' talk, somewhere in private? We want to know about
one of your patients."

He led us into an empty room, on the ground-floor of the building.
"Leave the matter in my hands," whispered Ralph to me, as we sat down.
"I'll find out everything."

"Now, Bernard," he said, "you have a man here, who calls himself Mr.
Turner?"

"Are _you_ a friend of that mysterious patient? Wonderful! The students
call him 'The Great Mystery of London;' and I begin to think the
students are right. Do you want to see him? When he has not got his
green shade on, he's rather a startling sight, I can tell you, for
unprofessional eyes."

"No, no--at least, not at present; my brother here, not at all. The fact
is, certain circumstances have happened which oblige us to look after
this man; and which I am sure you won't inquire into, when I tell you
that it is our interest to keep them secret."

"Certainly not!"

"Then, without any more words about it, our object here, to-day, is to
find out everything we can about Mr. Turner, and the people who have
been to see him. Did a woman come, the day before yesterday?"

"Yes; and behaved rather oddly, I believe. I was not here when she came,
but was told she asked for Turner, in a very agitated manner. She was
directed to the Victoria Ward, where he is; and when she got there,
looked excessively flurried and excited--seeing the Ward quite full,
and, perhaps, not being used to hospitals. However it was, though the
nurse pointed out the right bed to her, she ran in a mighty hurry to the
wrong one."

"I understand," said Ralph; "just as some women run into the wrong
omnibus, when the right one is straight before them."

"Exactly. Well, she only discovered her mistake (the room being rather
dark), after she had stooped down close over the stranger, who was lying
with his head away from her. By that time, the nurse was at her side,
and led her to the right bed. There, I'm told, another scene happened.
At sight of the patient's face, which is very frightfully disfigured,
she was on the point (as the nurse thought) of going into a fit; but
Turner stopped her in an instant. He just laid his hand on her arm, and
whispered something to her; and, though she turned as pale as ashes, she
was quiet directly. The next thing they say he did, was to give her a
slip of paper, coolly directing her to go to the address written on
it, and to come back to the hospital again, as soon as she could show a
little more resolution. She went away at once--nobody knows where."

"Has nobody asked where?"

"Yes; a fellow who said he was her father, and who behaved like a
madman. He came here about an hour after she had left, and wouldn't
believe that we knew nothing about her (how the deuce _should_ we know
anything!) He threatened Turner (whom, by the bye, he called Manning,
or some such name) in such an outrageous manner, that we were obliged
to refuse him admission. Turner himself will give no information on the
subject; but I suspect that his injuries are the result of a quarrel
with the father about the daughter--a pretty savage quarrel, I must say,
looking to the consequences--I beg your pardon, but your brother seems
ill! I'm afraid," (turning to me), "you find the room rather close?"

"No, indeed; not at all. I have just recovered from a serious
illness--but pray go on."

"I have very little more to say. The father went away in a fury, just
as he came; the daughter has not yet made her appearance a second time.
But, after what was reported to me of the first interview, I daresay she
_will_ come. She must, if she wants to see Turner; he won't be out,
I suspect, for another fortnight. He has been making himself worse by
perpetually writing letters; we were rather afraid of erysipelas, but
he'll get over that danger, I think."

"About the woman," said Ralph; "it is of the greatest importance that we
should know where she is now living. Is there any possibility (we will
pay well for it) of getting some sharp fellow to follow her home from
this place, the next time she comes here?"

Mr. Bernard hesitated a moment, and considered.

"I think I can manage it for you with the porter, after you are gone,"
he said, "provided you leave me free to give any remuneration I may
think necessary."

"Anything in the world, my dear fellow. Have you got pen and ink? I'll
write down my brother's address; you can communicate results to him, as
soon as they occur."

While Mr. Bernard went to the opposite end of the room, in search of
writing materials, Ralph whispered to me--

"If he wrote to _my_ address, Mrs. Ralph might see the letter. She is
the most amiable of her sex; but if written information of a woman's
residence, directed to me, fell into her hands--you understand, Basil!
Besides, it will be easy to let me know, the moment you hear from Jack.
Look up, young one! It's all right--we are sailing with wind and tide."

Here Mr. Bernard brought us pen and ink. While Ralph was writing my
address, his friend said to me:

"I hope you will not suspect me of wishing to intrude on your secrets,
if (assuming your interest in Turner to be the reverse of a friendly
interest) I warn you to look sharply after him when he leaves the
hospital. Either there has been madness in his family, or his brain has
suffered from his external injuries. Legally, he may be quite fit to
be at large; for he will be able to maintain the appearance of perfect
self-possession in all the ordinary affairs of life. But, morally, I am
convinced that he is a dangerous monomaniac; his mania being connected
with some fixed idea which evidently never leaves him day or night. I
would lay a heavy wager that he dies in a prison or a madhouse."

"And I'll lay another wager, if he's mad enough to annoy us, that we are
the people to shut him up," said Ralph. "There is the address. And now,
we needn't waste your time any longer. I have taken a little place at
Brompton, Jack,--you and Basil must come and dine with me, as soon as
the carpets are down."

We left the room. As we crossed the hall, a gentleman came forward, and
spoke to Mr. Bernard.

"That man's fever in the Victoria Ward has declared itself at last," he
said. "This morning the new symptoms have appeared."

"And what do they indicate?"

"Typhus of the most malignant character--not a doubt of it. Come up, and
look at him."

I saw Mr. Bernard start, and glance quickly at my brother. Ralph fixed
his eyes searchingly on his friend's face; exclaimed: "Victoria Ward!
why you mentioned that--;" and then stopped, with a very strange and
sudden alteration in his expression. The next moment he drew Mr. Bernard
aside, saying: "I want to ask you whether the bed in Victoria Ward,
occupied by this man whose fever has turned to typhus, is the same bed,
or near the bed which--" The rest of the sentence was lost to me as they
walked away.

After talking together in whispers for a few moments, they rejoined me.
Mr. Bernard was explaining the different theories of infection to Ralph.

_"My_ notion," he said, "is, that infection is taken through the lungs;
one breath inhaled from the infected atmosphere hanging immediately
around the diseased person, and generally extending about a foot from
him, being enough to communicate his malady to the breather--provided
there exists, at the time, in the individual exposed to catch
the malady, a constitutional predisposition to infection. This
predisposition we know to be greatly increased by mental agitation, or
bodily weakness; but, in the case we have been talking of," (he looked
at me,) "the chances of infection or non-infection may be equally
balanced. At any rate, I can predict nothing about them at this stage of
the discovery."

"You will write the moment you hear anything?" said Ralph, shaking hands
with him.

"The very moment. I have your brother's address safe in my pocket."

We separated. Ralph was unusually silent and serious on our way back.
He took leave of me at the door of my lodging, very abruptly; without
referring again to our visit to the hospital.

A week passed away, and I heard nothing from Mr. Bernard. During this
interval, I saw little of my brother; he was occupied in moving into
his new house. Towards the latter part of the week, he came to inform
me that he was about to leave London for a few days. My father had asked
him to go to the family house, in the country, on business connected
with the local management of the estates. Ralph still retained all his
old dislike of the steward's accounts and the lawyer's consultations;
but he felt bound, out of gratitude for my father's special kindness
to him since his return to England, to put a constraint on his own
inclinations, and go to the country as he was desired. He did not expect
to be absent more than two or three days; but earnestly charged me to
write to him, if I had any news from the hospital while he was away.

During the week, Clara came twice to see me--escaping from home by
stealth, as before. On each occasion, she showed the same affectionate
anxiety to set me an example of cheerfulness, and to sustain me in
hope. I saw, with a sorrow and apprehension which I could not altogether
conceal from her, that the weary look in her face had never changed,
never diminished since I had first observed it. Ralph had, from motives
of delicacy, avoided increasing the hidden anxieties which were but too
evidently preying upon her health, by keeping her in perfect ignorance
of our visit to the hospital, and, indeed, of the particulars of all our
proceedings since his return. I took care to preserve the same secrecy,
during her short interviews with me. She bade me farewell after her
third visit, with a sadness which she vainly endeavoured to hide. I
little thought, then, that the tones of her sweet, clear voice had
fallen on my ear for the last time, before I wandered to the far West of
England where I now write.

At the end of the week--it was on a Saturday, I remember--I left my
lodgings early in the morning, to go into the country; with no intention
of returning before evening. I had felt a sense of oppression, on
rising, which was almost unendurable. The perspiration stood thick on my
forehead, though the day was not unusually hot; the air of London grew
harder and harder to breathe, with every minute; my heart felt tightened
to bursting; my temples throbbed with fever-fury; my very life seemed to
depend on escaping into pure air, into some place where there was shade
from trees, and water that ran cool and refreshing to look on. So I set
forth, careless in what direction I went; and remained in the country
all day. Evening was changing into night as I got back to London.

I inquired of the servant at my lodging, when she let me in, whether any
letter had arrived for me. She answered, that one had come just after I
had gone out in the morning, and that it was lying on my table. My first
glance at it, showed me Mr. Bernard's name written in the corner of the
envelope. I eagerly opened the letter, and read these words:



"Private.

"Friday.

"My DEAR SIR,

"On the enclosed slip of paper you will find the address of the young
woman, of whom your brother spoke to me when we met at the hospital.
I regret to say, that the circumstances under which I have obtained
information of her residence, are of the most melancholy nature.

"The plan which I arranged for discovering her abode, in accordance with
your brother's suggestion, proved useless. The young woman never came to
the hospital a second time. Her address was given to me this morning, by
Turner himself; who begged that I would visit her professionally, as he
had no confidence in the medical man who was then in attendance on
her. Many circumstances combined to make my compliance with his request
anything but easy or desirable; but knowing that you--or your brother
I ought, perhaps, rather to say--were interested in the young woman,
I determined to take the very earliest opportunity of seeing her, and
consulting with her medical attendant. I could not get to her till late
in the afternoon. When I arrived, I found her suffering from one of the
worst attacks of Typhus I ever remember to have seen; and I think it
my duty to state candidly, that I believe her life to be in imminent
danger. At the same time, it is right to inform you that the gentleman
in attendance on her does not share my opinion: he still thinks there is
a good chance of saving her.

"There can be no doubt whatever, that she was infected with Typhus
at the hospital. You may remember my telling you, how her agitation
appeared to have deprived her of self-possession, when she entered the
ward; and how she ran to the wrong bed, before the nurse could stop her.
The man whom she thus mistook for Turner, was suffering from fever which
had not then specifically declared itself; but which did so declare
itself, as a Typhus fever, on the morning when you and your brother came
to the hospital. This man's disorder must have been infectious when the
young woman stooped down close over him, under the impression that he
was the person she had come to see. Although she started back at once,
on discovering her mistake, she had breathed the infection into her
system--her mental agitation at the time, accompanied (as I have since
understood) by some physical weakness, rendering her specially liable to
the danger to which she had accidentally exposed herself.

"Since the first symptoms of her disease appeared, on Saturday last, I
cannot find that any error has been committed in the medical treatment,
as reported to me. I remained some time by her bedside to-day, observing
her. The delirium which is, more or less, an invariable result of
Typhus, is particularly marked in her case, and manifests itself both
by speech and gesture. It has been found impossible to quiet her, by
any means hitherto tried. While I was watching by her, she never ceased
calling on your name, and entreating to see you. I am informed by her
medical attendant, that her wanderings have almost invariably taken this
direction for the last four-and-twenty hours. Occasionally she mixes
other names with yours, and mentions them in terms of abhorrence; but
her persistency in calling for your presence, is so remarkable that I
am tempted, merely from what I have heard myself; to suggest that you
really should go to her, on the bare chance that you might exercise some
tranquillising influence. At the same time, if you fear infection, or
for any private reasons (into which I have neither the right nor the
wish to inquire) feel unwilling to take the course I have pointed out,
do not by any means consider it your duty to accede to my proposal. I
can conscientiously assure you that duty is not involved in it.

"I have, however, another suggestion to make, which is of a positive
nature, and which I am sure will meet with your approval. It is, that
her parents, or some of her other relations, if her parents are not
alive, should be informed of her situation. Possibly, you may know
something of her connections, and can therefore do this good office. She
is dying in a strange place, among people who avoid her as they would
avoid a pestilence. Even though it be only to bury her, some relation
ought to be immediately summoned to her bed-side.

"I shall visit her twice to-morrow, in the morning and at night. If you
are not willing to risk seeing her (and I repeat that it is in no sense
imperative that you should combat such unwillingness), perhaps you will
communicate with me at my private address.

"I remain, dear Sir,

"Faithfully yours,

"JOHN BERNARD.

"P. S.--I open my letter again, to inform you that Turner, acting
against all advice, has left the hospital to-day. He attempted to go
on Tuesday last, when, I believe, he first received information of the
young woman's serious illness, but was seized with a violent attack of
giddiness, on attempting to walk, and fell down just outside the door of
the ward. On this second occasion, however, he has succeeded in getting
away without any accident--as far, at least, as the persons employed
about the hospital can tell."



When the letter fell from my trembling hand, when I first asked of my
own heart the fearful question:--"Have I, to whom the mere thought of
ever seeing this woman again has been as a pollution to shrink from, the
strength to stand by her death-bed, the courage to see her die?"--then,
and not till then, did I really know how suffering had fortified, while
it had humbled me; how affliction has the power to purify, as well as to
pain.

All bitter memory of the ill that she had done me, of the misery I had
suffered at her hands, lost its hold on my mind. Once more, her mother's
last words of earthly lament--"Oh, who will pray for her when I am
gone!" seemed to be murmuring in my ear--murmuring in harmony with
the divine words in which the Voice from the Mount of Olives taught
forgiveness of injuries to all mankind.

She was dying: dying among strangers in the pining madness of fever--and
the one being of all who knew her, whose presence at her bedside
might yet bring calmness to her last moments, and give her quietly and
tenderly to death, was the man whom she had pitilessly deceived and
dishonoured, whose youth she had ruined, whose hopes she had wrecked
for ever. Strangely had destiny brought us together--terribly had it
separated us--awfully would it now unite us again, at the end!

What were my wrongs, heavy as they had been; what my sufferings,
poignant as they still were, that they should stand between this dying
woman, and the last hope of awakening her to the consciousness that
she was going before the throne of God? The sole resource for her which
human skill and human pity could now suggest, embraced the sole chance
that she might still be recovered for repentance, before she was
resigned to death. How did I know, but that in those ceaseless cries
which had uttered my name, there spoke the last earthly anguish of
the tortured spirit, calling upon me for one drop of water to cool its
burning guilt--one drop from the waters of Peace?

I took up Mr. Bernard's letter from the floor on which it had fallen,
and re-directed it to my brother; simply writing on a blank place in the
inside, "I have gone to soothe her last moments." Before I departed, I
wrote to her father, and summoned him to her bedside. The guilt of his
absence--if his heartless and hardened nature did not change towards
her--would now rest with him, and not with me. I forbore from thinking
how he would answer my letter; for I remembered his written words to my
brother, declaring that he would accuse his daughter of having caused
her mother's death; and I suspected him even then, of wishing to shift
the shame of his conduct towards his unhappy wife from himself to his
child.

After writing this second letter, I set forth instantly for the house
to which Mr. Bernard had directed me. No thought of myself; no thought,
even, of the peril suggested by the ominous disclosure about Mannion,
in the postscript to the surgeon's letter, ever crossed my mind. In the
great stillness, in the heavenly serenity that had come to my spirit,
the wasting fire of every sensation which was only of this world, seemed
quenched for ever.

It was eleven o'clock when I arrived at the house. A slatternly, sulky
woman opened the door to me. "Oh! I suppose you're another doctor,"
she muttered, staring at me with scowling eyes. "I wish you were the
undertaker, to get her out of my house before we all catch our deaths of
her! There! there's the other doctor coming down stairs; he'll show you
the room--I won't go near it."

As I took the candle from her hand, I saw that Mr. Bernard was
approaching me from the stairs.

"You can do no good, I am afraid," he said, "but I am glad you have
come."

"There is no hope, then?"

"In my opinion, none. Turner came here this morning, whether she
recognised him, or not, in her delirium, I cannot say; but she grew so
much worse in his presence, that I insisted on his not seeing her
again, except under medical permission. Just now, there is no one in the
room--are you willing to go up stairs at once?"

"Does she still speak of me in her wanderings?"

"Yes, as incessantly as ever."

"Then I am ready to go to her bedside."

"Pray believe that I feel deeply what a sacrifice you are making. Since
I wrote to you, much that she has said in her delirium has told me"--(he
hesitated)--"has told me more, I am afraid, than you would wish me to
have known, as a comparative stranger to you. I will only say, that
secrets unconsciously disclosed on the death-bed are secrets sacred
to me, as they are to all who pursue my calling; and that what I have
unavoidably heard above stairs, is doubly sacred in my estimation, as
affecting a near and dear relative of one of my oldest friends." He
paused, and took my hand very kindly; then added: "I am sure you will
think yourself rewarded for any trial to your feelings to-night, if you
can only remember in years to come, that your presence quieted her in
her last moments!"

I felt his sympathy and delicacy too strongly to thank him in words; I
could only _look_ my gratitude as he asked me to follow him up stairs.

We entered the room softly. Once more, and for the last time in this
world, I stood in the presence of Margaret Sherwin.

Not even to see her, as I had last seen her, was such a sight of misery
as to behold her now, forsaken on her deathbed, to look at her, as she
lay with her head turned from me, fretfully covering and uncovering her
face with the loose tresses of her long black hair, and muttering my
name incessantly in her fever-dream: "Basil! Basil! Basil! I'll never
leave off calling for him, till he comes. Basil! Basil! Where is he? Oh,
where, where, where!"

"He is here," said the doctor, taking the candle from my hand, and
holding it, so that the light fell full on my face. "Look at her and
speak to her as usual, when she turns round," he whispered to me.

Still she never moved; still those hoarse, fierce, quick tones--that
voice, once the music that my heart beat to; now the discord that it
writhed under--muttered faster and faster: "Basil! Basil! Bring him
here! bring me Basil!"

"He is here," repeated Mr. Bernard loudly. "Look! look up at him!"

She turned in an instant, and tore the hair back from her face. For a
moment, I forced myself to look at her; for a moment, I confronted the
smouldering fever in her cheeks; the glare of the bloodshot eyes;
the distortion of the parched lips; the hideous clutching of the
outstretched fingers at the empty air--but the agony of that sight was
more than I could endure: I turned away my head, and hid my face in
horror.

"Compose yourself," whispered the doctor. "Now she is quiet, speak to
her; speak to her before she begins again; call her by her name."

Her name! Could my lips utter it at such a moment as this?

"Quick! quick!" cried Mr. Bernard. "Try her while you have the chance."

I struggled against the memories of the past, and spoke to her--God
knows as gently, if not as happily, as in the bygone time!

"Margaret," I said, "Margaret, you asked for me, and I have come."

She tossed her arms above her head with a shrill scream, frightfully
prolonged till it ended in low moanings and murmurings; then turned her
face from us again, and pulled her hair over it once more.

"I am afraid she is too far gone," said the doctor; "but make another
trial."

"Margaret," I said again, "have you forgotten me? Margaret!"

She looked at me once more. This time, her dry, dull eyes seemed to
soften, and her fingers twined themselves less passionately in her hair.
She began to laugh--a low, vacant, terrible laugh.

"Yes, yes," she said, "I know he's come at last; I can make him do
anything. Get me my bonnet and shawl; any shawl will do, but a mourning
shawl is best, because we are going to the funeral of our wedding. Come,
Basil! let's go back to the church, and get unmarried again; that's what
I wanted you for. We don't care about each other. Robert Mannion wants
me more than you do--he's not ashamed of me because my father's a
tradesman; he won't make believe that he's in love with me, and then
marry me to spite the pride of his family. Come! I'll tell the clergyman
to read the service backwards; that makes a marriage no marriage at all,
everybody knows."

As the last wild words escaped her, some one below stairs called to Mr.
Bernard. He went out for a minute, then returned again, telling me that
he was summoned to a case of sudden illness which he must attend without
a moment's delay.

"The medical man whom I found here when I first came," he said, "was
sent for this evening into the country, to be consulted about an
operation, I believe. But if anything happens, I shall be at your
service. There is the address of the house to which I am now going"
(he wrote it down on a card); "you can send, if you want me. I will get
back, however, as soon as possible, and see her again; she seems to be
a little quieter already, and may become quieter still, if you stay
longer. The night-nurse is below--I will send her up as I go downstairs.
Keep the room well ventilated, the windows open as they are now. Don't
breathe too close to her, and you need fear no infection. Look! her eyes
are still fixed on you. This is the first time I have seen her look in
the same direction for two minutes together; one would think she really
recognised you. Wait till I come back, if you possibly can--I won't be a
moment longer than I can help."

He hastily left the room. I turned to the bed, and saw that she was
still looking at me. She had never ceased murmuring to herself while Mr.
Bernard was speaking; and she did not stop when the nurse came in.

The first sight of this woman, on her entrance, sickened and shocked me.
All that was naturally repulsive in her, was made doubly revolting by
the characteristics of the habitual drunkard, lowering and glaring at
me in her purple, bloated face. To see her heavy hands shaking at the
pillow, as they tried mechanically to arrange it; to see her stand,
alternately leering and scowling by the bedside, an incarnate blasphemy
in the sacred chamber of death, was to behold the most horrible of all
mockeries, the most impious of all profanations. No loneliness in the
presence of mortal agony could try me to the quick, as the sight of that
foul old age of degradation and debauchery, defiling the sick room, now
tried me. I determined to wait alone by the bedside till Mr. Bernard
returned.

With some difficulty, I made the wretched drunkard understand that she
might go downstairs again; and that I would call her if she was wanted.
At last, she comprehended my meaning, and slowly quitted the room. The
door closed on her; and I was left alone to watch the last moments of
the woman who had ruined me!

As I sat down near the open window, the sounds outside in the street
told of the waning of the night. There was an echo of many footsteps, a
hoarse murmur of conflicting voices, now near, now afar off. The public
houses were dispersing their drunken crowds--the crowds of a Saturday
night: it was twelve o'clock.

Through those street-sounds of fierce ribaldry and ghastly mirth,
the voice of the dying woman penetrated, speaking more slowly, more
distinctly, more terribly than it had spoken yet.

"I see him," she said, staring vacantly at me, and moving her hands
slowly to and fro in the air. "I see him! But he's a long way off; he
can't hear our secrets, and he does not suspect you as mother does.
Don't tell me that about him any more; my flesh creeps at it! What are
you looking at me in that way for? You make me feel on fire. You know
I like you, because I _must_ like you; because I can't help it. It's no
use saying hush: I tell you he can't hear us, and can't see us. He can
see nothing; you make a fool of him, and I make a fool of him. But mind!
I _will_ ride in my own carriage: you must keep things secret enough to
let me do that. I say I _will_ ride in my carriage: and I'll go where
father walks to business: I don't care if I splash him with _my_
carriage wheels! I'll be even with him for some of the passions he's
been in with me. You see how I'll go into our shop and order dresses!
(be quiet! I say he can't hear us). I'll have velvet where his sister
has silk, and silk where she has muslin: I'm a finer girl than she is,
and I'll be better dressed. Tell _him_ anything, indeed! What have I
ever let out? It's not so easy always to make believe I'm in love with
him, after what you have told me. Suppose he found us out?--Rash? I'm
no more rash than you are! Why didn't you come back from France in time,
and stop it all? Why did you let me marry him? A nice wife I've been to
him, and a nice husband he has been to me--a husband who waits a year!
Ha! ha! he calls himself a man, doesn't he? A husband who waits a year!"

I approached nearer to the bedside, and spoke to her again, in the
hope to win her tenderly towards dreaming of better things. I know not
whether she heard me, but her wild thoughts changed--changed darkly to
later events.

"Beds! beds!" she cried, "beds everywhere, with dying men on them! And
one bed the most terrible of all--look at it! The deformed face, with
the white of the pillow all round it! _His_ face? _his_ face, that
hadn't a fault in it? Never! It's the face of a devil; the finger-nails
of the devil are on it! Take me away! drag me out! I can't move for that
face: it's always before me: it's walling me up among the beds: it's
burning me all over. Water! water! drown me in the sea; drown me deep,
away from the burning face!"

"Hush, Margaret! hush! drink this, and you will be cool again." I gave
her some lemonade, which stood by the bedside.

"Yes, yes; hush, as you say. Where's Robert? Robert Mannion? Not here!
then I've got a secret for you. When you go home to-night, Basil, and
say your prayers, pray for a storm of thunder and lightning; and pray
that I may be struck dead in it, and Robert too. It's a fortnight to my
aunt's party; and in a fortnight you'll wish us both dead, so you had
better pray for what I tell you in time. We shall make handsome corpses.
Put roses into my coffin--scarlet roses, if you can find any, because
that stands for Scarlet Woman--in the Bible, you know. Scarlet? What do
I care! It's the boldest colour in the world. Robert will tell you, and
all your family, how many women are as scarlet as I am--virtue wears it
at home, in secret; and vice wears it abroad, in public: that's the only
difference, he says. Scarlet roses! scarlet roses! throw them into the
coffin by hundreds; smother me up in them; bury me down deep; in the
dark, quiet street--where there's a broad door-step in front of a house,
and a white, wild face, something like Basil's, that's always staring on
the doorstep awfully. Oh, why did I meet him! why did I marry him! oh,
why! why!"

She uttered the last words in slow, measured cadence--the horrible
mockery of a chaunt which she used to play to us at North Villa, on
Sunday evenings. Then her voice sank again; her articulation thickened,
and grew indistinct. It was like the change from darkness to daylight,
in the sight of sleepless eyes, to hear her only murmuring now, after
hearing her last terrible words.

The weary night-time passed on. Longer and longer grew the intervals
of silence between the scattered noises from the streets; less and less
frequent were the sounds of distant carriage-wheels, and the echoing
rapid footsteps of late pleasure-seekers hurrying home. At last, the
heavy tramp of the policeman going his rounds, alone disturbed the
silence of the early morning hours. Still, the voice from the bed
muttered incessantly; but now, in drowsy, languid tones: still, Mr.
Bernard did not return: still the father of the dying girl never came,
never obeyed the letter which summoned him for the last time to her
side.

(There was yet one more among the absent--one from whose approach
the death-bed must be kept sacred; one, whose evil presence was to be
dreaded as a pestilence and a scourge. Mannion!--where was Mannion?)

I sat by the window, resigned to wait in loneliness till the end came,
watching mechanically the vacant eyes that ever watched me--when,
suddenly, the face of Margaret seemed to fade out of my sight. I started
and looked round. The candle, which I had placed at the opposite end of
the room, had burnt down without my noticing it, and was now expiring
in the socket. I ran to light the fresh candle which lay on the table
by its side, but was too late. The wick flickered its last; the room was
left in darkness.

While I felt among the different objects under my hands for a box of
matches: Margaret's voice strengthened again.

"Innocent! innocent!" I heard her cry mournfully through the darkness.
"I'll swear I'm innocent, and father is sure to swear it too. Innocent
Margaret! Oh, me! what innocence!"

She repeated these words over and over again, till the hearing them
seemed to bewilder all my senses. I hardly knew what I touched.
Suddenly, my searching hands stopped of themselves, I could not tell
why. Was there some change in the room? Was there more air in it, as if
a door had been opened? Was there something moving over the floor?
Had Margaret left her bed?--No! the mournful voice was speaking
unintermittingly, and speaking from the same distance.

I moved to search for the matches on a chest of drawers, which stood
near the window. Though the morning was at its darkest, and the house
stood midway between two gas-lamps, there was a glimmering of light in
this place. I looked back into the room from the window, and thought
I saw something shadowy moving near the bed. "Take him away!" I heard
Margaret scream in her wildest tones. "His hands are on me: he's feeling
my face, to feel if I'm dead!"

I ran to her, striking against some piece of furniture in the darkness.
Something passed swiftly between me and the bed, as I got near it. I
thought I heard a door close. Then there was silence for a moment; and
then, as I stretched out my hands, my right hand encountered the
little table placed by Margaret's side, and the next moment I felt the
match-box that had been left on it.

As I struck a light, her voice repeated close at my ear:

"His hands are on me: he's feeling my face to feel if I'm dead!"

The match flared up. As I carried it to the candle, I looked round, and
noticed for the first time that there was a second door, at the further
corner of the room, which lighted some inner apartment through glass
panes at the top. When I tried this door, it was locked on the inside,
and the room beyond was dark.

Dark and silent. But was no one there, hidden in that darkness and
silence? Was there any doubt now, that stealthy feet had approached
Margaret, that stealthy hands had touched her, while the room was in
obscurity?--Doubt? There was none on that point, none on any other.
Suspicion shaped itself into conviction in an instant, and identified
the stranger who had passed in the darkness between me and the bedside,
with the man whose presence I had dreaded, as the presence of an evil
spirit in the chamber of death.

He was waiting secretly in the house--waiting for her last moments;
listening for her last words; watching his opportunity, perhaps, to
enter the room again, and openly profane it by his presence! I placed
myself by the door, resolved, if he approached, to thrust him back, at
any hazard, from the bedside. How long I remained absorbed in watching
before the darkness of the inner room, I know not--but some time must
have elapsed before the silence around me forced itself suddenly on my
attention. I turned towards Margaret; and, in an instant, all previous
thoughts were suspended in my mind, by the sight that now met my eyes.

She had altered completely. Her hands, so restless hitherto, lay quite
still over the coverlid; her lips never moved; the whole expression of
her face had changed--the fever-traces remained on every feature, and
yet the fever-look was gone. Her eyes were almost closed; her quick
breathing had grown calm and slow. I touched her pulse; it was beating
with a wayward, fluttering gentleness. What did this striking alteration
indicate? Recovery? Was it possible? As the idea crossed my mind, every
one of my faculties became absorbed in the sole occupation of watching
her face; I could not have stirred an instant from the bed, for worlds.

The earliest dawn of day was glimmering faintly at the window, before
another change appeared--before she drew a long, sighing breath, and
slowly opened her eyes on mine. Their first look was very strange and
startling to behold; for it was the look that was natural to her; the
calm look of consciousness, restored to what it had always been in
the past time. It lasted only for a moment. She recognised me; and,
instantly, an expression of anguish and shame flew over the first terror
and surprise of her face. She struggled vainly to lift her hands--so
busy all through the night; so idle now! A faint moan of supplication
breathed from her lips; and she slowly turned her head on the pillow, so
as to hide her face from my sight.

"Oh, my God! my God!" she murmured, in low, wailing tones, "I've broken
his heart, and he still comes here to be kind to me! This is worse than
death! I'm too bad to be forgiven--leave me! leave me!--oh, Basil, leave
me to die!"

I spoke to her; but desisted almost immediately--desisted even from
uttering her name. At the mere sound of my voice, her suffering rose to
agony; the wild despair of the soul wrestling awfully with the writhing
weakness of the body, uttered itself in words and cries horrible, beyond
all imagination, to hear. I sank down on my knees by the bedside; the
strength which had sustained me for hours, gave way in an instant, and
I burst into a passion of tears, as my spirit poured from my lips in
supplication for hers--tears that did not humiliate me; for I knew,
while I shed them, that I had forgiven her!

The dawn brightened. Gradually, as the fair light of the new day flowed
in lovely upon her bed; as the fresh morning breeze lifted tenderly and
playfully the scattered locks of her hair that lay over the pillow--so,
the calmness began to come back to her voice and the stillness of repose
to her limbs. But she never turned her face to me again; never, when the
wild words of her despair grew fewer and fainter; never, when the last
faint supplication to me, to leave her to die forsaken as she deserved,
ended mournfully in a long, moaning gasp for breath. I waited after
this--waited a long time--then spoke to her softly--then waited once
more; hearing her still breathe, but slowly and more slowly with every
minute--then spoke to her for the second time, louder than before. She
never answered, and never moved. Was she sleeping? I could not tell.
Some influence seemed to hold me back from going to the other side of
the bed, to look at her face, as it lay away from me, almost hidden in
the pillow.

The light strengthened faster, and grew mellow with the clear beauty
of the morning sunshine. I heard the sound of rapid footsteps advancing
along the street; they stopped under the window: and a voice which I
recognized, called me by my name. I looked out: Mr. Bernard had returned
at last.

"I could not get back sooner," he said; "the case was desperate, and I
was afraid to leave it. You will find a key on the chimney-piece--throw
it out to me, and I can let myself in; I told them not to bolt the door
before I went out."

I obeyed his directions. When he entered the room, I thought Margaret
moved a little, and signed to him with my hand to make no noise. He
looked towards the bed without any appearance of surprise, and asked me
in a whisper when the change had come over her, and how. I told him
very briefly, and inquired whether he had known of such changes in other
cases, like hers.

"Many," he answered, "many changes just as extraordinary, which have
raised hopes that I never knew realised. Expect the worst from the
change you have witnessed; it is a fatal sign."

Still, in spite of what he said, it seemed as if he feared to wake her;
for he spoke in his lowest tones, and walked very softly when he went
close to the bedside.

He stopped suddenly, just as he was about to feel her pulse, and looked
in the direction of the glass door--listened attentively--and said, as
if to himself--"I thought I heard some one moving in that room, but I
suppose I am mistaken; nobody can be up in the house yet." With those
words he looked down at Margaret, and gently parted back her hair from
her forehead.

"Don't disturb her," I whispered, "she is asleep; surely she is asleep!"

He paused before he answered me, and placed his hand on her heart. Then
softly drew up the bed-linen, till it hid her face.

"Yes, she is asleep," he said gravely; "asleep, never to wake again. She
is dead."

I turned aside my head in silence, for my thoughts, at that moment, were
not the thoughts which can be spoken by man to man.

"This has been a sad scene for any one at your age," he resumed kindly,
as he left the bedside, "but you have borne it well. I am glad to see
that you can behave so calmly under so hard a trial."



Calmly?

Yes! at that moment it was fit that I should be calm; for I could
remember that I had forgiven her.

VIII.

On the fourth day from the morning when she had died, I stood alone in
the churchyard by the grave of Margaret Sherwin.

It had been left for me to watch her dying moments; it was left for me
to bestow on her remains the last human charity which the living can
extend to the dead. If I could have looked into the future on our fatal
marriage-day, and could have known that the only home of my giving which
she would ever inhabit, would be the home of the grave!--

Her father had written me a letter, which I destroyed at the time; and
which, if I had it now, I should forbear from copying into these pages.
Let it be enough for me to relate here, that he never forgave the action
by which she thwarted him in his mercenary designs upon me and upon my
family; that he diverted from himself the suspicion and disgust of
his wife's surviving relatives (whose hostility he had some pecuniary
reasons to fear), by accusing his daughter, as he had declared he would
accuse her, of having been the real cause of her mother's death; and
that he took care to give the appearance of sincerity to the indignation
which he professed to feel against her, by refusing to follow her
remains to the place of burial.

Ralph had returned to London, as soon as he received the letter from Mr.
Bernard which I had forwarded to him. He offered me his assistance
in performing the last duties left to my care, with an affectionate
earnestness that I had never seen him display towards me before. But Mr.
Bernard had generously undertaken to relieve me of every responsibility
which could be assumed by others; and on this occasion, therefore, I had
no need to put my brother's ready kindness in helping me to the test.

I stood alone by the grave. Mr. Bernard had taken leave of me; the
workers and the idlers in the churchyard had alike departed. There was
no reason why I should not follow them; and yet I remained, with my eyes
fixed upon the freshly-turned earth at my feet, thinking of the dead.

Some time had passed thus, when the sound of approaching footsteps
attracted my attention. I looked up, and saw a man, clothed in a long
cloak drawn loosely around his neck, and wearing a shade over his eyes,
which hid the whole upper part of his face, advancing slowly towards me,
walking with the help of a stick. He came on straight to the grave, and
stopped at the foot of it--stopped opposite me, as I stood at the head.

"Do you know me again?" he said. "Do you know me for Robert Mannion?" As
he pronounced his name, he raised the shade and looked at me.

The first sight of that appalling face, with its ghastly discolouration
of sickness, its hideous deformity of feature, its fierce and changeless
malignity of expression glaring full on me in the piercing noonday
sunshine--glaring with the same unearthly look of fury and triumph which
I had seen flashing through the flashing lightning, when I parted from
him on the night of the storm--struck me speechless where I stood, and
has never left me since. I must not, I dare not, describe that frightful
sight; though it now rises before my imagination, vivid in its horror
as on the first day when I saw it--though it moves hither and thither
before me fearfully, while I write; though it lowers at my window,
a noisome shadow on the radiant prospect of earth, and sea, and sky,
whenever I look up from the page I am now writing towards the beauties
of my cottage view.

"Do you know me for Robert Mannion?" he repeated. "Do you know the
work of your own hands, now you see it? Or, am I changed to you past
recognition, as _your_ father might have found _my_ father changed,
if he had seen him on the morning of his execution, standing under the
gallows, with the cap over his face?"

Still I could neither speak nor move. I could only look away from him in
horror, and fix my eyes on the ground.

He lowered the shade to its former position on his face, then spoke
again.

"Under this earth that we stand on," he said, setting his foot on the
grave; "down here, where you are now looking, lies buried with the
buried dead, the last influence which might one day have gained you
respite and mercy at my hands. Did you think of the one, last chance
that you were losing, when you came to see her die? I watched _you,_ and
I watched _her._ I heard as much as you heard; I saw as much as you saw;
I know when she died, and how, as you know it; I shared her last moments
with you, to the very end. It was my fancy not to give her up, as your
sole possession, even on her death-bed: it is my fancy, now, not to let
you stand alone--as if her corpse was your property--over her grave!"

While he uttered the last words, I felt my self-possession returning.
I could not force myself to speak, as I would fain have spoken--I could
only move away, to leave him.

"Stop," he said, "what I have still to say concerns you. I have to tell
you, face to face, standing with you here, over her dead body, that
what I wrote from the hospital, is what I will do; that I will make your
whole life to come, one long expiation of this deformity;" (he pointed
to his face), "and of that death" (he set his foot once more on the
grave). "Go where you will, this face of mine shall never be turned away
from you; this tongue, which you can never silence but by a crime,
shall awaken against you the sleeping superstitions and cruelties of all
mankind. The noisome secret of that night when you followed us, shall
reek up like a pestilence in the nostrils of your fellow-beings, be
they whom they may. You may shield yourself behind your family and your
friends--I will strike at you through the dearest and the bravest
of them! Now you have heard me, go! The next time we meet, you shall
acknowledge with your own lips that I can act as I speak. Live the free
life which Margaret Sherwin has restored to you by her death--you will
know it soon for the life of Cain!"

He turned from the grave, and left me by the way that he had come;
but the hideous image of him, and the remembrance of the words he had
spoken, never left me. Never for a moment, while I lingered alone in
the churchyard; never, when I quitted it, and walked through the crowded
streets. The horror of the fiend-face was still before my eyes, the
poison of the fiend-words was still in my ears, when I returned to my
lodging, and found Ralph waiting to see me as soon as I entered my room.

"At last you have come back!" he said; "I was determined to stop till
you did, if I stayed all day. Is anything the matter? Have you got into
some worse difficulty than ever?"

"No, Ralph--no. What have you to tell me?"

"Something that will rather surprise you, Basil: I have to tell you to
leave London at once! Leave it for your own interests and for everybody
else's. My father has found out that Clara has been to see you."

"Good heavens! how?"

"He won't tell me. But he has found it out. You know how you stand in
his opinion--I leave you to imagine what he thinks of Clara's conduct in
coming here."

"No! no! tell me yourself, Ralph--tell me how she bears his
displeasure!"

"As badly as possible. After having forbidden her ever to enter this
house again, he now only shows how he is offended, by his silence; and
it is exactly that, of course, which distresses her. Between her notions
of implicit obedience to _him,_ and her opposite notions, just as
strong, of her sisterly duties to _you,_ she is made miserable from
morning to night. What she will end in, if things go on like this, I am
really afraid to think; and I'm not easily frightened, as you know.
Now, Basil, listen to me: it is _your_ business to stop this, and _my_
business to tell you how."

"I will do anything you wish--anything for Clara's sake!"

"Then leave London; and so cut short the struggle between her duty and
her inclination. If you don't, my father is quite capable of taking her
at once into the country, though I know he has important business to
keep him in London. Write a letter to her, saying that you have gone
away for your health, for change of scene and peace of mind--gone away,
in short, to come back better some day. Don't say where you're going,
and don't tell me, for she is sure to ask, and sure to get it out of
me if I know. Then she might be writing to you, and that might be found
out, too. She can't distress herself about your absence, if you
account for it properly, as she distresses herself now--that is one
consideration. And you will serve your own interests, as well as
Clara's, by going away--that is another."

"Never mind _my_ interests. Clara! I can only think of Clara!"

"But you _have_ interests, and you must think of them. I told my father
of the death of that unhappy woman, and of your noble behaviour when she
was dying. Don't interrupt me, Basil--it _was_ noble; I couldn't have
done what you did, I can tell you! I saw he was more struck by it than
he was willing to confess. An impression has been made on him by the
turn circumstances have taken. Only leave that impression to strengthen,
and you're safe. But if you destroy it by staying here, after what has
happened, and keeping Clara in this new dilemma--my dear fellow,
you destroy your best chance! There is a sort of defiance of him in
stopping; there is a downright concession to him in going away."

"I _will_ go, Ralph; you have more than convinced me that I ought! I
will go to-morrow, though where--"

"You have the rest of the day to think where. _I_ should go abroad and
amuse myself; but your ideas of amusement are, most likely, not mine. At
any rate, wherever you go, I can always supply you with money, when you
want it; you can write to me, after you have been away some little time,
and I can write back, as soon as I have good news to tell you. Only
stick to your present determination, Basil, and, I'll answer for it,
you will be back in your own study at home, before you are many months
older!"

"I will put it out of my power to fail in my resolution, by writing to
Clara at once, and giving you the letter to place in her hands to-morrow
evening, when I shall have left London some hours."

"That's right, Basil! that's acting and speaking like a man!"

I wrote immediately, accounting for my sudden absence as Ralph had
advised me--wrote, with a heavy heart, all that I thought would be most
reassuring and cheering to Clara; and then, without allowing myself time
to hesitate or to think, gave the letter to my brother.

"She shall have it to-morrow night," he said, "and my father shall know
why you have left town, at the same time. Depend on me in this, as in
everything else. And now, Basil, I must say good bye--unless you're in
the humour for coming to look at my new house this evening. Ah! I see
that won't suit you just now, so, good bye, old fellow! Write when you
are in any necessity--get back your spirits and your health--and never
doubt that the step you are now taking will be the best for Clara, and
the best for yourself!"

He hurried out of the room, evidently feeling more at saying farewell
than he was willing to let me discover. I was left alone for the rest of
the day, to think whither I should turn my steps on the morrow.

I knew that it would be best that I should leave England; but there
seemed to have grown within me, suddenly, a yearning towards my own
country that I had never felt before--a home-sickness for the land in
which my sister lived. Not once did my thoughts wander away to foreign
places, while I now tried to consider calmly in what direction I should
depart when I left London.

While I was still in doubt, my earliest impressions of childhood came
back to my memory; and influenced by them, I thought of Cornwall. My
nurse had been a Cornish woman; my first fancies and first feelings of
curiosity had been excited by her Cornish stories, by the descriptions
of the scenery, the customs, and the people of her native land, with
which she was ever ready to amuse me. As I grew older, it had always
been one of my favourite projects to go to Cornwall, to explore the wild
western land, on foot, from hill to hill throughout. And now, when no
motive of pleasure could influence my choice--now, when I was going
forth homeless and alone, in uncertainty, in grief, in peril--the old
fancy of long-past days still kept its influence, and pointed out my new
path to me among the rocky boundaries of the Cornish shore.

My last night in London was a night made terrible by Mannion's fearful
image in all my dreams--made mournful, in my waking moments, by thoughts
of the morrow which was to separate me from Clara. But I never faltered
in my resolution to leave London for her sake. When the morning came,
I collected my few necessaries, added to them one or two books, and was
ready to depart.

My way through the streets took me near my father's house. As I passed
by the well-remembered neighbourhood, my self-control so far deserted
me, that I stopped and turned aside into the Square, in the hope of
seeing Clara once more before I went away. Cautiously and doubtfully,
as if I was a trespasser even on the public pavement, I looked up at
the house which was no more my home--at the windows, side by side, of my
sister's sitting-room and bed-room. She was neither standing near them,
nor passing accidentally from one room to another at that moment. Still
I could not persuade myself to go on. I thought of many and many an
act of kindness that she had done for me, which I seemed never to have
appreciated until now--I thought of what she had suffered, and might yet
suffer, for my sake--and the longing to see her once more, though only
for an instant, still kept me lingering near the house and looking up
vainly at the lonely windows.

It was a bright, cool, autumnal morning; perhaps she might have gone out
into the garden of the square: it used often to be her habit, when I was
at home, to go there and read at this hour. I walked round, outside the
railings, searching for her between gaps in the foliage; and had nearly
made the circuit of the garden thus, before the figure of a lady sitting
alone under one of the trees, attracted my attention. I stopped--looked
intently towards her--and saw that it was Clara.

Her face was almost entirely turned from me; but I knew her by her
dress, by her figure--even by her position, simple as it was. She was
sitting with her hands on a closed book which rested on her knee. A
little spaniel that I had given her lay asleep at her feet: she seemed
to be looking down at the animal, as far as I could tell by the position
of her head. When I moved aside, to try if I could see her face, the
trees hid her from sight. I was obliged to be satisfied with the little
I could discern of her, through the one gap in the foliage which gave
me a clear view of the place where she was sitting. To speak to her, to
risk the misery to both of us of saying farewell, was more than I dared
trust myself to do. I could only stand silent, and look at her--it might
be for the last time!--until the tears gathered in my eyes, so that I
could see nothing more. I resisted the temptation to dash them away.
While they still hid her from me--while I could not see her again, if I
would--I turned from the garden view, and left the Square.

Amid all the thoughts which thronged on me, as I walked farther and
farther away from the neighbourhood of what was once my home; amid all
the remembrances of past events--from the first day when I met Margaret
Sherwin to the day when I stood by her grave--which were recalled by the
mere act of leaving London, there now arose in my mind, for the first
time, a doubt, which from that day to this has never left it; a doubt
whether Mannion might not be tracking me in secret along every step of
my way.

I stopped instinctively, and looked behind me. Many figures were moving
in the distance; but the figure that I had seen in the churchyard was
nowhere visible among them. A little further on, I looked back again,
and still with the same result. After this, I let a longer interval
elapse before I stopped; and then, for the third time, I turned round,
and scanned the busy street-scene behind me, with eager, suspicious
eyes. Some little distance back, on the opposite side of the way, I
caught sight of a man who was standing still (as I was standing), amid
the moving throng. His height was like Mannion's height; and he wore
a cloak like the cloak I had seen on Mannion, when he approached me at
Margaret's grave. More than this I could not detect, without crossing
over. The passing vehicles and foot-passengers constantly intercepted my
view, from the position in which I stood.

Was this figure, thus visible only by intervals, the figure of Mannion?
and was he really tracking my steps? As the suspicion strengthened in
my mind that it was so, the remembrance of his threat in the churchyard:
"You may shield yourself behind your family and your friends: I will
strike at you through the dearest and the bravest of them--" suddenly
recurred to me; and brought with it a thought which urged me instantly
to proceed on my way. I never looked behind me again, as I now walked
on; for I said within myself:--"If he is following me, I must not, and
will not avoid him: it will be the best result of my departure, that I
shall draw after me that destroying presence; and thus at least remove
it far and safely away from my family and my home!"

So, I neither turned aside from the straight direction, nor hurried my
steps, nor looked back any more. At the time I had resolved on, I left
London for Cornwall, without making any attempt to conceal my departure.
And though I knew that he must surely be following me, still I never saw
him again: never discovered how close or how far off he was on my track.

                         *****

Two months have passed since that period; and I know no more about him
_now_ than I knew _then._



                        JOURNAL.

October 19th--My retrospect is finished. I have traced the history of
my errors and misfortunes, of the wrong I have done and the punishment I
have suffered for it, from the past to the present time.

The pages of my manuscript (many more than I thought to write at first)
lie piled together on the table before me. I dare not look them over: I
dare not read the lines which my own hand has traced. There may be much
in my manner of writing that wants alteration; but I have no heart to
return to my task, and revise and reconsider as I might if I were intent
on producing a book which was to be published during my lifetime. Others
will be found, when I am no more, to carve, and smooth, and polish to
the popular taste of the day this rugged material of Truth which I shall
leave behind me.

But now, while I collect these leaves, and seal them up, never to be
opened again by my hands, can I feel that I have related all which it is
necessary to tell? No! While Mannion lives--while I am ignorant of
the changes that may yet be wrought in the home from which I am
exiled--there remains for me a future which must be recorded, as the
necessary sequel to the narrative of the past. What may yet happen
worthy of record, I know not: what sufferings I may yet undergo, which
may unfit me for continuing the labour now terminated for a time, I
cannot foresee. I have not hope enough in the future, or in myself; to
believe that I shall have the time or the energy to write hereafter,
as I have written already, from recollection. It is best, then, that I
should note down events daily as they occur; and so ensure, as far as
may be, a continuation of my narrative, fragment by fragment, to the
very last.

But, first, as a fit beginning to the Journal I now propose to keep,
let me briefly reveal something, in this place, of the life that I am
leading in my retirement on the Cornish coast.

The fishing hamlet in which I have written the preceding pages, is on
the southern shore of Cornwall, not more than a few miles distant from
the Land's End. The cottage I inhabit is built of rough granite, rudely
thatched, and has but two rooms. I possess no furniture but my bed, my
table, and my chair; and some half-dozen fishermen and their families
are my only neighbours. But I feel neither the want of luxuries, nor
the want of society: all that I wished for in coming here, I have--the
completest seclusion.

My arrival produced, at first, both astonishment and suspicion. The
fishermen of Cornwall still preserve almost all the superstitions,
even to the grossest, which were held dear by their humble ancestors,
centuries back. My simple neighbours could not understand why I had no
business to occupy me; could not reconcile my worn, melancholy face with
my youthful years. Such loneliness as mine looked unnatural--especially
to the women. They questioned me curiously; and the very simplicity of
my answer, that I had only come to Cornwall to live in quiet, and regain
my health, perplexed them afresh. They waited, day after day, when I
was first installed in the cottage, to see letters sent to me--and no
letters arrived: to see my friends join me--and no friends came. This
deepened the mystery to their eyes. They began to recall to memory old
Cornish legends of solitary, secret people who had lived, years and
years ago, in certain parts of the county--coming, none knew whence;
existing, none knew by what means; dying and disappearing, none knew
when. They felt half inclined to identify me with these mysterious
visitors--to consider me as some being, a stranger to the whole human
family, who had come to waste away under a curse, and die ominously and
secretly among them. Even the person to whom I first paid money for
my necessaries, questioned, for a moment, the lawfulness and safety of
receiving it!

But these doubts gradually died away; this superstitious curiosity
insensibly wore off, among my poor neighbours. They became used to my
solitary, thoughtful, and (to them) inexplicable mode of existence.
One or two little services of kindness which I rendered, soon after my
arrival, to their children, worked wonders in my favour; and I am
pitied now, rather than distrusted. When the results of the fishing are
abundant, a little present has been often made to me, out of the nets.
Some weeks ago, after I had gone out in the morning, I found on my
return, two or three gulls' eggs placed in a basket before my door.
They had been left there by the children, as ornaments for my cottage
window--the only ornaments they had to give; the only ornaments they had
ever heard of.

I can now go out unnoticed, directing my steps up the ravine in which
our hamlet is situated, towards the old grey stone church which stands
solitary on the hill-top, surrounded by the lonesome moor. If any
children happen to be playing among the scattered tombs, they do not
start and run away, when they see me sitting on the coffin stone at the
entrance of the churchyard, or wandering round the sturdy granite
tower, reared by hands which have mouldered into dust centuries ago. My
approach has ceased to be of evil omen for my little neighbours. They
just look up at me, for a moment, with bright smiles, and then go on
with their game.

From the churchyard, I look down the ravine, on fine days, towards the
sea. Mighty piles of granite soar above the fishermen's cottages on each
side; the little strip of white beach which the cliffs shut in, glows
pure in the sunlight; the inland stream that trickles down the bed of
the rocks, sparkles, at places, like a rivulet of silver-fire; the round
white clouds, with their violet shadows and bright wavy edges, roll on
majestically above me; the cries of the sea-birds, the endless, dirging
murmur of the surf, and the far music of the wind among the ocean
caverns, fall, now together, now separately on my ear. Nature's
voice and Nature's beauty--God's soothing and purifying angels of the
soul--speak to me most tenderly and most happily, at such times as
these.

It is when the rain falls, and wind and sea arise together--when,
sheltered among the caverns in the side of the precipice, I look out
upon the dreary waves and the leaping spray--that I feel the unknown
dangers which hang over my head in all the horror of their uncertainty.
Then, the threats of my deadly enemy strengthen their hold fearfully on
all my senses. I see the dim and ghastly personification of a fatality
that is lying in wait for me, in the strange shapes of the mist which
shrouds the sky, and moves, and whirls, and brightens, and darkens in a
weird glory of its own over the heaving waters. Then, the crash of the
breakers on the reef howls upon me with a sound of judgment; and the
voice of the wind, growling and battling behind me in the hollows of the
cave, is, ever and ever, the same thunder-voice of doom and warning in
my ear.

Does this foreboding that Mannion's eye is always on me, that his
footsteps are always secretly following mine, proceed only from the
weakness of my worn-out energies? Could others in my situation restrain
themselves from fearing, as I do, that he is still incessantly watching
me in secret? It is possible. It may be, that his terrible connection
with all my sufferings of the past, makes me attach credit too easily to
the destroying power which he arrogates to himself in the future. Or
it may be, that all resolution to resist him is paralysed in me, not so
much by my fear of his appearance, as by my uncertainty of the time when
it will take place--not so much by his menaces themselves, as by the
delay in their execution. Still, though I can estimate fairly the value
of these considerations, they exercise over me no lasting influence of
tranquillity. I remember what this man _has_ done; and in spite of
all reasoning, I believe in what he has told me he will yet do. Madman
though he may be, I have no hope of defence or escape from him in any
direction, look where I will.

But for the occupation which the foregoing narrative has given to my
mind; but for the relief which my heart can derive from its thoughts of
Clara, I must have sunk under the torment of suspense and suspicion
in which my life is now passed. My sister! Even in this self-imposed
absence from her, I have still found a means of connecting myself
remotely with something that she loves. I have taken, as the assumed
name under which I live, and shall continue to live until my father has
given me back his confidence and his affection, the name of a little
estate that once belonged to my mother, and that now belongs to
her daughter. Even the most wretched have their caprice, their last
favourite fancy. I possess no memorial of Clara, not even a letter. The
name that I have taken from the place which she was always fondest and
proudest of, is, to me, what a lock of hair, a ring, any little loveable
keepsake, is to others happier than I am.

I have wandered away from the simple details of my life in this place.
Shall I now return to them? Not to-day; my head burns, my hand is weary.
If the morrow should bring with it no event to write of, on the morrow I
can resume the subject from which I now break off.

October 20th.--After laying aside my pen, I went out yesterday for
the purpose of renewing that former friendly intercourse with my poor
neighbours, which has been interrupted for the last three weeks by
unintermitting labour at the latter portions of my narrative.

In the course of my walk among the cottages and up to the old church
on the moor, I saw fewer of the people of the district than usual.
The behaviour of those whom I did chance to meet, seemed unaccountably
altered; perhaps it was mere fancy, but I thought they avoided me. One
woman abruptly shut her cottage door as I approached. A fisherman, when
I wished him good day, hardly answered; and walked on without stopping
to gossip with me as usual. Some children, too, whom I overtook on the
road to the church, ran away from me, making gestures to each other
which I could not understand. Is the first superstitious distrust of
me returning after I thought it had been entirely overcome? Or are my
neighbours only showing their resentment at my involuntary neglect of
them for the last three weeks? I must try to find out to-morrow.

21st--I have discovered all! The truth, which I was strangely slow to
suspect yesterday, has forced itself on me to-day.

I went out this morning, as I had purposed, to discover whether my
neighbours had really changed towards me, or not, since the interval
of my three weeks' seclusion. At the cottage-door nearest to mine, two
young children were playing, whom I knew I had succeeded in attaching
to me soon after my arrival. I walked up to speak to them; but, as I
approached, their mother came out, and snatched them from me with a
look of anger and alarm. Before I could question her, she had taken them
inside the cottage, and had closed the door.

Almost at the same moment, as if by a preconcerted signal, three or four
other women came out from their abodes at a little distance, warned
me in loud, angry voices not to come near them, or their children; and
disappeared, shutting their doors. Still not suspecting the truth, I
turned back, and walked towards the beach. The lad whom I employ to
serve me with provisions, was lounging there against the side of an old
boat. At seeing me, he started up, and walked away a few steps--then
stopped, and called out--

"I'm not to bring you anything more; father says he won't sell to you
again, whatever you pay him."

I asked the boy why his father had said that; but he ran back towards
the village without answering me.

"You had best leave us," muttered a voice behind me. "If you don't go of
your own accord, our people will starve you out of the place."

The man who said these words, had been one of the first to set the
example of friendliness towards me, after my arrival; and to him I now
turned for the explanation which no one else would give me.

"You know what we mean, and why we want you to go, well enough," was his
reply.

I assured him that I did not; and begged him so earnestly to enlighten
me, that he stopped as he was walking away.

"I'll tell you about it," he said; "but not now; I don't want to be seen
with you." (As he spoke he looked back at the women, who were appearing
once more in front of their cottages.) "Go home again, and shut yourself
up; I'll come at dusk."

And he came as he had promised. But when I asked him to enter my
cottage, he declined, and said he would talk to me outside, at my
window. This disinclination to be under my roof, reminded me that my
supplies of food had, for the last week, been left on the window-ledge,
instead of being brought into my room as usual. I had been too
constantly occupied to pay much attention to the circumstance at the
time; but I thought it very strange now.

"Do you mean to tell me you don't suspect why we want to get you out of
our place here?" said the man, looking in distrustfully at me through
the window.

I repeated that I could not imagine why they had all changed towards me,
or what wrong they thought I had done them.

"Then I'll soon let you know it," he continued. "We want you gone from
here, because--"

"Because," interrupted another voice behind him, which I recognised
as his wife's, "because you're bringing a blight on us, and our
houses--because _we want our children's faces left as God made them_--"

"Because," interposed a second woman, who had joined her, "you're
bringing devil's vengeances among Christian people! Come back, John!
he's not safe for a true man to speak to."

They dragged the fisherman away with them before he could say another
word. I had heard enough. The fatal truth burst at once on my mind.
Mannion _had_ followed me to Cornwall: his threats were executed to the
very letter!



(10 o'clock.)--I have lit my candle for the last time in this cottage,
to add a few lines to my journal. The hamlet is quiet; I hear no
footstep outside--and yet, can I be certain that Mannion is not lurking
near my door at this moment?

I must go when the morning comes; I must leave this quiet retreat, in
which I have lived so calmly until now. There is no hope that I can
reinstate myself in the opinions of my poor neighbours. He has arrayed
against me the pitiless hostility of their superstition. He has found
out the dormant cruelties, even in the hearts of these simple people;
and has awakened them against me, as he said he would. The evil work
must have been begun within the last three weeks, while I was much
within doors, and there was little chance of meeting me in my usual
walks. How that work was accomplished it is useless to inquire; my only
object now, must be to prepare myself at once for departure.

(11 o'clock.)--While I was putting up my few books, a minute ago, a
little embroidered marker fell out of one of them, which I had not
observed in the pages before; and which I recognised as having been
worked for me by Clara. I have a memorial of my sister in my possession,
after all! Trifling as it is, I shall preserve it about me, as a
messenger of consolation in the time of adversity and peril.

(1 o'clock.)--The wind sweeps down on us, from off the moorland, in
fiercer and fiercer gusts; the waves dash heavily against our rock
promontory; the rain drifts wildly past my windows; and the densest
darkness overspreads the whole sky. The storm which has been threatening
for some days, is gathering fast.



(Village of Treen, October 22nd.)--The events of this one day have
changed the whole future of my life. I must force myself to write of
them at once. Something warns me that if I delay, though only till
to-morrow, I shall be incapable of relating them at all.

It was still early in the morning--I think about seven o'clock--when I
closed my cottage door behind me, never to open it again. I met only one
or two of my neighbours as I left the hamlet. They drew aside to let me
advance, without saying a word. With a heavy heart, grieved more than
I could have imagined possible at departing as an enemy from among the
people with whom I had lived as a friend, I passed slowly by the last
cottages, and ascended the cliff path which led to the moor.

The storm had raged at its fiercest some hours back. Soon after daylight
the wind sank; but the majesty of the mighty sea had lost none of
its terror and grandeur as yet. The huge Atlantic waves still hurled
themselves, foaming and furious, against the massive granite of the
Cornish cliffs. Overhead, the sky was hidden in a thick white mist, now
hanging, still and dripping, down to the ground; now rolling in shapes
like vast smoke-wreaths before the light wind which still blew at
intervals. At a distance of more than a few yards, the largest objects
were totally invisible. I had nothing to guide me, as I advanced, but
the ceaseless roaring of the sea on my right hand.

It was my purpose to get to Penzance by night. Beyond that, I had no
project, no thought of what refuge I should seek next. Any hope I might
have formerly felt of escaping from Mannion, had now deserted me for
ever. I could not discover by any outward indications, that he was still
following my footsteps. The mist obscured all objects behind me from
view; the ceaseless crashing of the shore-waves overwhelmed all landward
sounds, but I never doubted for a moment that he was watching me, as I
proceeded along my onward way.

I walked slowly, keeping from the edge of the precipices only by keeping
the sound of the sea always at the same distance from my ear; knowing
that I was advancing in the proper direction, though very circuitously,
as long as I heard the waves on my right hand. To have ventured on the
shorter way, by the moor and the cross-roads beyond it, would have been
only to have lost myself past all chance of extrication, in the mist.

In this tedious manner I had gone on for some time, before it struck
me that the noise of the sea was altering completely to my sense
of hearing. It seemed to be sounding very strangely on each side of
me--both on my right hand and on my left. I stopped and strained my eyes
to look through the mist, but it was useless. Crags only a few yards
off, seemed like shadows in the thick white vapour. Again, I went on a
little; and, ere long, I heard rolling towards me, as it were, under
my own feet, and under the roaring of the sea, a howling, hollow,
intermittent sound--like thunder at a distance. I stopped again, and
rested against a rock. After some time, the mist began to part to
seaward, but remained still as thick as ever on each side of me. I went
on towards the lighter sky in front--the thunder-sound booming louder
and louder, in the very heart, as it seemed, of the great cliff.

The mist brightened yet a little more, and showed me a landmark to
ships, standing on the highest point of the surrounding rocks. I climbed
to it, recognised the glaring red and white pattern in which it was
painted, and knew that I had wandered, in the mist, away from the
regular line of coast, out on one of the great granite promontories
which project into the sea, as natural breakwaters, on the southern
shore of Cornwall.

I had twice penetrated as far as this place, at the earlier period of
my sojourn in the fishing-hamlet, and while I now listened to the
thunder-sound, I knew from what cause it proceeded.

Beyond the spot where I stood, the rocks descended suddenly, and almost
perpendicularly, to the range below them. In one of the highest parts of
the wall-side of granite thus formed, there opened a black, yawning hole
that slanted nearly straight downwards, like a tunnel, to unknown and
unfathomable depths below, into which the waves found entrance through
some subterranean channel. Even at calm times the sea was never silent
in this frightful abyss, but on stormy days its fury was terrific. The
wild waves boiled and thundered in their imprisonment, till they seemed
to convulse the solid cliff about them, like an earthquake. But, high
as they leapt up in the rocky walls of the chasm, they never leapt into
sight from above. Nothing but clouds of spray indicated to the eye, what
must be the horrible tumult of the raging waters below.

With my recognition of the place to which I had now wandered, came
remembrance of the dangers I had left behind me on the rock-track that
led from the mainland to the promontory--dangers of narrow ledges and
treacherous precipices, which I had passed safely, while unconscious
of them in the mist, but which I shrank from tempting again, now that I
recollected them, until the sky had cleared, and I could see my way well
before me. The atmosphere was still brightening slowly over the tossing,
distant waves: I determined to wait until it had lost all its obscurity,
before I ventured to retrace my steps.

I moved down towards the lower range of rocks, to seek a less exposed
position than that which I now occupied. As I neared the chasm, the
terrific howling of the waves inside it was violent enough to drown,
not only the crashing sound of the surf on the outward crags of the
promontory, but even the shrill cries of the hundreds on hundreds
of sea-birds that whirled around me, except when their flight was
immediately over my head. At each side of the abyss, the rocks, though
very precipitous, afforded firm hold for hand and foot. As I descended
them, the morbid longing to look on danger, which has led many a man
to the very brink of a precipice, even while he dreaded it, led me to
advance as near as I durst to the side of the great hole, and to gaze
down into it. I could see but little of its black, shining, interior
walls, or of the fragments of rock which here and there jutted out from
them, crowned with patches of long, lank, sea-weed waving slowly to
and fro in empty space--I could see but little of these things, for the
spray from the bellowing water in the invisible depths below, steamed up
almost incessantly, like smoke, and shot, hissing in clouds out of the
mouth of the chasm, on to a huge flat rock, covered with sea-weed, that
lay beneath and in front of it. The very sight of this smooth, slippery
plane of granite, shelving steeply downward, right into the gaping
depths of the hole, made my head swim; the thundering of the water
bewildered and deafened me--I moved away while I had the power: away,
some thirty or forty yards in a lateral direction, towards the edges of
the promontory which looked down on the sea. Here, the rocks rose again
in wild shapes, forming natural caverns and penthouses. Towards one of
these I now advanced, to shelter myself till the sky had cleared.

I had just entered the place, close to the edge of the cliff, when a
hand was laid suddenly and firmly on my arm; and, through the crashing
of the waves below, the thundering of the water in the abyss behind,
and the shrieking of the seabirds overhead, I heard these words, spoken
close to my ear:--

"Take care of your life. It is not your's to throw away--it is _mine!_"

I turned, and saw Mannion standing by me. No shade concealed the hideous
distortion of his face. His eye was on me, as he pointed significantly
down to the surf foaming two hundred feet beneath us.

"Suicide!" he said slowly--"I suspected it, and, this time, I followed
close: followed, to fight with death, which should have you."

As I moved back from the edge of the precipice, and shook him from me,
I marked the vacancy that glared even through the glaring triumph of his
eye, and remembered how I had been warned against him at the hospital.

The mist was thickening again, but thickening now in clouds that parted
and changed minute by minute, under the influence of the light behind
them. I had noticed these sudden transitions before, and knew them to be
the signs which preceded the speedy clearing of the atmosphere.

When I looked up at the sky, Mannion stepped back a few paces, and
pointed in the direction of the fishing-hamlet from which I had
departed.

"Even in that remote place," he said, "and among those ignorant people,
my deformed face has borne witness against you, and Margaret's death has
been avenged, as I said it should. You have been expelled as a pest and
a curse, by a community of poor fishermen; you have begun to live your
life of excommunication, as I lived mine. Superstition!--barbarous,
monstrous superstition, which I found ready made to my use, is the
scourge with which I have driven you from that hiding-place. Look at me
now! I have got back my strength; I am no longer the sick refuse of the
hospital. Where you go, I have the limbs and the endurance to go too! I
tell you again, we are linked together for life; I cannot leave you if
I would. The horrible joy of hunting you through the world, leaps in my
blood like fire! Look! look out on those tossing waves. There is no rest
for _them;_ there shall be no rest for _you!_"

The sight of him, standing close by me in that wild solitude; the hoarse
sound of his voice, as he raised it almost to raving in his exultation
over my helplessness; the incessant crashing of the sea on the outer
rocks; the roaring of the tortured waters imprisoned in the depths of
the abyss behind us; the obscurity of the mist, and the strange, wild
shapes it began to take, as it now rolled almost over our heads---all
that I saw, all that I heard, seemed suddenly to madden me, as Mannion
uttered his last words. My brain felt turned to fire; my heart to ice.
A horrible temptation to rid myself for ever of the wretch before me, by
hurling him over the precipice at my feet, seized on me. I felt my hands
stretching themselves out towards him without my willing it--if I
had waited another instant, I should have dashed him or myself to
destruction. But I turned back in time; and, reckless of all danger,
fled from the sight of him, over the rugged and perilous surface of the
cliff.

The shock of a fall among the rocks, before I had advanced more than a
few yards, partly restored my self-possession. Still, I dared not look
back to see if Mannion was following me, so long as the precipice behind
him was within view.

I began to climb to the higher range of rocks almost at the same spot
by which I had descended from them--judging by the close thunder of the
water in the chasm. Halfway up, I stopped at a broad resting-place; and
found that I must proceed a little, either to the right or to the left,
in a horizontal direction, before I could easily get higher. At that
moment, the mist was slowly brightening again. I looked first to the
left, to see where I could get good foothold--then to the right, towards
the outer sides of the riven rocks close at hand.

At the same instant, I caught sight dimly of the figure of Mannion,
moving shadow-like below and beyond me, skirting the farther edge of
the slippery plane of granite that shelved into the gaping mouth of the
hole. The brightening atmosphere showed him that he had risked himself,
in the mist, too near to a dangerous place. He stopped--looked up and
saw me watching him--raised his hand--and shook it threateningly in the
air. The ill-calculated violence of his action, in making that menacing
gesture, destroyed his equilibrium--he staggered--tried to recover
himself--swayed half round where he stood--then fell heavily backward,
right on to the steep shelving rock.

The wet sea-weed slipped through his fingers, as they madly clutched at
it. He struggled frantically to throw himself towards the side of the
declivity; slipping further and further down it at every effort. Close
to the mouth of the abyss, he sprang up as if he had been shot. A
tremendous jet of spray hissed out upon him at the same moment. I heard
a scream, so shrill, so horribly unlike any human cry, that it seemed
to silence the very thundering of the water. The spray fell. For one
instant, I saw two livid and bloody hands tossed up against the black
walls of the hole, as he dropped into it. Then, the waves roared again
fiercely in their hidden depths; the spray flew out once more; and
when it cleared off; nothing was to be seen at the yawning mouth of the
chasm--nothing moved over the shelving granite, but some torn particles
of sea-weed sliding slowly downwards in the running ooze.

The shock of that sight must have paralysed within me the power of
remembering what followed it; for I can recall nothing, after looking
on the emptiness of the rock below, except that I crouched on the ledge
under my feet, to save myself from falling off it--that there was an
interval of oblivion--and that I seemed to awaken again, as it were, to
the thundering of the water in the abyss. When I rose and looked around
me, the seaward sky was lovely in its clearness; the foam of the leaping
waves flashed gloriously in the sunlight: and all that remained of the
mist was one great cloud of purple shadow, hanging afar off over the
whole inland view.

I traced my way back along the promontory feebly and slowly. My weakness
was so great, that I trembled in every limb. A strange uncertainty about
directing myself in the simplest actions, overcame my mind. Sometimes, I
stopped short, hesitating in spite of myself at the slightest obstacles
in my path. Sometimes, I grew confused without any cause, about the
direction in which I was proceeding, and fancied I was going back to the
fishing village.. The sight that I had witnessed, seemed to be affecting
me physically, far more than mentally. As I dragged myself on my weary
way along the coast, there was always the same painful vacancy in
my thoughts: there seemed to be no power in them yet, of realising
Mannion's appalling death.

By the time I arrived at this village, my strength was so utterly
exhausted, that the people at the inn were obliged to help me upstairs.
Even now, after some hours' rest, the mere exertion of dipping my pen
in the ink begins to be a labour and a pain to me. There is a strange
fluttering at my heart; my recollections are growing confused again--I
can write no more.

23rd.--The frightful scene that I witnessed yesterday still holds the
same disastrous influence over me. I have vainly endeavoured to think,
not of Mannion's death, but of the free prospect which that death has
opened to my view. Waking or sleeping, it is as if some fatality kept
all my faculties imprisoned within the black walls of the chasm. I saw
the livid, bleeding hands flying past them again, in my dreams, last
night. And now, while the morning is clear and the breeze is fresh, no
repose, no change comes to my thoughts. Time bright beauty of unclouded
daylight seems to have lost the happy influence over me which it used
formerly to possess.

25th.--All yesterday I had not energy enough even to add a line to this
journal. The strength to control myself seems to have gone from me.
The slightest accidental noise in the house, throws me into a fit of
trembling which I cannot subdue. Surely, if ever the death of one human
being brought release and salvation to another, the death of Mannion has
brought them to me; and yet, the effect left on my mind by the horror of
having seen it, is still not lessened--not even by the knowledge of all
that I have gained by being freed from the deadliest and most determined
enemy that man ever had.

26th.--Visions--half waking, half dreaming--all through the night.
Visions of my last lonely evening in the fishing-hamlet--of Mannion
again--the livid hands whirling to and fro over my head in the
darkness--then, glimpses of home; of Clara reading to me in my
study--then, a change to the room where Margaret died--the sight of her
again, with her long black hair streaming over her face--then, oblivion
for a little while--then, Mannion once more; walking backwards and
forwards by my bedside--his death, seeming like a dream; his watching
me through the night like a reality to which I had just awakened--Clara
walking opposite to him on the other side--Ralph between them, pointing
at me.

27th.--I am afraid my mind is seriously affected; it must have been
fatally weakened before I passed through the terrible scenes among the
rocks of the promontory. My nerves must have suffered far more than I
suspected at the time, under the constant suspense in which I have been
living since I left London, and under the incessant strain and agitation
of writing the narrative of all that has happened to me. Shall I send
a letter to Ralph? No--not yet. It might look like impatience, like not
being able to bear my necessary absence as calmly and resolutely as I
ought.

28th.--A wakeful night--tormented by morbid apprehensions that the
reports about me in the fishing-village may spread to this place; that
inquiries may be made after Mannion; and that I may be suspected of
having caused his death.

29th.--The people at the inn have sent to get me medical advice. The
doctor came to-day. He was kindness itself; but I fell into a fit of
trembling, the moment he entered the room--grew confused in attempting
to tell him what was the matter with me--and, at last, could not
articulate a single word distinctly. He looked very grave as he examined
me and questioned the landlady. I thought I heard him say something
about sending for my friends, but could not be certain.

31st.--Weaker and weaker. I tried in despair, to-day, to write to Ralph;
but knew not how to word the letter. The simplest forms of expression
confused themselves inextricably in my mind. I was obliged to give it
up. It is a surprise to me to find that I can still add with my pencil
to the entries in this Journal! When I am no longer able to continue,
in some sort, the employment to which I have been used for so many weeks
past, what will become of me? Shall I have lost the only safeguard that
keeps me in my senses?

                   * * * * *

Worse! worse! I have forgotten what day of the month it is; and cannot
remember it for a moment together, when they tell me--cannot even
recollect how long I have been confined to my bed. I feel as if my heart
was wasting away. Oh! if I could only see Clara again.

                   * * * * *

The doctor and a strange man have been looking among my papers.

My God! am I dying? dying at the very time when there is a chance of
happiness for my future life?

                   * * * * *

Clara!--far from her--nothing but the little book-marker she worked for
me--leave it round my neck when I--

I can't move, or breathe, or think--if I could only be taken back--if
my father could see me as I am now! Night again--the dreams that will
come--always of home; sometimes, the untried home in heaven, as well as
the familiar home on earth--

                   * * * * *

Clara! I shall die out of my senses, unless Clara--break the news
gently--it may kill her--

Her face so bright and calm! her watchful, weeping eyes always looking
at me, with a light in them that shines steady through the quivering
tears. While the light lasts, I shall live; when it begins to die out--*


                   NOTE BY THE EDITOR.

     * There are some lines of writing beyond this point; but they are
     illegible.





LETTERS IN CONCLUSION.



LETTER I.

FROM WILLIAM PENHALE, MINER, AT BARTALLOCK, IN CORNWALL, TO HIS WIFE IN
LONDON.

MY DEAR MARY,

I received your letter yesterday, and was more glad than I can say, at
hearing that our darling girl Susan has got such a good place in London,
and likes her new mistress so well. My kind respects to your sister and
her husband, and say I don't grumble about the money that's been spent
in sending you with Susan to take care of her. She was too young, poor
child, to be trusted to make the journey alone; and, as I was obliged to
stop at home and work to keep the other children, and pay back what we
borrowed for the trip, of course you were the proper person, after me,
to go with Susan--whose welfare is a more precious possession to us than
any money, I am sure. Besides, when I married you, and took you away
to Cornwall, I always promised you a trip to London to see your friends
again; and now that promise is performed. So, once again, don't fret
about the money that's been spent: I shall soon pay it back.

I've got some very strange news for you, Mary. You know how bad work
was getting at the mine, before you went away--so bad, that I thought
to myself after you had gone, "Hadn't I better try what I can do in the
fishing at Treen?" And I went there; and, thank God, have got on well
by it. I can turn my hand to most things; and the fishing has been very
good this year. So I have stuck to my work. And now I come to my news.

The landlady at the inn here, is, as you know, a sort of relation of
mine. Well, the third afternoon after you had gone, I was stopping to
say a word to her at her own door, on my way to the beach, when we saw a
young gentleman, quite a stranger, coming up to us. He looked very pale
and wild-like, I thought, when he asked for a bed; and then got faint
all of a sudden--so faint and ill, that I was obliged to lend a hand in
getting him upstairs. The next morning I heard he was worse: and it was
just the same story the morning after. He quite frightened the landlady,
he was so restless, and talked to himself in such a strange way;
specially at night. He wouldn't say what was the matter with him, or
who he was: we could only find out that he had been stopping among the
fishing people further west: and that they had not behaved very well to
him at last--more shame for them! I'm sure they could take no hurt from
the poor young fellow, let him be whom he may. Well, the end of it was
that I went and fetched the doctor for him myself, and when we got into
his room, we found him all pale and trembling, and looking at us, poor
soul, as if he thought we meant to murder him. The doctor gave his
complaint some hard names which I don't know how to write down; but it
seems there's more the matter with his mind than his body, and that
he must have had some great fright which has shaken his nerves all to
pieces. The only way to do him good, as the doctor said, was to have him
carefully nursed by his relations, and kept quiet among people he knew;
strange faces about him being likely to make him worse. The doctor asked
where his friends lived; but he wouldn't say, and, lately, he's got so
much worse that he can't speak clearly to us at all.

Yesterday evening, he gave us all a fright. The doctor hearing me below,
asking after him, said I was to come up stairs and help to move him to
have his bed made. As soon as I raised him up (though I'm sure I touched
him as gently as I could), he fainted dead away. While he was being
brought to, a little piece of something that looked like card-board,
prettily embroidered with beads and silk, came away from a string that
held it round his neck, and dropped off the bedside. I picked it up;
for I remembered the time, Mary, when you and I were courting, and how
precious the least thing was to me that belonged to you. So I took care
of it for him, thinking it might be a keepsake from his sweetheart.
And sure enough, when he came to, he put up his thin white hands to his
neck, and looked so thankful at me when I tied the little thing again to
the string! Just as I had done that, the doctor beckons me to the other
end of the room.

"This won't do," says he to me in a whisper. "If he goes on like this,
he'll lose his reason, if not his life. I must search his papers, to
find out what friends he has; and you must be my witness."

So the doctor opens his little bag, and takes out a square sealed packet
first; then two or three letters tied together; the poor soul looking
all the while as if he longed to prevent us from touching them. Well,
the doctor said there was no occasion to open the packet, for the
direction was the same on all the letters, and the name corresponded
with his initials marked on his linen.

"I'm next to certain this is where he lives, or did live; so this is
where I'll write," says the doctor.

"Shall my wife take the letter, Sir?" says I. "She's in London with our
girl, Susan; and, if his friends should be gone away from where you are
writing to, she may be able to trace them."

"Quite right, Penhale!" says he; "we'll do that. Write to your wife, and
put my letter inside yours."

I did as he told me, at once; and his letter is inside this, with the
direction of the house and the street.

Now, Mary, dear, go at once, and see what you can find out. The
direction on the doctor's letter may be his home; and if it isn't, there
may be people there who can tell you where it is. So go at once, and
let us know directly what luck you have had, for there is no time to be
lost; and if you saw the young gentleman, you would pity him as much as
we do.

This has got to be such a long letter, that I have no room left to write
any more. God bless you, Mary, and God bless my darling Susan! Give her
a kiss for father's sake, and believe me, Your loving husband,

                      WILLIAM PENHALE.

                         *****

LETTER II.

FROM MARY PENHALE TO HER HUSBAND

DEAREST WILLIAM,

Susan sends a hundred kisses, and best loves to you and her brothers and
sisters. She's getting on nicely; and her mistress is as kind and fond
of her as can be. Best respects, too, from my sister Martha, and her
husband. And now I've done giving you all my messages, I'll tell you
some good news for the poor young gentleman who is so bad at Treen.

As soon as I had seen Susan, and read your letter to her, I went to
the place where the doctor's letter directed me. Such a grand house,
William! I was really afraid to knock at the door. So I plucked up
courage, and gave a pull at the bell; and a very fat, big man, with his
head all plastered over with powder, opened the door, almost before I
had done ringing. "If you please, Sir," says I, showing him the name on
the doctor's letter, "do any friends of this gentleman live here?" "To
be sure they do," says he; "his father and sister live here: but what do
you want to know for?" "I want them to read this letter," says I. "It's
to tell them that the young gentleman is very bad in health down in our
country." "You can't see my master," says he, "for he's confined to his
bed by illness: and Miss Clara is very poorly too--you had better leave
the letter with me." Just as he said this, an elderly lady crossed the
hall (I found out she was the housekeeper, afterwards), and asked what
I wanted. When I told her, she looked quite startled. "Step this way,
ma'am," says she; "you will do Miss Clara more good than all the doctors
put together. But you must break the news to her carefully, before she
sees the letter. Please to make it out better news than it is, for
the young lady is in very delicate health." We went upstairs--such
stair-carpets! I was almost frightened to step on them, after walking
through the dirty streets. The housekeeper opened a door, and said a few
words inside, which I could not hear, and then let me in where the young
lady was.

Oh, William! she had the sweetest, kindest face I ever saw in my life.
But it was so pale, and there was such a sad look in her eyes when she
asked me to sit down, that it went to my heart, when I thought of the
news I had to tell her. I couldn't speak just at first; and I suppose
she thought I was in some trouble--for she begged me not to tell her
what I wanted, till I was better. She said it with such a voice and
such a look, that, like a great fool, I burst out crying, instead of
answering as I ought. But it did me good, though, and made me able to
tell her about her brother (breaking it as gently as I could) before I
gave her the doctor's letter. She never opened it; but stood up before
me as if she was turned to stone--not able to cry, or speak, or move. It
frightened me so, to see her in such a dreadful state, that I forgot all
about the grand house, and the difference there was between us; and took
her in my arms, making her sit down on the sofa by me--just as I should
do, if I was consoling our own Susan under some great trouble. Well!
I soon made her look more like herself, comforting her in every way I
could think of: and she laid her poor head on my shoulder, and I took
and kissed her, (not remembering a bit about its being a born lady and
a stranger that I was kissing); and the tears came at last, and did her
good. As soon as she could speak, she thanked God her brother was found,
and had fallen into kind hands. She hadn't courage to read the doctor's
letter herself, and asked me to do it. Though he gave a very bad account
of the young gentleman, he said that care and nursing, and getting him
away from a strange place to his own home and among his friends, might
do wonders for him yet. When I came to this part of the letter, she
started up, and asked me to give it to her. Then she inquired when I was
going back to Cornwall; and I said, "as soon as possible," (for indeed,
it's time I was home, William). "Wait; pray wait till I have shown this
letter to my father!" says she. And she ran out of the room with it in
her hand.

After some time, she came back with her face all of a flush, like;
looking quite different to what she did before, and saying that I had
done more to make the family happy by coming with that letter, than she
could ever thank me for as she ought. A gentleman followed her in, who
was her eldest brother (she said); the pleasantest, liveliest gentleman
I ever saw. He shook hands as if he had known me all his life; and told
me I was the first person he had ever met with who had done good in a
family by bringing them bad news. Then he asked me whether I was ready
to go to Cornwall the next morning with him, and the young lady, and
a friend of his who was a doctor. I had thought already of getting the
parting over with poor Susan, that very day: so I said, "Yes." After
that, they wouldn't let me go away till I had had something to eat and
drink; and the dear, kind young lady asked me all about Susan, and where
she was living, and about you and the children, just as if she had known
us like neighbours. Poor thing! she was so flurried, and so anxious for
the next morning, that it was all the gentleman could do to keep her
quiet, and prevent her falling into a sort of laughing and crying fit,
which it seems she had been liable to lately. At last they let me go
away: and I went and stayed with Susan as long as I could before I bid
her good-bye. She bore the parting bravely--poor, dear child! God in
heaven bless her; and I'm sure he will; for a better daughter no mother
ever had.

My dear husband, I am afraid this letter is very badly written; but
the tears are in my eyes, thinking of Susan; and I feel so wearied and
flurried after what has happened. We are to go off very early to-morrow
morning in a carriage, which is to be put on the railway. Only think
of my riding home in a fine carriage, with gentlefolks!--how surprised
Willie, and Nancy, and the other children will be! I shall get to Treen
almost as soon as my letter; but I thought I would write, so that you
might have the good news, the first moment it could get to you, to tell
the poor young gentleman. I'm sure it must make him better, only to hear
that his brother and sister are coming to fetch him home.

I can't write any more, dear William, I'm so very tired; except that I
long to see you and the little ones again; and that I am,

                    Your loving and dutiful wife,

MARY PENHALE.



LETTER III.

TO MR. JOHN BERNARD, FROM THE WRITER OF THE FORE-GOING AUTOBIOGRAPHY.

[This letter is nearly nine years later in date than the letters which
precede it.]

                                 Lanreath Cottage, Breconshire.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

I find, by your last letter, that you doubt whether I still remember
the circumstances under which I made a certain promise to you, more than
eight years ago. You are mistaken: not one of those circumstances has
escaped my memory. To satisfy you of this, I will now recapitulate them.
You will own, I think, that I have forgotten nothing.

After my removal from Cornwall (shall I ever forget the first sight of
Clara and Ralph at my bedside!), when the nervous malady from which
I suffered so long, had yielded to the affectionate devotion of my
family--aided by the untiring exercise of your skill--one of my first
anxieties was to show that I could gratefully appreciate your exertions
for my good, by reposing the same confidence in you, which I should
place in my nearest and dearest relatives. From the time when we first
met at the hospital, your services were devoted to me, through much
misery of mind and body, with the delicacy and the self-denial of a true
friend. I felt that it was only your due that you should know by what
trials I had been reduced to the situation in which you found me, when
you accompanied my brother and sister to Cornwall--I felt this; and
placed in your hands, for your own private perusal, the narrative which
I had written of my error and of its terrible consequences. To tell you
all that had happened to me, with my own lips, was more than I could do
then--and even after this lapse of years, would be more than I could do
now.

After you had read the narrative, you urged me, on returning it into my
possession, to permit its publication during my lifetime. I granted the
justness of the reasons which led you to counsel me thus; but I told
you, at the same time, that an obstacle, which I was bound to respect,
would prevent me from following your advice. While my father lived, I
could not suffer a manuscript in which he was represented (no matter
under what excess of provocation) as separating himself in the bitterest
hostility from his own son, to be made public property. I could not
suffer events of which we never afterwards spoke ourselves, to be given
to others in the form of a printed narrative which might perhaps fall
under his own eye. You acknowledged, I remember, the justice of these
considerations and promised, in case I died before him, to keep back
my manuscript from publication as long as my father lived. In binding
yourself to that engagement, however, you stipulated, and I agreed, that
I should reconsider your arguments in case I outlived him. This was my
promise, and these were the circumstances under which it was made.
You will allow, I think, that my memory is more accurate than you had
imagined it to be.

And now, you write to remind me of _my_ part of our
agreement--forbearing, with your accustomed delicacy, to introduce
the subject, until more than six months have elapsed since my father's
death. You have done well. I have had time to feel all the consolation
afforded to me by the remembrance that, for years past, my life was of
some use in sweetening my father's; that his death has occurred in the
ordinary course of Nature; and that I never, to my own knowledge, gave
him any cause to repent the full and loving reconciliation which took
place between us, as soon as we could speak together freely after my
return to home.

Still I am not answering your question:--Am I now willing to permit the
publication of my narrative, provided all names and places mentioned in
it remained concealed, and I am known to no one but yourself, Ralph, and
Clara, as the writer of my own story? I reply that I am willing. In a
few days, you will receive the manuscript by a safe hand. Neither my
brother nor my sister object to its being made public on the terms I
have mentioned; and I feel no hesitation in accepting the permission
thus accorded to me. I have not glossed over the flightiness of Ralph's
character; but the brotherly kindness and manly generosity which lie
beneath it, are as apparent, I hope, in my narrative as they are in
fact. And Clara, dear Clara!--all that I have said of her is only to be
regretted as unworthy of the noblest subject that my pen, or any other
pen, can have to write on.

One difficulty, however, still remains:--How are the pages which I am
about to send you to be concluded? In the novel-reading sense of the
word, my story has no real conclusion. The repose that comes to all
of us after trouble--to _me,_ a repose in life: to others, how often
a repose only in the grave!--is the end which must close this
autobiography: an end, calm, natural, and uneventful; yet not, perhaps,
devoid of all lesson and value. Is it fit that I should set myself, for
the sake of effect, to _make_ a conclusion, and terminate by fiction
what has begun, and thus far, has proceeded in truth? In the interests
of Art, as well as in the interests of Reality, surely not!

Whatever remains to be related after the last entry in my journal, will
be found expressed in the simplest, and therefore, the best form, by the
letters from William and Mary Penhale, which I send you with this. When
I revisited Cornwall, to see the good miner and his wife, I found, in
the course of the inquiries which I made as to the past, that they still
preserved the letters they had written about me, while I lay ill at
Treen. I asked permission to take copies of these two documents,
as containing materials, which I could but ill supply from my own
resources, for filling up a gap in my story. They at once consented;
telling me that they had always kept each other's letters after
marriage, as carefully as they kept them before, in token that their
first affection remained to the last unchanged. At the same time they
entreated me, with the most earnest simplicity, to polish their own
homely expressions; and turn them, as they phrased, it, into proper
reading. You may easily imagine that I knew better than to do this; and
you will, I am sure, agree with me that both the letters I send should
be printed as literally as they were copied by my hand.

Having now provided for the continuation of my story to the period of my
return home, I have a word or two to say on the subject of preparing the
autobiography for press. Failing in the resolution, even now, to
look over my manuscript again, I leave the corrections it requires to
others--but on one condition. Let none of the passages in which I
have related events, or described characters, be either softened
or suppressed. I am well aware of the tendency, in some readers,
to denounce truth itself as improbable, unless their own personal
experience has borne witness to it; and it is on this very account that
I am firm in my determination to allow of no cringing beforehand to
anticipated incredulities. What I have written is Truth; and it shall go
into the world as Truth should--entirely uncompromised. Let my style
be corrected as completely as you will; but leave characters and events
which are taken from realities, real as they are.

In regard to the surviving persons with whom this narrative associates
me, I have little to say which it can concern the reader to know. The
man whom I have presented in the preceding pages under the name
of Sherwin is, I believe, still alive, and still residing in
France--whither he retreated soon after the date of the last events
mentioned in my autobiography. A new system had been introduced into
his business by his assistant, which, when left to his own unaided
resources, he failed to carry out. His affairs became involved; a
commercial crisis occurred, which he was wholly unable to meet; and
he was made a bankrupt, having first dishonestly secured to himself a
subsistence for life, out of the wreck of his property. I accidentally
heard of him, a few years since, as maintaining among the English
residents of the town he then inhabited, the character of a man who had
undeservedly suffered from severe family misfortunes, and who bore his
afflictions with the most exemplary piety and resignation.

To those once connected with him, who are now no more, I need not and
cannot refer again. That part of the dreary Past with which they are
associated, is the part which I still shrink in terror from thinking on.
There are two names which my lips have not uttered for years; which,
in this life, I shall never pronounce again. The night of Death is over
them: a night to look away from for evermore.

To look away from--but, towards what object? The Future? That way, I see
but dimly even yet. It is on the Present that my thoughts are fixed, in
the contentment which desires no change.

For the last five months I have lived here with Clara--here, on the
little estate which was once her mother's, which is now hers. Long
before my father's death we often talked, in the great country house, of
future days which we might pass together, as we pass them now, in this
place. Though we may often leave it for a time, we shall always look
back to Lanreath Cottage as to our home. The years of retirement which
I spent at the Hall, after my recovery, have not awakened in me a single
longing to return to the busy world. Ralph--now the head of our family;
now aroused by his new duties to a sense of his new position--Ralph,
already emancipated from many of the habits which once enthralled and
degraded him, has written, bidding me employ to the utmost the resources
which his position enables him to offer me, if I decide on entering into
public life. But I have no such purpose; I am still resolved to live on
in obscurity, in retirement, in peace. I have suffered too much; I have
been wounded too sadly, to range myself with the heroes of Ambition, and
fight my way upward from the ranks. The glory and the glitter which I
once longed to look on as my own, would dazzle and destroy me, now.
Such shocks as I have endured, leave that behind them which changes the
character and the purpose of a life. The mountain-path of Action is no
longer a path for _me;_ my future hope pauses with my present happiness
in the shadowed valley of Repose.

Not a repose which owns no duty, and is good for no use; not a repose
which Thought cannot ennoble, and Affection cannot sanctify. To serve
the cause of the poor and the ignorant, in the little sphere which now
surrounds me; to smooth the way for pleasure and plenty, where pain and
want have made it rugged too long; to live more and more worthy, with
every day, of the sisterly love which, never tiring, never changing,
watches over me in this last retreat, this dearest home--these are the
purposes, the only purposes left, which I may still cherish. Let me but
live to fulfil them, and life will have given to me all that I can ask!

I may now close my letter. I have communicated to you all the materials
I can supply for the conclusion of my autobiography, and have furnished
you with the only directions I wish to give in reference to its
publication. Present it to the reader in any form, and at any time,
that you think fit. On its reception by the public I have no wish to
speculate. It is enough for me to know that, with all its faults, it has
been written in sincerity and in truth. I shall not feel false shame at
its failure, or false pride at its success.

If there be any further information which you think it necessary to
possess, and which I have forgotten to communicate, write to me on the
subject--or, far better, come here yourself, and ask of me with your own
lips all that you desire to know. Come, and judge of the life I am now
leading, by seeing it as it really is. Though it be only for a few days,
pause long enough in your career of activity and usefulness, of fame and
honour, to find leisure time for a visit to the cottage where we live.
This is as much Clara's invitation as mine. She will never forget (even
if I could!) all that I have owed to your friendship--will never weary
(even if I should tire!) of showing you that we are capable of deserving
it. Come, then, and see _her_ as well as _me_--see her, once more, my
sister of old times! I remember what you said of Clara, when we last
met, and last talked of her; and I believe you will be almost as happy
to see her again in her old character as I am.

Till then, farewell! Do not judge hastily of my motives for persisting
in the life of retirement which I have led for so many years past. Do
not think that calamity has chilled my heart, or enervated my mind.
Past suffering may have changed, but it has not deteriorated me. It has
fortified my spirit with an abiding strength; it has told me plainly,
much that was but dimly revealed to me before; it has shown me uses to
which I may put my existence, that have their sanction from other voices
than the voices of fame; it has taught me to feel that bravest ambition
which is vigorous enough to overleap the little life here! Is there
no aspiration in the purposes for which I would now live?--Bernard!
whatever we can do of good, in this world, with our affections or our
faculties, rises to the Eternal World above us, as a song of praise from
Humanity to God. Amid the thousand, thousand tones ever joining to
swell the music of that song, are those which sound loudest and grandest
_here,_ the tones which travel sweetest and purest to the Imperishable
Throne; which mingle in the perfectest harmony with the anthem of the
angel-choir! Ask your own heart that question--and then say, may not
the obscurest life--even a life like mine--be dignified by a lasting
aspiration, and dedicated to a noble aim?

I have done. The calm summer evening has stolen on me while I have been
writing to you; and Clara's voice--now the happy voice of the happy
old times--calls to me from our garden seat to come out and look at the
sunset over the distant sea. Once more--farewell!




