

Santa Claus lives in the Laughing Valley, where stands the big,
rambling castle in which his toys are manufactured.  His workmen,
selected from the ryls, knooks, pixies and fairies, live with him, and
every one is as busy as can be from one year's end to another.

It is called the Laughing Valley because everything there is happy
and gay.  The brook chuckles to itself as it leaps rollicking between
its green banks; the wind whistles merrily in the trees; the sunbeams
dance lightly over the soft grass, and the violets and wild flowers
look smilingly up from their green nests.  To laugh one needs to be
happy; to be happy one needs to be content.  And throughout the
Laughing Valley of Santa Claus contentment reigns supreme.

On one side is the mighty Forest of Burzee.  At the other side stands
the huge mountain that contains the Caves of the Daemons.  And between
them the Valley lies smiling and peaceful.

One would thing that our good old Santa Claus, who devotes his days to
making children happy, would have no enemies on all the earth; and, as
a matter of fact, for a long period of time he encountered nothing but
love wherever he might go.

But the Daemons who live in the mountain caves grew to hate Santa Claus
very much, and all for the simple reason that he made children happy.

The Caves of the Daemons are five in number.  A broad pathway leads
up to the first cave, which is a finely arched cavern at the foot of
the mountain, the entrance being beautifully carved and decorated.  In
it resides the Daemon of Selfishness.  Back of this is another cavern
inhabited by the Daemon of Envy.  The cave of the Daemon of Hatred is
next in order, and through this one passes to the home of the Daemon
of Malice--situated in a dark and fearful cave in the very heart of
the mountain.  I do not know what lies beyond this.  Some say there
are terrible pitfalls leading to death and destruction, and this may
very well be true.  However, from each one of the four caves mentioned
there is a small, narrow tunnel leading to the fifth cave--a cozy
little room occupied by the Daemon of Repentance.  And as the rocky
floors of these passages are well worn by the track of passing feet, I
judge that many wanderers in the Caves of the Daemons have escaped
through the tunnels to the abode of the Daemon of Repentance, who is
said to be a pleasant sort of fellow who gladly opens for one a little
door admitting you into fresh air and sunshine again.

Well, these Daemons of the Caves, thinking they had great cause to
dislike old Santa Claus, held a meeting one day to discuss the matter.

"I'm really getting lonesome," said the Daemon of Selfishness.  "For
Santa Claus distributes so many pretty Christmas gifts to all the
children that they become happy and generous, through his example, and
keep away from my cave."

"I'm having the same trouble," rejoined the Daemon of Envy.  "The
little ones seem quite content with Santa Claus, and there are few,
indeed, that I can coax to become envious."

"And that makes it bad for me!" declared the Daemon of Hatred.  "For
if no children pass through the Caves of Selfishness and Envy, none
can get to MY cavern."

"Or to mine," added the Daemon of Malice.

"For my part," said the Daemon of Repentance, "it is easily seen that
if children do not visit your caves they have no need to visit mine;
so that I am quite as neglected as you are."

"And all because of this person they call Santa Claus!" exclaimed the
Daemon of Envy.  "He is simply ruining our business, and something
must be done at once."

To this they readily agreed; but what to do was another and more
difficult matter to settle.  They knew that Santa Claus worked all
through the year at his castle in the Laughing Valley, preparing the
gifts he was to distribute on Christmas Eve; and at first they
resolved to try to tempt him into their caves, that they might lead
him on to the terrible pitfalls that ended in destruction.

So the very next day, while Santa Claus was busily at work, surrounded
by his little band of assistants, the Daemon of Selfishness came to
him and said:

"These toys are wonderfully bright and pretty.  Why do you not keep
them for yourself?  It's a pity to give them to those noisy boys and
fretful girls, who break and destroy them so quickly."

"Nonsense!" cried the old graybeard, his bright eyes twinkling merrily
as he turned toward the tempting Daemon.  "The boys and girls are
never so noisy and fretful after receiving my presents, and if I can
make them happy for one day in the year I am quite content."

So the Daemon went back to the others, who awaited him in their caves,
and said:

"I have failed, for Santa Claus is not at all selfish."

The following day the Daemon of Envy visited Santa Claus.  Said he:
"The toy shops are full of playthings quite as pretty as those you are
making.  What a shame it is that they should interfere with your
business!  They make toys by machinery much quicker than you can make
them by hand; and they sell them for money, while you get nothing at
all for your work."

But Santa Claus refused to be envious of the toy shops.

"I can supply the little ones but once a year--on Christmas Eve," he
answered; "for the children are many, and I am but one.  And as my
work is one of love and kindness I would be ashamed to receive money
for my little gifts.  But throughout all the year the children must be
amused in some way, and so the toy shops are able to bring much
happiness to my little friends.  I like the toy shops, and am glad to
see them prosper."

In spite of the second rebuff, the Daemon of Hatred thought he would
try to influence Santa Claus.  So the next day he entered the busy
workshop and said:

"Good morning, Santa!  I have bad news for you."

"Then run away, like a good fellow," answered Santa Claus.  "Bad news
is something that should be kept secret and never told."

"You cannot escape this, however," declared the Daemon; "for in the
world are a good many who do not believe in Santa Claus, and these you
are bound to hate bitterly, since they have so wronged you."

"Stuff and rubbish!" cried Santa.

"And there are others who resent your making children happy and who
sneer at you and call you a foolish old rattlepate!  You are quite
right to hate such base slanderers, and you ought to be revenged upon
them for their evil words."

"But I don't hate 'em!" exclaimed Santa Claus positively.  "Such
people do me no real harm, but merely render themselves and their
children unhappy.  Poor things!  I'd much rather help them any day
than injure them."

Indeed, the Daemons could not tempt old Santa Claus in any way.  On
the contrary, he was shrewd enough to see that their object in
visiting him was to make mischief and trouble, and his cheery laughter
disconcerted the evil ones and showed to them the folly of such an
undertaking.  So they abandoned honeyed words and determined to use force.

It was well known that no harm can come to Santa Claus while he is in
the Laughing Valley, for the fairies, and ryls, and knooks all protect
him.  But on Christmas Eve he drives his reindeer out into the big
world, carrying a sleighload of toys and pretty gifts to the children;
and this was the time and the occasion when his enemies had the best
chance to injure him.  So the Daemons laid their plans and awaited the
arrival of Christmas Eve.

The moon shone big and white in the sky, and the snow lay crisp and
sparkling on the ground as Santa Claus cracked his whip and sped away
out of the Valley into the great world beyond.  The roomy sleigh was
packed full with huge sacks of toys, and as the reindeer dashed onward
our jolly old Santa laughed and whistled and sang for very joy.  For
in all his merry life this was the one day in the year when he was
happiest--the day he lovingly bestowed the treasures of his workshop
upon the little children.

It would be a busy night for him, he well knew.  As he whistled and
shouted and cracked his whip again, he reviewed in mind all the towns
and cities and farmhouses where he was expected, and figured that he
had just enough presents to go around and make every child happy.  The
reindeer knew exactly what was expected of them, and dashed along so
swiftly that their feet scarcely seemed to touch the snow-covered ground.

Suddenly a strange thing happened: a rope shot through the moonlight
and a big noose that was in the end of it settled over the arms and
body of Santa Claus and drew tight.  Before he could resist or even
cry out he was jerked from the seat of the sleigh and tumbled head
foremost into a snowbank, while the reindeer rushed onward with the
load of toys and carried it quickly out of sight and sound.

Such a surprising experience confused old Santa for a moment, and when
he had collected his senses he found that the wicked Daemons had
pulled him from the snowdrift and bound him tightly with many coils of
the stout rope.  And then they carried the kidnapped Santa Claus away
to their mountain, where they thrust the prisoner into a secret cave
and chained him to the rocky wall so that he could not escape.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the Daemons, rubbing their hands together with cruel
glee.  "What will the children do now?  How they will cry and scold
and storm when they find there are no toys in their stockings and no
gifts on their Christmas trees!  And what a lot of punishment they
will receive from their parents, and how they will flock to our Caves
of Selfishness, and Envy, and Hatred, and Malice!  We have done a
mighty clever thing, we Daemons of the Caves!"

Now it so chanced that on this Christmas Eve the good Santa Claus had
taken with him in his sleigh Nuter the Ryl, Peter the Knook, Kilter
the Pixie, and a small fairy named Wisk--his four favorite assistants.
These little people he had often found very useful in helping him to
distribute his gifts to the children, and when their master was so
suddenly dragged from the sleigh they were all snugly tucked
underneath the seat, where the sharp wind could not reach them.

The tiny immortals knew nothing of the capture of Santa Claus until
some time after he had disappeared.  But finally they missed his
cheery voice, and as their master always sang or whistled on his
journeys, the silence warned them that something was wrong.

Little Wisk stuck out his head from underneath the seat and found
Santa Claus gone and no one to direct the flight of the reindeer.

"Whoa!" he called out, and the deer obediently slackened speed and
came to a halt.

Peter and Nuter and Kilter all jumped upon the seat and looked back
over the track made by the sleigh.  But Santa Claus had been left
miles and miles behind.

"What shall we do?" asked Wisk anxiously, all the mirth and mischief
banished from his wee face by this great calamity.

"We must go back at once and find our master," said Nuter the Ryl, who
thought and spoke with much deliberation.

"No, no!" exclaimed Peter the Knook, who, cross and crabbed though he
was, might always be depended upon in an emergency.  "If we delay, or
go back, there will not be time to get the toys to the children before
morning; and that would grieve Santa Claus more than anything else."

"It is certain that some wicked creatures have captured him," added
Kilter thoughtfully, "and their object must be to make the children
unhappy.  So our first duty is to get the toys distributed as
carefully as if Santa Claus were himself present.  Afterward we
can search for our master and easily secure his freedom."

This seemed such good and sensible advice that the others at once
resolved to adopt it.  So Peter the Knook called to the reindeer, and
the faithful animals again sprang forward and dashed over hill and
valley, through forest and plain, until they came to the houses
wherein children lay sleeping and dreaming of the pretty gifts they
would find on Christmas morning.

The little immortals had set themselves a difficult task; for although
they had assisted Santa Claus on many of his journeys, their master
had always directed and guided them and told them exactly what he
wished them to do.  But now they had to distribute the toys according
to their own judgment, and they did not understand children as well as
did old Santa.  So it is no wonder they made some laughable errors.

Mamie Brown, who wanted a doll, got a drum instead; and a drum is of
no use to a girl who loves dolls.  And Charlie Smith, who delights to
romp and play out of doors, and who wanted some new rubber boots to
keep his feet dry, received a sewing box filled with colored worsteds
and threads and needles, which made him so provoked that he
thoughtlessly called our dear Santa Claus a fraud.

Had there been many such mistakes the Daemons would have accomplished
their evil purpose and made the children unhappy.  But the little
friends of the absent Santa Claus labored faithfully and intelligently
to carry out their master's ideas, and they made fewer errors than
might be expected under such unusual circumstances.

And, although they worked as swiftly as possible, day had begun to
break before the toys and other presents were all distributed; so for
the first time in many years the reindeer trotted into the Laughing
Valley, on their return, in broad daylight, with the brilliant sun
peeping over the edge of the forest to prove they were far behind
their accustomed hours.

Having put the deer in the stable, the little folk began to wonder how
they might rescue their master; and they realized they must discover,
first of all, what had happened to him and where he was.

So Wisk the Fairy transported himself to the bower of the Fairy Queen,
which was located deep in the heart of the Forest of Burzee; and once
there, it did not take him long to find out all about the naughty
Daemons and how they had kidnapped the good Santa Claus to prevent his
making children happy.  The Fairy Queen also promised her assistance,
and then, fortified by this powerful support, Wisk flew back to where
Nuter and Peter and Kilter awaited him, and the four counseled
together and laid plans to rescue their master from his enemies.

It is possible that Santa Claus was not as merry as usual during the
night that succeeded his capture.  For although he had faith in the
judgment of his little friends he could not avoid a certain amount of
worry, and an anxious look would creep at times into his kind old eyes
as he thought of the disappointment that might await his dear little
children.  And the Daemons, who guarded him by turns, one after
another, did not neglect to taunt him with contemptuous words in his
helpless condition.

When Christmas Day dawned the Daemon of Malice was guarding the
prisoner, and his tongue was sharper than that of any of the others.

"The children are waking up, Santa!" he cried.  "They are waking up to
find their stockings empty!  Ho, ho!  How they will quarrel, and wail,
and stamp their feet in anger!  Our caves will be full today, old
Santa!  Our caves are sure to be full!"

But to this, as to other like taunts, Santa Claus answered nothing.
He was much grieved by his capture, it is true; but his courage did
not forsake him.  And, finding that the prisoner would not reply to
his jeers, the Daemon of Malice presently went away, and sent the
Daemon of Repentance to take his place.

This last personage was not so disagreeable as the others.  He had
gentle and refined features, and his voice was soft and pleasant in tone.

"My brother Daemons do not trust me overmuch," said he, as he entered
the cavern; "but it is morning, now, and the mischief is done.  You
cannot visit the children again for another year."

"That is true," answered Santa Claus, almost cheerfully;
"Christmas Eve is past, and for the first time in centuries
I have not visited my children."

"The little ones will be greatly disappointed," murmured the Daemon of
Repentance, almost regretfully; "but that cannot be helped now.  Their
grief is likely to make the children selfish and envious and hateful,
and if they come to the Caves of the Daemons today I shall get a
chance to lead some of them to my Cave of Repentance."

"Do you never repent, yourself?" asked Santa Claus, curiously.

"Oh, yes, indeed," answered the Daemon.  "I am even now repenting that
I assisted in your capture.  Of course it is too late to remedy the
evil that has been done; but repentance, you know, can come only after
an evil thought or deed, for in the beginning there is nothing to
repent of."

"So I understand," said Santa Claus.  "Those who avoid evil need never
visit your cave."

"As a rule, that is true," replied the Daemon; "yet you, who have done
no evil, are about to visit my cave at once; for to prove that I sincerely
regret my share in your capture I am going to permit you to escape."

This speech greatly surprised the prisoner, until he reflected that it
was just what might be expected of the Daemon of Repentance.  The
fellow at once busied himself untying the knots that bound Santa Claus
and unlocking the chains that fastened him to the wall.  Then he
led the way through a long tunnel until they both emerged in the
Cave of Repentance.

"I hope you will forgive me," said the Daemon pleadingly.  "I am not
really a bad person, you know; and I believe I accomplish a great deal
of good in the world."

With this he opened a back door that let in a flood of sunshine, and
Santa Claus sniffed the fresh air gratefully.

"I bear no malice," said he to the Daemon, in a gentle voice; "and I
am sure the world would be a dreary place without you.  So, good
morning, and a Merry Christmas to you!"

With these words he stepped out to greet the bright morning, and a
moment later he was trudging along, whistling softly to himself, on
his way to his home in the Laughing Valley.

Marching over the snow toward the mountain was a vast army, made up of
the most curious creatures imaginable.  There were numberless knooks
from the forest, as rough and crooked in appearance as the gnarled
branches of the trees they ministered to.  And there were dainty ryls
from the fields, each one bearing the emblem of the flower or plant it
guarded.  Behind these were many ranks of pixies, gnomes and nymphs, and
in the rear a thousand beautiful fairies floated along in gorgeous array.

This wonderful army was led by Wisk, Peter, Nuter, and Kilter, who had
assembled it to rescue Santa Claus from captivity and to punish the
Daemons who had dared to take him away from his beloved children.

And, although they looked so bright and peaceful, the little immortals
were armed with powers that would be very terrible to those who had
incurred their anger.  Woe to the Daemons of the Caves if this mighty
army of vengeance ever met them!

But lo! coming to meet his loyal friends appeared the imposing form of
Santa Claus, his white beard floating in the breeze and his bright
eyes sparkling with pleasure at this proof of the love and veneration
he had inspired in the hearts of the most powerful creatures in existence.

And while they clustered around him and danced with glee at his safe
return, he gave them earnest thanks for their support.  But Wisk, and
Nuter, and Peter, and Kilter, he embraced affectionately.

"It is useless to pursue the Daemons," said Santa Claus to the army.
"They have their place in the world, and can never be destroyed.  But
that is a great pity, nevertheless," he continued musingly.

So the fairies, and knooks, and pixies, and ryls all escorted the good
man to his castle, and there left him to talk over the events of the
night with his little assistants.

Wisk had already rendered himself invisible and flown through the big
world to see how the children were getting along on this bright
Christmas morning; and by the time he returned, Peter had finished
telling Santa Claus of how they had distributed the toys.

"We really did very well," cried the fairy, in a pleased voice; "for I
found little unhappiness among the children this morning.  Still, you
must not get captured again, my dear master; for we might not be so
fortunate another time in carrying out your ideas."

He then related the mistakes that had been made, and which he had not
discovered until his tour of inspection.  And Santa Claus at once sent
him with rubber boots for Charlie Smith, and a doll for Mamie Brown;
so that even those two disappointed ones became happy.

As for the wicked Daemons of the Caves, they were filled with anger
and chagrin when they found that their clever capture of Santa Claus
had come to naught.  Indeed, no one on that Christmas Day appeared to
be at all selfish, or envious, or hateful.  And, realizing that while
the children's saint had so many powerful friends it was folly to
oppose him, the Daemons never again attempted to interfere with his
journeys on Christmas Eve.



THE BOX OF ROBBERS


No one intended to leave Martha alone that afternoon, but it
happened that everyone was called away, for one reason or another.
Mrs. McFarland was attending the weekly card party held by the
Women's Anti-Gambling League. Sister Nell's young man had called
quite unexpectedly to take her for a long drive. Papa was at the
office, as usual. It was Mary Ann's day out. As for Emeline, she
certainly should have stayed in the house and looked after the
little girl; but Emeline had a restless nature.

"Would you mind, miss, if I just crossed the alley to speak a word
to Mrs. Carleton's girl?" she asked Martha.

"'Course not," replied the child. "You'd better lock the back door,
though, and take the key, for I shall be upstairs."

"Oh, I'll do that, of course, miss," said the delighted maid, and
ran away to spend the afternoon with her friend, leaving Martha
quite alone in the big house, and locked in, into the bargain.

The little girl read a few pages in her new book, sewed a few
stitches in her embroidery and started to "play visiting" with her
four favorite dolls. Then she remembered that in the attic was a
doll's playhouse that hadn't been used for months, so she decided
she would dust it and put it in order.

Filled with this idea, the girl climbed the winding stairs to the
big room under the roof. It was well lighted by three dormer windows
and was warm and pleasant. Around the walls were rows of boxes and
trunks, piles of old carpeting, pieces of damaged furniture, bundles
of discarded clothing and other odds and ends of more or less value.
Every well-regulated house has an attic of this sort, so I need not
describe it.

The doll's house had been moved, but after a search Martha found it
away over in a corner near the big chimney.

She drew it out and noticed that behind it was a black wooden chest
which Uncle Walter had sent over from Italy years and years
ago--before Martha was born, in fact. Mamma had told her about it
one day; how there was no key to it, because Uncle Walter wished it
to remain unopened until he returned home; and how this wandering
uncle, who was a mighty hunter, had gone into Africa to hunt
elephants and had never been heard from afterwards.

The little girl looked at the chest curiously, now that it had by
accident attracted her attention.

It was quite big--bigger even than mamma's traveling trunk--and was
studded all over with tarnished brassheaded nails. It was heavy,
too, for when Martha tried to lift one end of it she found she could
not stir it a bit. But there was a place in the side of the cover
for a key. She stooped to examine the lock, and saw that it would
take a rather big key to open it.

Then, as you may suspect, the little girl longed to open Uncle
Walter's big box and see what was in it. For we are all curious, and
little girls are just as curious as the rest of us.

"I don't b'lieve Uncle Walter'll ever come back," she thought. "Papa
said once that some elephant must have killed him. If I only had a
key--" She stopped and clapped her little hands together gayly as
she remembered a big basket of keys on the shelf in the linen
closet. They were of all sorts and sizes; perhaps one of them would
unlock the mysterious chest!

She flew down the stairs, found the basket and returned with it to
the attic. Then she sat down before the brass-studded box and began
trying one key after another in the curious old lock. Some were too
large, but most were too small. One would go into the lock but would
not turn; another stuck so fast that she feared for a time that she
would never get it out again. But at last, when the basket was
almost empty, an oddly-shaped, ancient brass key slipped easily into
the lock. With a cry of joy Martha turned the key with both hands;
then she heard a sharp "click," and the next moment the heavy lid
flew up of its own accord!

The little girl leaned over the edge of the chest an instant, and
the sight that met her eyes caused her to start back in amazement.

Slowly and carefully a man unpacked himself from the chest, stepped
out upon the floor, stretched his limbs and then took off his hat
and bowed politely to the astonished child.

He was tall and thin and his face seemed badly tanned or sunburnt.

Then another man emerged from the chest, yawning and rubbing his
eyes like a sleepy schoolboy. He was of middle size and his skin
seemed as badly tanned as that of the first.

While Martha stared open-mouthed at the remarkable sight a third man
crawled from the chest. He had the same complexion as his fellows,
but was short and fat.

All three were dressed in a curious manner. They wore short jackets
of red velvet braided with gold, and knee breeches of sky-blue satin
with silver buttons. Over their stockings were laced wide ribbons of
red and yellow and blue, while their hats had broad brims with high,
peaked crowns, from which fluttered yards of bright-colored ribbons.

They had big gold rings in their ears and rows of knives and pistols
in their belts. Their eyes were black and glittering and they wore
long, fierce mustaches, curling at the ends like a pig's tail.

"My! but you were heavy," exclaimed the fat one, when he had pulled
down his velvet jacket and brushed the dust from his sky-blue
breeches. "And you squeezed me all out of shape."

"It was unavoidable, Luigi," responded the thin man, lightly; "the
lid of the chest pressed me down upon you. Yet I tender you my
regrets."

"As for me," said the middle-sized man, carelessly rolling a
cigarette and lighting it, "you must acknowledge I have been your
nearest friend for years; so do not be disagreeable."

"You mustn't smoke in the attic," said Martha, recovering herself at
sight of the cigarette. "You might set the house on fire."

The middle-sized man, who had not noticed her before, at this speech
turned to the girl and bowed.

"Since a lady requests it," said he, "I shall abandon my cigarette,"
and he threw it on the floor and extinguished it with his foot.

"Who are you?" asked Martha, who until now had been too astonished
to be frightened.

"Permit us to introduce ourselves," said the thin man, flourishing
his hat gracefully. "This is Lugui," the fat man nodded; "and this
is Beni," the middle-sized man bowed; "and I am Victor. We are three
bandits--Italian bandits."

"Bandits!" cried Martha, with a look of horror.

"Exactly. Perhaps in all the world there are not three other bandits
so terrible and fierce as ourselves," said Victor, proudly.

"'Tis so," said the fat man, nodding gravely.

"But it's wicked!" exclaimed Martha.

"Yes, indeed," replied Victor. "We are extremely and tremendously
wicked. Perhaps in all the world you could not find three men more
wicked than those who now stand before you."

"'Tis so," said the fat man, approvingly.

"But you shouldn't be so wicked," said the girl;
"it's--it's--naughty!"

Victor cast down his eyes and blushed.

"Naughty!" gasped Beni, with a horrified look.

"'Tis a hard word," said Luigi, sadly, and buried his face in his
hands.

"I little thought," murmured Victor, in a voice broken by emotion,
"ever to be so reviled--and by a lady! Yet, perhaps you spoke
thoughtlessly. You must consider, miss, that our wickedness has an
excuse. For how are we to be bandits, let me ask, unless we are
wicked?"

Martha was puzzled and shook her head, thoughtfully. Then she
remembered something.

"You can't remain bandits any longer," said she, "because you are
now in America."

"America!" cried the three, together.

"Certainly. You are on Prairie avenue, in Chicago. Uncle Walter sent
you here from Italy in this chest."

The bandits seemed greatly bewildered by this announcement. Lugui
sat down on an old chair with a broken rocker and wiped his forehead
with a yellow silk handkerchief. Beni and Victor fell back upon the
chest and looked at her with pale faces and staring eyes.

When he had somewhat recovered himself Victor spoke.

"Your Uncle Walter has greatly wronged us," he said, reproachfully.
"He has taken us from our beloved Italy, where bandits are highly
respected, and brought us to a strange country where we shall not
know whom to rob or how much to ask for a ransom."

"'Tis so!" said the fat man, slapping his leg sharply.

"And we had won such fine reputations in Italy!" said Beni,
regretfully.

"Perhaps Uncle Walter wanted to reform you," suggested Martha.

"Are there, then, no bandits in Chicago?" asked Victor.

"Well," replied the girl, blushing in her turn, "we do not call them
bandits."

"Then what shall we do for a living?" inquired Beni, despairingly.

"A great deal can be done in a big American city," said the child.
"My father is a lawyer" (the bandits shuddered), "and my mother's
cousin is a police inspector."

"Ah," said Victor, "that is a good employment. The police need to be
inspected, especially in Italy."

"Everywhere!" added Beni.

"Then you could do other things," continued Martha, encouragingly.
"You could be motor men on trolley cars, or clerks in a department
store. Some people even become aldermen to earn a living."

The bandits shook their heads sadly.

"We are not fitted for such work," said Victor. "Our business is to
rob."

Martha tried to think.

"It is rather hard to get positions in the gas office," she said,
"but you might become politicians."

"No!" cried Beni, with sudden fierceness; "we must not abandon our
high calling. Bandits we have always been, and bandits we must
remain!"

"'Tis so!" agreed the fat man.

"Even in Chicago there must be people to rob," remarked Victor, with
cheerfulness.

Martha was distressed.

"I think they have all been robbed," she objected.

"Then we can rob the robbers, for we have experience and talent
beyond the ordinary," said Beni.

"Oh, dear; oh, dear!" moaned the girl; "why did Uncle Walter ever
send you here in this chest?"

The bandits became interested.

"That is what we should like to know," declared Victor, eagerly.

"But no one will ever know, for Uncle Walter was lost while hunting
elephants in Africa," she continued, with conviction.

"Then we must accept our fate and rob to the best of our ability,"
said Victor. "So long as we are faithful to our beloved profession
we need not be ashamed."

"'Tis so!" cried the fat man.

"Brothers! we will begin now. Let us rob the house we are in."

"Good!" shouted the others and sprang to their feet.

Beni turned threateningly upon the child.

"Remain here!" he commanded. "If you stir one step your blood will
be on your own head!" Then he added, in a gentler voice: "Don't be
afraid; that's the way all bandits talk to their captives. But of
course we wouldn't hurt a young lady under any circumstances."

"Of course not," said Victor.

The fat man drew a big knife from his belt and flourished it about
his head.

"S'blood!" he ejaculated, fiercely.

"S'bananas!" cried Beni, in a terrible voice.

"Confusion to our foes!" hissed Victor.

And then the three bent themselves nearly double and crept
stealthily down the stairway with cocked pistols in their hands and
glittering knives between their teeth, leaving Martha trembling with
fear and too horrified to even cry for help.

How long she remained alone in the attic she never knew, but finally
she heard the catlike tread of the returning bandits and saw them
coming up the stairs in single file.

All bore heavy loads of plunder in their arms, and Lugui was
balancing a mince pie on the top of a pile of her mother's best
evening dresses. Victor came next with an armful of bric-a-brac, a
brass candelabra and the parlor clock. Beni had the family Bible,
the basket of silverware from the sideboard, a copper kettle and
papa's fur overcoat.

"Oh, joy!" said Victor, putting down his load; "it is pleasant to
rob once more."

"Oh, ecstacy!" said Beni; but he let the kettle drop on his toe and
immediately began dancing around in anguish, while he muttered queer
words in the Italian language.

"We have much wealth," continued Victor, holding the mince pie while
Lugui added his spoils to the heap; "and all from one house! This
America must be a rich place."

With a dagger he then cut himself a piece of the pie and handed the
remainder to his comrades. Whereupon all three sat upon the floor
and consumed the pie while Martha looked on sadly.

"We should have a cave," remarked Beni; "for we must store our
plunder in a safe place. Can you tell us of a secret cave?" he asked
Martha.

"There's a Mammoth cave," she answered, "but it's in Kentucky. You
would be obliged to ride on the cars a long time to get there."

The three bandits looked thoughtful and munched their pie silently,
but the next moment they were startled by the ringing of the
electric doorbell, which was heard plainly even in the remote attic.

"What's that?" demanded Victor, in a hoarse voice, as the three
scrambled to their feet with drawn daggers.

Martha ran to the window and saw it was only the postman, who had
dropped a letter in the box and gone away again. But the incident
gave her an idea of how to get rid of her troublesome bandits, so
she began wringing her hands as if in great distress and cried out:

"It's the police!"

The robbers looked at one another with genuine alarm, and Lugui
asked, tremblingly:

"Are there many of them?"

"A hundred and twelve!" exclaimed Martha, after pretending to count
them.

"Then we are lost!" declared Beni; "for we could never fight so many
and live."

"Are they armed?" inquired Victor, who was shivering as if cold.

"Oh, yes," said she. "They have guns and swords and pistols and axes
and--and--"

"And what?" demanded Lugui.

"And cannons!"

The three wicked ones groaned aloud and Beni said, in a hollow
voice:

"I hope they will kill us quickly and not put us to the torture. I
have been told these Americans are painted Indians, who are
bloodthirsty and terrible."

"'Tis so!" gasped the fat man, with a shudder.

Suddenly Martha turned from the window.

"You are my friends, are you not?" she asked.

"We are devoted!" answered Victor.

"We adore you!" cried Beni.

"We would die for you!" added Lugui, thinking he was about to die
anyway.

"Then I will save you," said the girl.

"How?" asked the three, with one voice.

"Get back into the chest," she said. "I will then close the lid, so
they will be unable to find you."

They looked around the room in a dazed and irresolute way, but she
exclaimed:

"You must be quick! They will soon be here to arrest you."

Then Lugui sprang into the chest and lay fat upon the bottom. Beni
tumbled in next and packed himself in the back side. Victor followed
after pausing to kiss her hand to the girl in a graceful manner.

Then Martha ran up to press down the lid, but could not make it
catch.

"You must squeeze down," she said to them.

Lugui groaned.

"I am doing my best, miss," said Victor, who was nearest the top;
"but although we fitted in very nicely before, the chest now seems
rather small for us."

"'Tis so!" came the muffled voice of the fat man from the bottom.

"I know what takes up the room," said Beni.

"What?" inquired Victor, anxiously.

"The pie," returned Beni.

"'Tis so!" came from the bottom, in faint accents.

Then Martha sat upon the lid and pressed it down with all her
weight. To her great delight the lock caught, and, springing down,
she exerted all her strength and turned the key.

* * * * *

This story should teach us not to interfere in matters that do not
concern us. For had Martha refrained from opening Uncle Walter's
mysterious chest she would not have been obliged to carry downstairs
all the plunder the robbers had brought into the attic.




THE GLASS DOG


An accomplished wizard once lived on the top floor of a tenement
house and passed his time in thoughtful study and studious thought.
What he didn't know about wizardry was hardly worth knowing, for he
possessed all the books and recipes of all the wizards who had lived
before him; and, moreover, he had invented several wizardments
himself.

This admirable person would have been completely happy but for the
numerous interruptions to his studies caused by folk who came to
consult him about their troubles (in which he was not interested),
and by the loud knocks of the iceman, the milkman, the baker's boy,
the laundryman and the peanut woman. He never dealt with any of
these people; but they rapped at his door every day to see him about
this or that or to try to sell him their wares. Just when he was
most deeply interested in his books or engaged in watching the
bubbling of a cauldron there would come a knock at his door. And
after sending the intruder away he always found he had lost his
train of thought or ruined his compound.

At length these interruptions aroused his anger, and he decided he
must have a dog to keep people away from his door. He didn't know
where to find a dog, but in the next room lived a poor glass-blower
with whom he had a slight acquaintance; so he went into the man's
apartment and asked:

"Where can I find a dog?"

"What sort of a dog?" inquired the glass-blower.

"A good dog. One that will bark at people and drive them away. One
that will be no trouble to keep and won't expect to be fed. One that
has no fleas and is neat in his habits. One that will obey me when I
speak to him. In short, a good dog," said the wizard.

"Such a dog is hard to find," returned the glass-blower, who was
busy making a blue glass flower pot with a pink glass rosebush in
it, having green glass leaves and yellow glass roses.

The wizard watched him thoughtfully.

"Why cannot you blow me a dog out of glass?" he asked, presently.

"I can," declared the glass-blower; "but it would not bark at
people, you know."

"Oh, I'll fix that easily enough," replied the other. "If I could
not make a glass dog bark I would be a mighty poor wizard."

"Very well; if you can use a glass dog I'll be pleased to blow one
for you. Only, you must pay for my work."

"Certainly," agreed the wizard. "But I have none of that horrid
stuff you call money. You must take some of my wares in exchange."

The glass-blower considered the matter for a moment.

"Could you give me something to cure my rheumatism?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; easily."

"Then it's a bargain. I'll start the dog at once. What color of
glass shall I use?"

"Pink is a pretty color," said the wizard, "and it's unusual for a
dog, isn't it?"

"Very," answered the glass-blower; "but it shall be pink."

So the wizard went back to his studies and the glass-blower began to
make the dog.

Next morning he entered the wizard's room with the glass dog under
his arm and set it carefully upon the table. It was a beautiful pink
in color, with a fine coat of spun glass, and about its neck was
twisted a blue glass ribbon. Its eyes were specks of black glass and
sparkled intelligently, as do many of the glass eyes worn by men.

The wizard expressed himself pleased with the glass-blower's skill
and at once handed him a small vial.

"This will cure your rheumatism," he said.

"But the vial is empty!" protested the glass-blower.

"Oh, no; there is one drop of liquid in it," was the wizard's reply.

"Will one drop cure my rheumatism?" inquired the glass-blower, in
wonder.

"Most certainly. That is a marvelous remedy. The one drop contained
in the vial will cure instantly any kind of disease ever known to
humanity. Therefore it is especially good for rheumatism. But guard
it well, for it is the only drop of its kind in the world, and I've
forgotten the recipe."

"Thank you," said the glass-blower, and went back to his room.

Then the wizard cast a wizzy spell and mumbled several very learned
words in the wizardese language over the glass dog. Whereupon the
little animal first wagged its tail from side to side, then winked
his left eye knowingly, and at last began barking in a most
frightful manner--that is, when you stop to consider the noise came
from a pink glass dog. There is something almost astonishing in the
magic arts of wizards; unless, of course, you know how to do the
things yourself, when you are not expected to be surprised at them.

The wizard was as delighted as a school teacher at the success of
his spell, although he was not astonished. Immediately he placed the
dog outside his door, where it would bark at anyone who dared knock
and so disturb the studies of its master.

The glass-blower, on returning to his room, decided not to use the
one drop of wizard cure-all just then.

"My rheumatism is better to-day," he reflected, "and I will be wise
to save the medicine for a time when I am very ill, when it will be
of more service to me."

So he placed the vial in his cupboard and went to work blowing more
roses out of glass. Presently he happened to think the medicine
might not keep, so he started to ask the wizard about it. But when
he reached the door the glass dog barked so fiercely that he dared
not knock, and returned in great haste to his own room. Indeed, the
poor man was quite upset at so unfriendly a reception from the dog
he had himself so carefully and skillfully made.

The next morning, as he read his newspaper, he noticed an article
stating that the beautiful Miss Mydas, the richest young lady in
town, was very ill, and the doctors had given up hope of her
recovery.

The glass-blower, although miserably poor, hard-working and homely
of feature, was a man of ideas. He suddenly recollected his precious
medicine, and determined to use it to better advantage than
relieving his own ills. He dressed himself in his best clothes,
brushed his hair and combed his whiskers, washed his hands and tied
his necktie, blackened his hoes and sponged his vest, and then put
the vial of magic cure-all in his pocket. Next he locked his door,
went downstairs and walked through the streets to the grand mansion
where the wealthy Miss Mydas resided.

The butler opened the door and said:

"No soap, no chromos, no vegetables, no hair oil, no books, no
baking powder. My young lady is dying and we're well supplied for
the funeral."

The glass-blower was grieved at being taken for a peddler.

"My friend," he began, proudly; but the butler interrupted him,
saying:

"No tombstones, either; there's a family graveyard and the
monument's built."

"The graveyard won't be needed if you will permit me to speak," said
the glass-blower.

"No doctors, sir; they've given up my young lady, and she's given up
the doctors," continued the butler, calmly.

"I'm no doctor," returned the glass-blower.

"Nor are the others. But what is your errand?"

"I called to cure your young lady by means of a magical compound."

"Step in, please, and take a seat in the hall. I'll speak to the
housekeeper," said the butler, more politely.

So he spoke to the housekeeper and the housekeeper mentioned the
matter to the steward and the steward consulted the chef and the
chef kissed the lady's maid and sent her to see the stranger. Thus
are the very wealthy hedged around with ceremony, even when dying.

When the lady's maid heard from the glass-blower that he had a
medicine which would cure her mistress, she said:

"I'm glad you came."

"But," said he, "if I restore your mistress to health she must marry
me."

"I'll make inquiries and see if she's willing," answered the maid,
and went at once to consult Miss Mydas.

The young lady did not hesitate an instant.

"I'd marry any old thing rather than die!" she cried. "Bring him
here at once!"

So the glass-blower came, poured the magic drop into a little water,
gave it to the patient, and the next minute Miss Mydas was as well
as she had ever been in her life.

"Dear me!" she exclaimed; "I've an engagement at the Fritters'
reception to-night. Bring my pearl-colored silk, Marie, and I will
begin my toilet at once. And don't forget to cancel the order for
the funeral flowers and your mourning gown."

"But, Miss Mydas," remonstrated the glass-blower, who stood by, "you
promised to marry me if I cured you."

"I know," said the young lady, "but we must have time to make proper
announcement in the society papers and have the wedding cards
engraved. Call to-morrow and we'll talk it over."

The glass-blower had not impressed her favorably as a husband, and
she was glad to find an excuse for getting rid of him for a time.
And she did not want to miss the Fritters' reception.

Yet the man went home filled with joy; for he thought his stratagem
had succeeded and he was about to marry a rich wife who would keep
him in luxury forever afterward.

The first thing he did on reaching his room was to smash his
glass-blowing tools and throw them out of the window.

He then sat down to figure out ways of spending his wife's money.

The following day he called upon Miss Mydas, who was reading a novel
and eating chocolate creams as happily as if she had never been ill
in her life.

"Where did you get the magic compound that cured me?" she asked.

"From a learned wizard," said he; and then, thinking it would
interest her, he told how he had made the glass dog for the wizard,
and how it barked and kept everybody from bothering him.

"How delightful!" she said. "I've always wanted a glass dog that
could bark."

"But there is only one in the world," he answered, "and it belongs
to the wizard."

"You must buy it for me," said the lady.

"The wizard cares nothing for money," replied the glass-blower.

"Then you must steal it for me," she retorted. "I can never live
happily another day unless I have a glass dog that can bark."

The glass-blower was much distressed at this, but said he would see
what he could do. For a man should always try to please his wife,
and Miss Mydas has promised to marry him within a week.

On his way home he purchased a heavy sack, and when he passed the
wizard's door and the pink glass dog ran out to bark at him he threw
the sack over the dog, tied the opening with a piece of twine, and
carried him away to his own room.

The next day he sent the sack by a messenger boy to Miss Mydas, with
his compliments, and later in the afternoon he called upon her in
person, feeling quite sure he would be received with gratitude for
stealing the dog she so greatly desired.

But when he came to the door and the butler opened it, what was his
amazement to see the glass dog rush out and begin barking at him
furiously.

"Call off your dog," he shouted, in terror.

"I can't, sir," answered the butler. "My young lady has ordered the
glass dog to bark whenever you call here. You'd better look out,
sir," he added, "for if it bites you, you may have glassophobia!"

This so frightened the poor glass-blower that he went away
hurriedly. But he stopped at a drug store and put his last dime in
the telephone box so he could talk to Miss Mydas without being
bitten by the dog.

"Give me Pelf 6742!" he called.

"Hello! What is it?" said a voice.

"I want to speak with Miss Mydas," said the glass-blower.

Presently a sweet voice said: "This is Miss Mydas. What is it?"

"Why have you treated me so cruelly and set the glass dog on me?"
asked the poor fellow.

"Well, to tell the truth," said the lady, "I don't like your looks.
Your cheeks are pale and baggy, your hair is coarse and long, your
eyes are small and red, your hands are big and rough, and you are
bow-legged."

"But I can't help my looks!" pleaded the glass-blower; "and you
really promised to marry me."

"If you were better looking I'd keep my promise," she returned. "But
under the circumstances you are no fit mate for me, and unless you
keep away from my mansion I shall set my glass dog on you!" Then she
dropped the 'phone and would have nothing more to say.

The miserable glass-blower went home with a heart bursting with
disappointment and began tying a rope to the bedpost by which to
hang himself.

Some one knocked at the door, and, upon opening it, he saw the
wizard.

"I've lost my dog," he announced.

"Have you, indeed?" replied the glass-blower tying a knot in the
rope.

"Yes; some one has stolen him."

"That's too bad," declared the glass-blower, indifferently.

"You must make me another," said the wizard.

"But I cannot; I've thrown away my tools."

"Then what shall I do?" asked the wizard.

"I do not know, unless you offer a reward for the dog."

"But I have no money," said the wizard.

"Offer some of your compounds, then," suggested the glass-blower,
who was making a noose in the rope for his head to go through.

"The only thing I can spare," replied the wizard, thoughtfully, "is
a Beauty Powder."

"What!" cried the glass-blower, throwing down the rope, "have you
really such a thing?"

"Yes, indeed. Whoever takes the powder will become the most
beautiful person in the world."

"If you will offer that as a reward," said the glass-blower,
eagerly, "I'll try to find the dog for you, for above everything
else I long to be beautiful."

"But I warn you the beauty will only be skin deep," said the wizard.

"That's all right," replied the happy glass-blower; "when I lose my
skin I shan't care to remain beautiful."

"Then tell me where to find my dog and you shall have the powder,"
promised the wizard.

So the glass-blower went out and pretended to search, and by-and-by
he returned and said:

"I've discovered the dog. You will find him in the mansion of Miss
Mydas."

The wizard went at once to see if this were true, and, sure enough,
the glass dog ran out and began barking at him. Then the wizard
spread out his hands and chanted a magic spell which sent the dog
fast asleep, when he picked him up and carried him to his own room
on the top floor of the tenement house.

Afterward he carried the Beauty Powder to the glass-blower as a
reward, and the fellow immediately swallowed it and became the most
beautiful man in the world.

The next time he called upon Miss Mydas there was no dog to bark at
him, and when the young lady saw him she fell in love with his
beauty at once.

"If only you were a count or a prince," she sighed, "I'd willingly
marry you."

"But I am a prince," he answered; "the Prince of Dogblowers."

"Ah!" said she; "then if you are willing to accept an allowance of
four dollars a week I'll order the wedding cards engraved."

The man hesitated, but when he thought of the rope hanging from his
bedpost he consented to the terms.

So they were married, and the bride was very jealous of her
husband's beauty and led him a dog's life. So he managed to get into
debt and made her miserable in turn.

* * * * *

As for the glass dog, the wizard set him barking again by means of
his wizardness and put him outside his door. I suppose he is there
yet, and am rather sorry, for I should like to consult the wizard
about the moral to this story.




THE QUEEN OF QUOK


A king once died, as kings are apt to do, being as liable to
shortness of breath as other mortals.

It was high time this king abandoned his earth life, for he had
lived in a sadly extravagant manner, and his subjects could spare
him without the slightest inconvenience.

His father had left him a full treasury, both money and jewels being
in abundance. But the foolish king just deceased had squandered
every penny in riotous living. He had then taxed his subjects until
most of them became paupers, and this money vanished in more riotous
living. Next he sold all the grand old furniture in the palace; all
the silver and gold plate and bric-a-brac; all the rich carpets and
furnishings and even his own kingly wardrobe, reserving only a
soiled and moth-eaten ermine robe to fold over his threadbare
raiment. And he spent the money in further riotous living.

Don't ask me to explain what riotous living is. I only know, from
hearsay, that it is an excellent way to get rid of money. And so
this spendthrift king found it.

He now picked all the magnificent jewels from this kingly crown and
from the round ball on the top of his scepter, and sold them and
spent the money. Riotous living, of course. But at last he was at
the end of his resources. He couldn't sell the crown itself, because
no one but the king had the right to wear it. Neither could he sell
the royal palace, because only the king had the right to live there.

So, finally, he found himself reduced to a bare palace, containing
only a big mahogany bedstead that he slept in, a small stool on
which he sat to pull off his shoes and the moth-eaten ermine robe.

In this straight he was reduced to the necessity of borrowing an
occasional dime from his chief counselor, with which to buy a ham
sandwich. And the chief counselor hadn't many dimes. One who
counseled his king so foolishly was likely to ruin his own prospects
as well.

So the king, having nothing more to live for, died suddenly and left
a ten-year-old son to inherit the dismantled kingdom, the moth-eaten
robe and the jewel-stripped crown.

No one envied the child, who had scarcely been thought of until he
became king himself. Then he was recognized as a personage of some
importance, and the politicians and hangers-on, headed by the chief
counselor of the kingdom, held a meeting to determine what could be
done for him.

These folk had helped the old king to live riotously while his money
lasted, and now they were poor and too proud to work. So they tried
to think of a plan that would bring more money into the little
king's treasury, where it would be handy for them to help
themselves.

After the meeting was over the chief counselor came to the young
king, who was playing peg-top in the courtyard, and said:

"Your majesty, we have thought of a way to restore your kingdom to
its former power and magnificence."

"All right," replied his majesty, carelessly. "How will you do it?"

"By marrying you to a lady of great wealth," replied the counselor.

"Marrying me!" cried the king. "Why, I am only ten years old!"

"I know; it is to be regretted. But your majesty will grow older,
and the affairs of the kingdom demand that you marry a wife."

"Can't I marry a mother, instead?" asked the poor little king, who
had lost his mother when a baby.

"Certainly not," declared the counselor. "To marry a mother would be
illegal; to marry a wife is right and proper."

"Can't you marry her yourself?" inquired his majesty, aiming his
peg-top at the chief counselor's toe, and laughing to see how he
jumped to escape it.

"Let me explain," said the other. "You haven't a penny in the world,
but you have a kingdom. There are many rich women who would be glad
to give their wealth in exchange for a queen's coronet--even if the
king is but a child. So we have decided to advertise that the one
who bids the highest shall become the queen of Quok."

"If I must marry at all," said the king, after a moment's thought,
"I prefer to marry Nyana, the armorer's daughter."

"She is too poor," replied the counselor.

"Her teeth are pearls, her eyes are amethysts, and her hair is
gold," declared the little king.

"True, your majesty. But consider that your wife's wealth must be
used. How would Nyana look after you have pulled her teeth of
pearls, plucked out her amethyst eyes and shaved her golden head?"

The boy shuddered.

"Have your own way," he said, despairingly. "Only let the lady be as
dainty as possible and a good playfellow."

"We shall do our best," returned the chief counselor, and went away
to advertise throughout the neighboring kingdoms for a wife for the
boy king of Quok.

There were so many applicants for the privilege of marrying the
little king that it was decided to put him up at auction, in order
that the largest possible sum of money should be brought into the
kingdom. So, on the day appointed, the ladies gathered at the palace
from all the surrounding kingdoms--from Bilkon, Mulgravia, Junkum
and even as far away as the republic of Macvelt.

The chief counselor came to the palace early in the morning and had
the king's face washed and his hair combed; and then he padded the
inside of the crown with old newspapers to make it small enough to
fit his majesty's head. It was a sorry looking crown, having many
big and little holes in it where the jewels had once been; and it
had been neglected and knocked around until it was quite battered
and tarnished. Yet, as the counselor said, it was the king's crown,
and it was quite proper he should wear it on the solemn occasion of
his auction.

Like all boys, be they kings or paupers, his majesty had torn and
soiled his one suit of clothes, so that they were hardly
presentable; and there was no money to buy new ones. Therefore the
counselor wound the old ermine robe around the king and sat him upon
the stool in the middle of the otherwise empty audience chamber.

And around him stood all the courtiers and politicians and
hangers-on of the kingdom, consisting of such people as were too
proud or lazy to work for a living. There was a great number of
them, you may be sure, and they made an imposing appearance.

Then the doors of the audience chamber were thrown open, and the
wealthy ladies who aspired to being queen of Quok came trooping in.
The king looked them over with much anxiety, and decided they were
each and all old enough to be his grandmother, and ugly enough to
scare away the crows from the royal cornfields. After which he lost
interest in them.

But the rich ladies never looked at the poor little king squatting
upon his stool. They gathered at once about the chief counselor, who
acted as auctioneer.

"How much am I offered for the coronet of the queen of Quok?" asked
the counselor, in a loud voice.

"Where is the coronet?" inquired a fussy old lady who had just
buried her ninth husband and was worth several millions.

"There isn't any coronet at present," explained the chief counselor,
"but whoever bids highest will have the right to wear one, and she
can then buy it."

"Oh," said the fussy old lady, "I see." Then she added: "I'll bid
fourteen dollars."

"Fourteen thousand dollars!" cried a sour-looking woman who was thin
and tall and had wrinkles all over her skin--"like a frosted apple,"
the king thought.

The bidding now became fast and furious, and the poverty-stricken
courtiers brightened up as the sum began to mount into the millions.

"He'll bring us a very pretty fortune, after all," whispered one to
his comrade, "and then we shall have the pleasure of helping him
spend it."

The king began to be anxious. All the women who looked at all
kind-hearted or pleasant had stopped bidding for lack of money, and
the slender old dame with the wrinkles seemed determined to get the
coronet at any price, and with it the boy husband. This ancient
creature finally became so excited that her wig got crosswise of her
head and her false teeth kept slipping out, which horrified the
little king greatly; but she would not give up.

At last the chief counselor ended the auction by crying out:

"Sold to Mary Ann Brodjinsky de la Porkus for three million, nine
hundred thousand, six hundred and twenty-four dollars and sixteen
cents!" And the sour-looking old woman paid the money in cash and on
the spot, which proves this is a fairy story.

The king was so disturbed at the thought that he must marry this
hideous creature that he began to wail and weep; whereupon the woman
boxed his ears soundly. But the counselor reproved her for punishing
her future husband in public, saying:

"You are not married yet. Wait until to-morrow, after the wedding
takes place. Then you can abuse him as much as you wish. But at
present we prefer to have people think this is a love match."

The poor king slept but little that night, so filled was he with
terror of his future wife. Nor could he get the idea out of his head
that he preferred to marry the armorer's daughter, who was about his
own age. He tossed and tumbled around upon his hard bed until the
moonlight came in at the window and lay like a great white sheet
upon the bare floor. Finally, in turning over for the hundredth
time, his hand struck against a secret spring in the headboard of
the big mahogany bedstead, and at once, with a sharp click, a panel
flew open.

The noise caused the king to look up, and, seeing the open panel, he
stood upon tiptoe, and, reaching within, drew out a folded paper. It
had several leaves fastened together like a book, and upon the first
page was written:

  "When the king is in trouble
  This leaf he must double
  And set it on fire
  To obtain his desire."

This was not very good poetry, but when the king had spelled it out
in the moonlight he was filled with joy.

"There's no doubt about my being in trouble," he exclaimed; "so I'll
burn it at once, and see what happens."

He tore off the leaf and put the rest of the book in its secret
hiding place. Then, folding the paper double, he placed it on the
top of his stool, lighted a match and set fire to it.

It made a horrid smudge for so small a paper, and the king sat on
the edge of the bed and watched it eagerly.

When the smoke cleared away he was surprised to see, sitting upon
the stool, a round little man, who, with folded arms and crossed
legs, sat calmly facing the king and smoking a black briarwood pipe.

"Well, here I am," said he.

"So I see," replied the little king. "But how did you get here?"

"Didn't you burn the paper?" demanded the round man, by way of
answer.

"Yes, I did," acknowledged the king.

"Then you are in trouble, and I've come to help you out of it. I'm
the Slave of the Royal Bedstead."

"Oh!" said the king. "I didn't know there was one."

"Neither did your father, or he would not have been so foolish as to
sell everything he had for money. By the way, it's lucky for you he
did not sell this bedstead. Now, then, what do you want?"

"I'm not sure what I want," replied the king; "but I know what I
don't want, and that is the old woman who is going to marry me."

"That's easy enough," said the Slave of the Royal Bedstead. "All you
need do is to return her the money she paid the chief counselor and
declare the match off. Don't be afraid. You are the king, and your
word is law."

"To be sure," said the majesty. "But I am in great need of money.
How am I going to live if the chief counselor returns to Mary Ann
Brodjinski her millions?"

"Phoo! that's easy enough," again answered the man, and, putting his
hand in his pocket, he drew out and tossed to the king an
old-fashioned leather purse. "Keep that with you," said he, "and you
will always be rich, for you can take out of the purse as many
twenty-five-cent silver pieces as you wish, one at a time. No matter
how often you take one out, another will instantly appear in its
place within the purse."

"Thank you," said the king, gratefully. "You have rendered me a rare
favor; for now I shall have money for all my needs and will not be
obliged to marry anyone. Thank you a thousand times!"

"Don't mention it," answered the other, puffing his pipe slowly and
watching the smoke curl into the moonlight. "Such things are easy to
me. Is that all you want?"

"All I can think of just now," returned the king.

"Then, please close that secret panel in the bedstead," said the
man; "the other leaves of the book may be of use to you some time."

The boy stood upon the bed as before and, reaching up, closed the
opening so that no one else could discover it. Then he turned to
face his visitor, but the Slave of the Royal Bedstead had
disappeared.

"I expected that," said his majesty; "yet I am sorry he did not wait
to say good-by."

With a lightened heart and a sense of great relief the boy king
placed the leathern purse underneath his pillow, and climbing into
bed again slept soundly until morning.

When the sun rose his majesty rose also, refreshed and comforted,
and the first thing he did was to send for the chief counselor.

That mighty personage arrived looking glum and unhappy, but the boy
was too full of his own good fortune to notice it. Said he:

"I have decided not to marry anyone, for I have just come into a
fortune of my own. Therefore I command you return to that old woman
the money she has paid you for the right to wear the coronet of the
queen of Quok. And make public declaration that the wedding will not
take place."

Hearing this the counselor began to tremble, for he saw the young
king had decided to reign in earnest; and he looked so guilty that
his majesty inquired:

"Well! what is the matter now?"

"Sire," replied the wretch, in a shaking voice, "I cannot return the
woman her money, for I have lost it!"

"Lost it!" cried the king, in mingled astonishment and anger.

"Even so, your majesty. On my way home from the auction last night I
stopped at the drug store to get some potash lozenges for my throat,
which was dry and hoarse with so much loud talking; and your majesty
will admit it was through my efforts the woman was induced to pay so
great a price. Well, going into the drug store I carelessly left the
package of money lying on the seat of my carriage, and when I came
out again it was gone. Nor was the thief anywhere to be seen."

"Did you call the police?" asked the king.

"Yes, I called; but they were all on the next block, and although
they have promised to search for the robber I have little hope they
will ever find him."

The king sighed.

"What shall we do now?" he asked.

"I fear you must marry Mary Ann Brodjinski," answered the chief
counselor; "unless, indeed, you order the executioner to cut her
head off."

"That would be wrong," declared the king. "The woman must not be
harmed. And it is just that we return her money, for I will not
marry her under any circumstances."

"Is that private fortune you mentioned large enough to repay her?"
asked the counselor.

"Why, yes," said the king, thoughtfully, "but it will take some time
to do it, and that shall be your task. Call the woman here."

The counselor went in search of Mary Ann, who, when she heard she
was not to become a queen, but would receive her money back, flew
into a violent passion and boxed the chief counselor's ears so
viciously that they stung for nearly an hour. But she followed him
into the king's audience chamber, where she demanded her money in a
loud voice, claiming as well the interest due upon it over night.

"The counselor has lost your money," said the boy king, "but he
shall pay you every penny out of my own private purse. I fear,
however, you will be obliged to take it in small change."

"That will not matter," she said, scowling upon the counselor as if
she longed to reach his ears again; "I don't care how small the
change is so long as I get every penny that belongs to me, and the
interest. Where is it?"

"Here," answered the king, handing the counselor the leathern purse.
"It is all in silver quarters, and they must be taken from the purse
one at a time; but there will be plenty to pay your demands, and to
spare."

So, there being no chairs, the counselor sat down upon the floor in
one corner and began counting out silver twenty-five-cent pieces
from the purse, one by one. And the old woman sat upon the floor
opposite him and took each piece of money from his hand.

It was a large sum: three million, nine hundred thousand, six
hundred and twenty-four dollars and sixteen cents. And it takes four
times as many twenty-five-cent pieces as it would dollars to make up
the amount.

The king left them sitting there and went to school, and often
thereafter he came to the counselor and interrupted him long enough
to get from the purse what money he needed to reign in a proper and
dignified manner. This somewhat delayed the counting, but as it was
a long job, anyway, that did not matter much.

The king grew to manhood and married the pretty daughter of the
armorer, and they now have two lovely children of their own. Once in
awhile they go into the big audience chamber of the palace and let
the little ones watch the aged, hoary-headed counselor count out
silver twenty-five-cent pieces to a withered old woman, who watched
his every movement to see that he does not cheat her.

It is a big sum, three million, nine hundred thousand, six hundred
and twenty-four dollars and sixteen cents in twenty-five-cent
pieces.

But this is how the counselor was punished for being so careless
with the woman's money. And this is how Mary Ann Brodjinski de la
Porkus was also punished for wishing to marry a ten-year-old king in
order that she might wear the coronet of the queen of Quok.




THE GIRL WHO OWNED A BEAR


Mamma had gone down-town to shop. She had asked Nora to look after
Jane Gladys, and Nora promised she would. But it was her afternoon
for polishing the silver, so she stayed in the pantry and left Jane
Gladys to amuse herself alone in the big sitting-room upstairs.

The little girl did not mind being alone, for she was working on her
first piece of embroidery--a sofa pillow for papa's birthday
present. So she crept into the big bay window and curled herself up
on the broad sill while she bent her brown head over her work.

Soon the door opened and closed again, quietly. Jane Gladys thought
it was Nora, so she didn't look up until she had taken a couple more
stitches on a forget-me-not. Then she raised her eyes and was
astonished to find a strange man in the middle of the room, who
regarded her earnestly.

He was short and fat, and seemed to be breathing heavily from his
climb up the stairs. He held a work silk hat in one hand and
underneath his other elbow was tucked a good-sized book. He was
dressed in a black suit that looked old and rather shabby, and his
head was bald upon the top.

"Excuse me," he said, while the child gazed at him in solemn
surprise. "Are you Jane Gladys Brown?"

"Yes, sir," she answered.

"Very good; very good, indeed!" he remarked, with a queer sort of
smile. "I've had quite a hunt to find you, but I've succeeded at
last."

"How did you get in?" inquired Jane Gladys, with a growing distrust
of her visitor.

"That is a secret," he said, mysteriously.

This was enough to put the girl on her guard. She looked at the man
and the man looked at her, and both looks were grave and somewhat
anxious.

"What do you want?" she asked, straightening herself up with a
dignified air.

"Ah!--now we are coming to business," said the man, briskly. "I'm
going to be quite frank with you. To begin with, your father has
abused me in a most ungentlemanly manner."

Jane Gladys got off the window sill and pointed her small finger at
the door.

"Leave this room 'meejitly!" she cried, her voice trembling with
indignation. "My papa is the best man in the world. He never 'bused
anybody!"

"Allow me to explain, please," said the visitor, without paying any
attention to her request to go away. "Your father may be very kind
to you, for you are his little girl, you know. But when he's
down-town in his office he's inclined to be rather severe,
especially on book agents. Now, I called on him the other day and
asked him to buy the 'Complete Works of Peter Smith,' and what do
you suppose he did?"

She said nothing.

"Why," continued the man, with growing excitement, "he ordered me
from his office, and had me put out of the building by the janitor!
What do you think of such treatment as that from the 'best papa in
the world,' eh?"

"I think he was quite right," said Jane Gladys.

"Oh, you do? Well," said the man, "I resolved to be revenged for the
insult. So, as your father is big and strong and a dangerous man, I
have decided to be revenged upon his little girl."

Jane Gladys shivered.

"What are you going to do?" she asked.

"I'm going to present you with this book," he answered, taking it
from under his arm. Then he sat down on the edge of a chair, placed
his hat on the rug and drew a fountain pen from his vest pocket.

"I'll write your name in it," said he. "How do you spell Gladys?"

"G-l-a-d-y-s," she replied.

"Thank you. Now this," he continued, rising and handing her the book
with a bow, "is my revenge for your father's treatment of me.
Perhaps he'll be sorry he didn't buy the 'Complete Works of Peter
Smith.' Good-by, my dear."

He walked to the door, gave her another bow, and left the room, and
Jane Gladys could see that he was laughing to himself as if very
much amused.

When the door had closed behind the queer little man the child sat
down in the window again and glanced at the book. It had a red and
yellow cover and the word "Thingamajigs" was across the front in big
letters.

Then she opened it, curiously, and saw her name written in black
letters upon the first white leaf.

"He was a funny little man," she said to herself, thoughtfully.

She turned the next leaf, and saw a big picture of a clown, dressed
in green and red and yellow, and having a very white face with
three-cornered spots of red on each cheek and over the eyes. While
she looked at this the book trembled in her hands, the leaf crackled
and creaked and suddenly the clown jumped out of it and stood upon
the floor beside her, becoming instantly as big as any ordinary
clown.

After stretching his arms and legs and yawning in a rather impolite
manner, he gave a silly chuckle and said:

"This is better! You don't know how cramped one gets, standing so
long upon a page of flat paper."

Perhaps you can imagine how startled Jane Gladys was, and how she
stared at the clown who had just leaped out of the book.

"You didn't expect anything of this sort, did you?" he asked,
leering at her in clown fashion. Then he turned around to take a
look at the room and Jane Gladys laughed in spite of her
astonishment.

"What amuses you?" demanded the clown.

"Why, the back of you is all white!" cried the girl. "You're only a
clown in front of you."

"Quite likely," he returned, in an annoyed tone. "The artist made a
front view of me. He wasn't expected to make the back of me, for
that was against the page of the book."

"But it makes you look so funny!" said Jane Gladys, laughing until
her eyes were moist with tears.

The clown looked sulky and sat down upon a chair so she couldn't see
his back.

"I'm not the only thing in the book," he remarked, crossly.

This reminded her to turn another page, and she had scarcely noted
that it contained the picture of a monkey when the animal sprang
from the book with a great crumpling of paper and landed upon the
window seat beside her.

"He-he-he-he-he!" chattered the creature, springing to the girl's
shoulder and then to the center table. "This is great fun! Now I can
be a real monkey instead of a picture of one."

"Real monkeys can't talk," said Jane Gladys, reprovingly.

"How do you know? Have you ever been one yourself?" inquired the
animal; and then he laughed loudly, and the clown laughed, too, as
if he enjoyed the remark.

The girl was quite bewildered by this time. She thoughtlessly turned
another leaf, and before she had time to look twice a gray donkey
leaped from the book and stumbled from the window seat to the floor
with a great clatter.

"You're clumsy enough, I'm sure!" said the child, indignantly, for
the beast had nearly upset her.

"Clumsy! And why not?" demanded the donkey, with angry voice. "If
the fool artist had drawn you out of perspective, as he did me, I
guess you'd be clumsy yourself."

"What's wrong with you?" asked Jane Gladys.

"My front and rear legs on the left side are nearly six inches too
short, that's what's the matter! If that artist didn't know how to
draw properly why did he try to make a donkey at all?"

"I don't know," replied the child, seeing an answer was expected.

"I can hardly stand up," grumbled the donkey; "and the least little
thing will topple me over."

"Don't mind that," said the monkey, making a spring at the
chandelier and swinging from it by his tail until Jane Gladys feared
he would knock all the globes off; "the same artist has made my ears
as big as that clown's and everyone knows a monkey hasn't any ears
to speak of--much less to draw."

"He should be prosecuted," remarked the clown, gloomily. "I haven't
any back."

Jane Gladys looked from one to the other with a puzzled expression
upon her sweet face, and turned another page of the book.

Swift as a flash there sprang over her shoulder a tawney, spotted
leopard, which landed upon the back of a big leather armchair and
turned upon the others with a fierce movement.

The monkey climbed to the top of the chandelier and chattered with
fright. The donkey tried to run and straightway tipped over on his
left side. The clown grew paler than ever, but he sat still in his
chair and gave a low whistle of surprise.

The leopard crouched upon the back of the chair, lashed his tail
from side to side and glared at all of them, by turns, including
Jane Gladys.

"Which of us are you going to attack first?" asked the donkey,
trying hard to get upon his feet again.

"I can't attack any of you," snarled the leopard. "The artist made
my mouth shut, so I haven't any teeth; and he forgot to make my
claws. But I'm a frightful looking creature, nevertheless; am I
not?"

"Oh, yes;" said the clown, indifferently. "I suppose you're
frightful looking enough. But if you have no teeth nor claws we
don't mind your looks at all."

This so annoyed the leopard that he growled horribly, and the monkey
laughed at him.

Just then the book slipped from the girl's lap, and as she made a
movement to catch it one of the pages near the back opened wide. She
caught a glimpse of a fierce grizzly bear looking at her from the
page, and quickly threw the book from her. It fell with a crash in
the middle of the room, but beside it stood the great grizzly, who
had wrenched himself from the page before the book closed.

"Now," cried the leopard from his perch, "you'd better look out for
yourselves! You can't laugh at him as you did at me. The bear has
both claws and teeth."

"Indeed I have," said the bear, in a low, deep, growling voice. "And
I know how to use them, too. If you read in that book you'll find
I'm described as a horrible, cruel and remorseless grizzly, whose
only business in life is to eat up little girls--shoes, dresses,
ribbons and all! And then, the author says, I smack my lips and
glory in my wickedness."

"That's awful!" said the donkey, sitting upon his haunches and
shaking his head sadly. "What do you suppose possessed the author to
make you so hungry for girls? Do you eat animals, also?"

"The author does not mention my eating anything but little girls,"
replied the bear.

"Very good," remarked the clown, drawing a long breath of relief.
"you may begin eating Jane Gladys as soon as you wish. She laughed
because I had no back."

"And she laughed because my legs are out of perspective," brayed the
donkey.

"But you also deserve to be eaten," screamed the leopard from the
back of the leather chair; "for you laughed and poked fun at me
because I had no claws nor teeth! Don't you suppose Mr. Grizzly, you
could manage to eat a clown, a donkey and a monkey after you finish
the girl?"

"Perhaps so, and a leopard into the bargain," growled the bear. "It
will depend on how hungry I am. But I must begin on the little girl
first, because the author says I prefer girls to anything."

Jane Gladys was much frightened on hearing this conversation, and
she began to realize what the man meant when he said he gave her the
book to be revenged. Surely papa would be sorry he hadn't bought the
"Complete Works of Peter Smith" when he came home and found his
little girl eaten up by a grizzly bear--shoes, dress, ribbons and
all!

The bear stood up and balanced himself on his rear legs.

"This is the way I look in the book," he said. "Now watch me eat the
little girl."

He advanced slowly toward Jane Gladys, and the monkey, the leopard,
the donkey and the clown all stood around in a circle and watched
the bear with much interest.

But before the grizzly reached her the child had a sudden thought,
and cried out:

"Stop! You mustn't eat me. It would be wrong."

"Why?" asked the bear, in surprise.

"Because I own you. You're my private property," she answered.

"I don't see how you make that out," said the bear, in a
disappointed tone.

"Why, the book was given to me; my name's on the front leaf. And you
belong, by rights, in the book. So you mustn't dare to eat your
owner!"

The Grizzly hesitated.

"Can any of you read?" he asked.

"I can," said the clown.

"Then see if she speaks the truth. Is her name really in the book?"

The clown picked it up and looked at the name.

"It is," said he. "'Jane Gladys Brown;' and written quite plainly in
big letters."

The bear sighed.

"Then, of course, I can't eat her," he decided. "That author is as
disappointing as most authors are."

"But he's not as bad as the artist," exclaimed the donkey, who was
still trying to stand up straight.

"The fault lies with yourselves," said Jane Gladys, severely. "Why
didn't you stay in the book, where you were put?"

The animals looked at each other in a foolish way, and the clown
blushed under his white paint.

"Really--" began the bear, and then he stopped short.

The door bell rang loudly.

"It's mamma!" cried Jane Gladys, springing to her feet. "She's come
home at last. Now, you stupid creatures--"

But she was interrupted by them all making a rush for the book.
There was a swish and a whirr and a rustling of leaves, and an
instant later the book lay upon the floor looking just like any
other book, while Jane Gladys' strange companions had all
disappeared.

* * * * *

This story should teach us to think quickly and clearly upon all
occasions; for had Jane Gladys not remembered that she owned the
bear he probably would have eaten her before the bell rang.




THE ENCHANTED TYPES


One time a knook became tired of his beautiful life and longed for
something new to do. The knooks have more wonderful powers than any
other immortal folk--except, perhaps, the fairies and ryls. So one
would suppose that a knook who might gain anything he desired by a
simple wish could not be otherwise than happy and contented. But
such was not the case with Popopo, the knook we are speaking of. He
had lived thousands of years, and had enjoyed all the wonders he
could think of. Yet life had become as tedious to him now as it
might be to one who was unable to gratify a single wish.

Finally, by chance, Popopo thought of the earth people who dwell in
cities, and so he resolved to visit them and see how they lived.
This would surely be fine amusement, and serve to pass away many
wearisome hours.

Therefore one morning, after a breakfast so dainty that you could
scarcely imagine it, Popopo set out for the earth and at once was in
the midst of a big city.

His own dwelling was so quiet and peaceful that the roaring noise of
the town startled him. His nerves were so shocked that before he had
looked around three minutes he decided to give up the adventure, and
instantly returned home.

This satisfied for a time his desire to visit the earth cities, but
soon the monotony of his existence again made him restless and gave
him another thought. At night the people slept and the cities would
be quiet. He would visit them at night.

So at the proper time Popopo transported himself in a jiffy to a
great city, where he began wandering about the streets. Everyone was
in bed. No wagons rattled along the pavements; no throngs of busy
men shouted and halloaed. Even the policemen slumbered slyly and
there happened to be no prowling thieves abroad.

His nerves being soothed by the stillness, Popopo began to enjoy
himself. He entered many of the houses and examined their rooms with
much curiosity. Locks and bolts made no difference to a knook, and
he saw as well in darkness as in daylight.

After a time he strolled into the business portion of the city.
Stores are unknown among the immortals, who have no need of money or
of barter and exchange; so Popopo was greatly interested by the
novel sight of so many collections of goods and merchandise.

During his wanderings he entered a millinery shop, and was surprised
to see within a large glass case a great number of women's hats,
each bearing in one position or another a stuffed bird. Indeed, some
of the most elaborate hats had two or three birds upon them.

Now knooks are the especial guardians of birds, and love them
dearly. To see so many of his little friends shut up in a glass case
annoyed and grieved Popopo, who had no idea they had purposely been
placed upon the hats by the milliner. So he slid back one of the
doors of the case, gave the little chirruping whistle of the knooks
that all birds know well, and called:

"Come, friends; the door is open--fly out!"

Popopo did not know the birds were stuffed; but, stuffed or not,
every bird is bound to obey a knook's whistle and a knook's call. So
they left the hats, flew out of the case and began fluttering about
the room.

"Poor dears!" said the kind-hearted knook, "you long to be in the
fields and forests again."

Then he opened the outer door for them and cried: "Off with you! Fly
away, my beauties, and be happy again."

The astonished birds at once obeyed, and when they had soared away
into the night air the knook closed the door and continued his
wandering through the streets.

By dawn he saw many interesting sights, but day broke before he had
finished the city, and he resolved to come the next evening a few
hours earlier.

As soon as it was dark the following day he came again to the city
and on passing the millinery shop noticed a light within. Entering
he found two women, one of whom leaned her head upon the table and
sobbed bitterly, while the other strove to comfort her.

Of course Popopo was invisible to mortal eyes, so he stood by and
listened to their conversation.

"Cheer up, sister," said one. "Even though your pretty birds have
all been stolen the hats themselves remain."

"Alas!" cried the other, who was the milliner, "no one will buy my
hats partly trimmed, for the fashion is to wear birds upon them. And
if I cannot sell my goods I shall be utterly ruined."

Then she renewed her sobbing and the knook stole away, feeling a
little ashamed to realized that in his love for the birds he had
unconsciously wronged one of the earth people and made her unhappy.

This thought brought him back to the millinery shop later in the
night, when the two women had gone home. He wanted, in some way, to
replace the birds upon the hats, that the poor woman might be happy
again. So he searched until he came upon a nearby cellar full of
little gray mice, who lived quite undisturbed and gained a
livelihood by gnawing through the walls into neighboring houses and
stealing food from the pantries.

"Here are just the creatures," thought Popopo, "to place upon the
woman's hats. Their fur is almost as soft as the plumage of the
birds, and it strikes me the mice are remarkably pretty and graceful
animals. Moreover, they now pass their lives in stealing, and were
they obliged to remain always upon women's hats their morals would
be much improved."

So he exercised a charm that drew all the mice from the cellar and
placed them upon the hats in the glass case, where they occupied the
places the birds had vacated and looked very becoming--at least, in
the eyes of the unworldly knook. To prevent their running about and
leaving the hats Popopo rendered them motionless, and then he was so
pleased with his work that he decided to remain in the shop and
witness the delight of the milliner when she saw how daintily her
hats were now trimmed.

She came in the early morning, accompanied by her sister, and her
face wore a sad and resigned expression. After sweeping and dusting
the shop and drawing the blinds she opened the glass case and took
out a hat.

But when she saw a tiny gray mouse nestling among the ribbons and
laces she gave a loud shriek, and, dropping the hat, sprang with one
bound to the top of the table. The sister, knowing the shriek to be
one of fear, leaped upon a chair and exclaimed:

"What is it? Oh! what is it?"

"A mouse!" gasped the milliner, trembling with terror.

Popopo, seeing this commotion, now realized that mice are especially
disagreeable to human beings, and that he had made a grave mistake
in placing them upon the hats; so he gave a low whistle of command
that was heard only by the mice.

Instantly they all jumped from the hats, dashed out the open door
of the glass case and scampered away to their cellar. But this
action so frightened the milliner and her sister that after giving
several loud screams they fell upon their backs on the floor and
fainted away.

Popopo was a kind-hearted knook, but on witnessing all this misery,
caused by his own ignorance of the ways of humans, he straightway
wished himself at home, and so left the poor women to recover as
best they could.

Yet he could not escape a sad feeling of responsibility, and after
thinking upon the matter he decided that since he had caused the
milliner's unhappiness by freeing the birds, he could set the matter
right by restoring them to the glass case. He loved the birds, and
disliked to condemn them to slavery again; but that seemed the only
way to end the trouble.

So he set off to find the birds. They had flown a long distance, but
it was nothing to Popopo to reach them in a second, and he
discovered them sitting upon the branches of a big chestnut tree and
singing gayly.

When they saw the knook the birds cried:

"Thank you, Popopo. Thank you for setting us free."

"Do not thank me," returned the knook, "for I have come to send you
back to the millinery shop."

"Why?" demanded a blue jay, angrily, while the others stopped their
songs.

"Because I find the woman considers you her property, and your loss
has caused her much unhappiness," answered Popopo.

"But remember how unhappy we were in her glass case," said a robin
redbreast, gravely. "And as for being her property, you are a knook,
and the natural guardian of all birds; so you know that Nature
created us free. To be sure, wicked men shot and stuffed us, and
sold us to the milliner; but the idea of our being her property is
nonsense!"

Popopo was puzzled.

"If I leave you free," he said, "wicked men will shoot you again,
and you will be no better off than before."

"Pooh!" exclaimed the blue jay, "we cannot be shot now, for we are
stuffed. Indeed, two men fired several shots at us this morning, but
the bullets only ruffled our feathers and buried themselves in our
stuffing. We do not fear men now."

"Listen!" said Popopo, sternly, for he felt the birds were getting
the best of the argument; "the poor milliner's business will be
ruined if I do not return you to her shop. It seems you are
necessary to trim the hats properly. It is the fashion for women to
wear birds upon their headgear. So the poor milliner's wares,
although beautified by lace and ribbons, are worthless unless you
are perched upon them."

"Fashions," said a black bird, solemnly, "are made by men. What law
is there, among birds or knooks, that requires us to be the slaves
of fashion?"

"What have we to do with fashions, anyway?" screamed a linnet. "If
it were the fashion to wear knooks perched upon women's hats would
you be contented to stay there? Answer me, Popopo!"

But Popopo was in despair. He could not wrong the birds by sending
them back to the milliner, nor did he wish the milliner to suffer by
their loss. So he went home to think what could be done.

After much meditation he decided to consult the king of the knooks,
and going at once to his majesty he told him the whole story.

The king frowned.

"This should teach you the folly of interfering with earth people,"
he said. "But since you have caused all this trouble, it is your
duty to remedy it. Our birds cannot be enslaved, that is certain;
therefore you must have the fashions changed, so it will no longer
be stylish for women to wear birds upon their hats."

"How shall I do that?" asked Popopo.

"Easily enough. Fashions often change among the earth people, who
tire quickly of any one thing. When they read in their newspapers
and magazines that the style is so-and-so, they never question the
matter, but at once obey the mandate of fashion. So you must visit
the newspapers and magazines and enchant the types."

"Enchant the types!" echoed Popopo, in wonder.

"Just so. Make them read that it is no longer the fashion to wear
birds upon hats. That will afford relief to your poor milliner and
at the same time set free thousands of our darling birds who have
been so cruelly used."

Popopo thanked the wise king and followed his advice.

The office of every newspaper and magazine in the city was visited by
the knook, and then he went to other cities, until there was not a
publication in the land that had not a "new fashion note" in its
pages. Sometimes Popopo enchanted the types, so that whoever read
the print would see only what the knook wished them to. Sometimes he
called upon the busy editors and befuddled their brains until they
wrote exactly what he wanted them to. Mortals seldom know how
greatly they are influenced by fairies, knooks and ryls, who often
put thoughts into their heads that only the wise little immortals
could have conceived.

The following morning when the poor milliner looked over her
newspaper she was overjoyed to read that "no woman could now wear a
bird upon her hat and be in style, for the newest fashion required
only ribbons and laces."

Popopo after this found much enjoyment in visiting every millinery
shop he could find and giving new life to the stuffed birds which
were carelessly tossed aside as useless. And they flew to the fields
and forests with songs of thanks to the good knook who had rescued
them.

Sometimes a hunter fires his gun at a bird and then wonders why he
did not hit it. But, having read this story, you will understand
that the bird must have been a stuffed one from some millinery shop,
which cannot, of course, be killed by a gun.




THE LAUGHING HIPPOPOTAMUS


On one of the upper branches of the Congo river lived an ancient and
aristocratic family of hippopotamuses, which boasted a pedigree
dating back beyond the days of Noah--beyond the existence of
mankind--far into the dim ages when the world was new.

They had always lived upon the banks of this same river, so that
every curve and sweep of its waters, every pit and shallow of its
bed, every rock and stump and wallow upon its bank was as familiar
to them as their own mothers. And they are living there yet, I
suppose.

Not long ago the queen of this tribe of hippopotamuses had a child
which she named Keo, because it was so fat and round. Still, that
you may not be misled, I will say that in the hippopotamus language
"Keo," properly translated, means "fat and lazy" instead of fat and
round. However, no one called the queen's attention to this error,
because her tusks were monstrous long and sharp, and she thought Keo
the sweetest baby in the world.

He was, indeed, all right for a hippopotamus. He rolled and played
in the soft mud of the river bank, and waddled inland to nibble the
leaves of the wild cabbage that grew there, and was happy and
contented from morning till night. And he was the jolliest
hippopotamus that ancient family had ever known. His little red eyes
were forever twinkling with fun, and he laughed his merry laugh on
all occasions, whether there was anything to laugh at or not.

Therefore the black people who dwelt in that region called him
"Ippi"--the jolly one, although they dared not come anigh him on
account of his fierce mother, and his equally fierce uncles and
aunts and cousins, who lived in a vast colony upon the river bank.

And while these black people, who lived in little villages scattered
among the trees, dared not openly attack the royal family of
hippopotamuses, they were amazingly fond of eating hippopotamus meat
whenever they could get it. This was no secret to the hippopotamuses.
And, again, when the blacks managed to catch these animals alive,
they had a trick of riding them through the jungles as if they were
horses, thus reducing them to a condition of slavery.

Therefore, having these things in mind, whenever the tribe of
hippopotamuses smelled the oily odor of black people they were
accustomed to charge upon them furiously, and if by chance they
overtook one of the enemy they would rip him with their sharp tusks
or stamp him into the earth with their huge feet.

It was continual warfare between the hippopotamuses and the black
people.

Gouie lived in one of the little villages of the blacks. He was the
son of the chief's brother and grandson of the village sorcerer, the
latter being an aged man known as the "the boneless wonder," because
he could twist himself into as many coils as a serpent and had no
bones to hinder his bending his flesh into any position. This made
him walk in a wabbly fashion, but the black people had great respect
for him.

Gouie's hut was made of branches of trees stuck together with mud,
and his clothing consisted of a grass mat tied around his middle.
But his relationship to the chief and the sorcerer gave him a
certain dignity, and he was much addicted to solitary thought.
Perhaps it was natural that these thoughts frequently turned upon
his enemies, the hippopotamuses, and that he should consider many
ways of capturing them.

Finally he completed his plans, and set about digging a great pit in
the ground, midway between two sharp curves of the river. When the
pit was finished he covered it over with small branches of trees,
and strewed earth upon them, smoothing the surface so artfully that
no one would suspect there was a big hole underneath. Then Gouie
laughed softly to himself and went home to supper.

That evening the queen said to Keo, who was growing to be a fine
child for his age:

"I wish you'd run across the bend and ask your Uncle Nikki to come
here. I have found a strange plant, and want him to tell me if it is
good to eat."

The jolly one laughed heartily as he started upon his errand, for he
felt as important as a boy does when he is sent for the first time
to the corner grocery to buy a yeast cake.

"Guk-uk-uk-uk! guk-uk-uk-uk!" was the way he laughed; and if you
think a hippopotamus does not laugh this way you have but to listen
to one and you will find I am right.

He crawled out of the mud where he was wallowing and tramped away
through the bushes, and the last his mother heard as she lay half in
and half out of the water was his musical "guk-uk-uk-uk!" dying away
in the distance.

Keo was in such a happy mood that he scarcely noticed where he
stepped, so he was much surprised when, in the middle of a laugh,
the ground gave way beneath him, and he fell to the bottom of
Gouie's deep pit. He was not badly hurt, but had bumped his nose
severely as he went down; so he stopped laughing and began to think
how he should get out again. Then he found the walls were higher
than his head, and that he was a prisoner.

So he laughed a little at his own misfortune, and the laughter
soothed him to sleep, so that he snored all through the night until
daylight came.

When Gouie peered over the edge of the pit next morning he
exclaimed:

"Why, 'tis Ippi--the Jolly One!"

Keo recognized the scent of a black man and tried to raise his head
high enough to bite him. Seeing which Gouie spoke in the
hippopotamus language, which he had learned from his grandfather,
the sorcerer.

"Have peace, little one; you are my captive."

"Yes; I will have a piece of your leg, if I can reach it," retorted
Keo; and then he laughed at his own joke: "Guk-uk-uk-uk!"

But Gouie, being a thoughtful black man, went away without further
talk, and did not return until the following morning. When he again
leaned over the pit Keo was so weak from hunger that he could hardly
laugh at all.

"Do you give up?" asked Gouie, "or do you still wish to fight?"

"What will happen if I give up?" inquired Keo.

The black man scratched his woolly head in perplexity.

"It is hard to say, Ippi. You are too young to work, and if I kill
you for food I shall lose your tusks, which are not yet grown. Why,
O Jolly One, did you fall into my hole? I wanted to catch your
mother or one of your uncles."

"Guk-uk-uk-uk!" laughed Keo. "You must let me go, after all, black
man; for I am of no use to you!"

"That I will not do," declared Gouie; "unless," he added, as an
afterthought, "you will make a bargain with me."

"Let me hear about the bargain, black one, for I am hungry," said
Keo.

"I will let your go if you swear by the tusks of your grandfather
that you will return to me in a year and a day and become my
prisoner again."

The youthful hippopotamus paused to think, for he knew it was a
solemn thing to swear by the tusks of his grandfather; but he was
exceedingly hungry, and a year and a day seemed a long time off; so
he said, with another careless laugh:

"Very well; if you will now let me go I swear by the tusks of my
grandfather to return to you in a year and a day and become your
prisoner."

Gouie was much pleased, for he knew that in a year and a day Keo
would be almost full grown. So he began digging away one end of the
pit and filling it up with the earth until he had made an incline
which would allow the hippopotamus to climb out.

Keo was so pleased when he found himself upon the surface of the
earth again that he indulged in a merry fit of laughter, after which
he said:

"Good-by, Gouie; in a year and a day you will see me again."

Then he waddled away toward the river to see his mother and get his
breakfast, and Gouie returned to his village.

During the months that followed, as the black man lay in his hut or
hunted in the forest, he heard at times the faraway "Guk-uk-uk-uk!"
of the laughing hippopotamus. But he only smiled to himself and
thought: "A year and a day will soon pass away!"

Now when Keo returned to his mother safe and well every member of
his tribe was filled with joy, for the Jolly One was a general
favorite. But when he told them that in a year and a day he must
again become the slave of the black man, they began to wail and
weep, and so many were their tears that the river rose several
inches.

Of course Keo only laughed at their sorrow; but a great meeting of
the tribe was called and the matter discussed seriously.

"Having sworn by the tusks of his grandfather," said Uncle Nikki,
"he must keep his promise. But it is our duty to try in some way to
rescue him from death or a life of slavery."

To this all agreed, but no one could think of any method of saving
Keo from his fate. So months passed away, during which all the royal
hippopotamuses were sad and gloomy except the Jolly One himself.

Finally but a week of freedom remained to Keo, and his mother, the
queen, became so nervous and worried that another meeting of the
tribe was called. By this time the laughing hippopotamus had grown
to enormous size, and measured nearly fifteen feet long and six feet
high, while his sharp tusks were whiter and harder than those of an
elephant.

"Unless something is done to save my child," said the mother, "I
shall die of grief."

Then some of her relations began to make foolish suggestions; but
presently Uncle Nep, a wise and very big hippopotamus, said:

"We must go to Glinkomok and implore his aid."

Then all were silent, for it was a bold thing to face the mighty
Glinkomok. But the mother's love was equal to any heroism.

"I will myself go to him, if Uncle Nep will accompany me," she said,
quickly.

Uncle Nep thoughtfully patted the soft mud with his fore foot and
wagged his short tail leisurely from side to side.

"We have always been obedient to Glinkomok, and shown him great
respect," said he. "Therefore I fear no danger in facing him. I will
go with you."

All the others snorted approval, being very glad they were not
called upon to go themselves.

So the queen and Uncle Nep, with Keo swimming between them, set out
upon their journey. They swam up the river all that day and all the
next, until they came at sundown to a high, rocky wall, beneath
which was the cave where the might Glinkomok dwelt.

This fearful creature was part beast, part man, part fowl and part
fish. It had lived since the world began. Through years of wisdom it
had become part sorcerer, part wizard, part magician and part fairy.
Mankind knew it not, but the ancient beasts knew and feared it.

The three hippopotamuses paused before the cave, with their front
feet upon the bank and their bodies in the water, and called in
chorus a greeting to Glinkomok. Instantly thereafter the mouth of
the cave darkened and the creature glided silently toward them.

The hippopotamuses were afraid to look upon it, and bowed their
heads between their legs.

"We come, O Glinkomok, to implore your mercy and friendly
assistance!" began Uncle Nep; and then he told the story of Keo's
capture, and how he had promised to return to the black man.

"He must keep his promise," said the creature, in a voice that
sounded like a sigh.

The mother hippopotamus groaned aloud.

"But I will prepare him to overcome the black man, and to regain his
liberty," continued Glinkomok.

Keo laughed.

"Lift your right paw," commanded Glinkomok. Keo obeyed, and the
creature touched it with its long, hairy tongue. Then it held four
skinny hands over Keo's bowed head and mumbled some words in a
language unknown to man or beast or fowl or fish. After this it
spoke again in hippopotamese:

"Your skin has now become so tough that no man can hurt you. Your
strength is greater than that of ten elephants. Your foot is so
swift that you can distance the wind. Your wit is sharper than the
bulthorn. Let the man fear, but drive fear from your own breast
forever; for of all your race you are the mightiest!"

Then the terrible Glinkomok leaned over, and Keo felt its fiery
breath scorch him as it whispered some further instructions in his
ear. The next moment it glided back into its cave, followed by the
loud thanks of the three hippopotamuses, who slid into the water and
immediately began their journey home.

The mother's heart was full of joy; Uncle Nep shivered once or twice
as he remembered a glimpse he had caught of Glinkomok; but Keo was
as jolly as possible, and, not content to swim with his dignified
elders, he dived under their bodies, raced all around them and
laughed merrily every inch of the way home.

Then all the tribe held high jinks and praised the mighty Glinkomok
for befriending their queen's son. And when the day came for the
Jolly One to give himself up to the black man they all kissed him
good-by without a single fear for his safety.

Keo went away in good spirits, and they could hear his laughing
"guk-uk-uk-uk!" long after he was lost in sight in the jungle.

Gouie had counted the days and knew when to expect Keo; but he was
astonished at the monstrous size to which his captive had grown, and
congratulated himself on the wise bargain he had made. And Keo was
so fat that Gouie determined to eat him--that is, all of him he
possibly could, and the remainder of the carcass he would trade off
to his fellow villagers.

So he took a knife and tried to stick it into the hippopotamus, but
the skin was so tough the knife was blunted against it. Then he
tried other means; but Keo remained unhurt.

And now indeed the Jolly One laughed his most gleeful laugh, till
all the forest echoed the "guk-uk-uk-uk-uk!" And Gouie decided not
to kill him, since that was impossible, but to use him for a beast
of burden. He mounted upon Keo's back and commanded him to march. So
Keo trotted briskly through the village, his little eyes twinkling
with merriment.

The other blacks were delighted with Gouie's captive, and begged
permission to ride upon the Jolly One's back. So Gouie bargained
with them for bracelets and shell necklaces and little gold
ornaments, until he had acquired quite a heap of trinkets. Then a
dozen black men climbed upon Keo's back to enjoy a ride, and the one
nearest his nose cried out:

"Run, Mud-dog--run!"

And Keo ran. Swift as the wind he strode, away from the village,
through the forest and straight up the river bank. The black men
howled with fear; the Jolly One roared with laughter; and on, on, on
they rushed!

Then before them, on the opposite side of the river, appeared the
black mouth of Glinkomok's cave. Keo dashed into the water, dived to
the bottom and left the black people struggling to swim out. But
Glinkomok had heard the laughter of Keo and knew what to do. When
the Jolly One rose to the surface and blew the water from his throat
there was no black man to be seen.

Keo returned alone to the village, and Gouie asked, with surprise:

"Where are my brothers:"

"I do not know," answered Keo. "I took them far away, and they
remained where I left them."

Gouie would have asked more questions then, but another crowd of
black men impatiently waited to ride on the back of the laughing
hippopotamus. So they paid the price and climbed to their seats,
after which the foremost said:

"Run, mud-wallower--run!"

And Keo ran as before and carried them to the mouth of Glinkomok's
cave, and returned alone.

But now Gouie became anxious to know the fate of his fellows, for he
was the only black man left in his village. So he mounted the
hippopotamus and cried:

"Run, river-hog--run!"

Keo laughed his jolly "guk-uk-uk-uk!" and ran with the speed of the
wind. But this time he made straight for the river bank where his
own tribe lived, and when he reached it he waded into the river,
dived to the bottom and left Gouie floating in the middle of the
stream.

The black man began swimming toward the right bank, but there he saw
Uncle Nep and half the royal tribe waiting to stamp him into the
soft mud. So he turned toward the left bank, and there stood the
queen mother and Uncle Nikki, red-eyed and angry, waiting to tear
him with their tusks.

Then Gouie uttered loud screams of terror, and, spying the Jolly
One, who swam near him, he cried:

"Save me, Keo! Save me, and I will release you from slavery!"

"That is not enough," laughed Keo.

"I will serve you all my life!" screamed Gouie; "I will do
everything you bid me!"

"Will you return to me in a year and a day and become my captive, if
I allow you to escape?" asked Keo.

"I will! I will! I will!" cried Gouie.

"Swear it by the bones of your grandfather!" commanded Keo,
remembering that black men have no tusks to swear by.

And Gouie swore it by the bones of his grandfather.

Then Keo swam to the black one, who clambered upon his back again.
In this fashion they came to the bank, where Keo told his mother and
all the tribe of the bargain he had made with Gouie, who was to
return in a year and a day and become his slave.

Therefore the black man was permitted to depart in peace, and once
more the Jolly One lived with his own people and was happy.

When a year and a day had passed Keo began watching for the return
of Gouie; but he did not come, then or ever afterwards.

For the black man had made a bundle of his bracelets and shell
necklaces and little gold ornaments and had traveled many miles into
another country, where the ancient and royal tribe of hippopotamuses
was unknown. And he set up for a great chief, because of his riches,
and people bowed down before him.

By day he was proud and swaggering. But at night he tumbled and
tossed upon his bed and could not sleep. His conscience troubled
him.

For he had sworn by the bones of his grandfather; and his
grandfather had no bones.




THE MAGIC BON BONS


There lived in Boston a wise and ancient chemist by the name of Dr.
Daws, who dabbled somewhat in magic. There also lived in Boston a
young lady by the name of Claribel Sudds, who was possessed of much
money, little wit and an intense desire to go upon the stage.

So Claribel went to Dr. Daws and said:

"I can neither sing nor dance; I cannot recite verse nor play upon
the piano; I am no acrobat nor leaper nor high kicker; yet I wish to
go upon the stage. What shall I do?"

"Are you willing to pay for such accomplishments?" asked the wise
chemist.

"Certainly," answered Claribel, jingling her purse.

"Then come to me to-morrow at two o'clock," said he.

All that night he practiced what is known as chemical sorcery; so
that when Claribel Sudds came next day at two o'clock he showed her
a small box filled with compounds that closely resembled French
bonbons.

"This is a progressive age," said the old man, "and I flatter myself
your Uncle Daws keeps right along with the procession. Now, one of
your old-fashioned sorcerers would have made you some nasty, bitter
pills to swallow; but I have consulted your taste and convenience.
Here are some magic bonbons. If you eat this one with the lavender
color you can dance thereafter as lightly and gracefully as if you
had been trained a lifetime. After you consume the pink confection
you will sing like a nightingale. Eating the white one will enable
you to become the finest elocutionist in the land. The chocolate
piece will charm you into playing the piano better than Rubenstein,
while after eating you lemon-yellow bonbon you can easily kick six
feet above your head."

"How delightful!" exclaimed Claribel, who was truly enraptured. "You
are certainly a most clever sorcerer as well as a considerate
compounder," and she held out her hand for the box.

"Ahem!" said the wise one; "a check, please."

"Oh, yes; to be sure! How stupid of me to forget it," she returned.

He considerately retained the box in his own hand while she signed a
check for a large amount of money, after which he allowed her to
hold the box herself.

"Are you sure you have made them strong enough?" she inquired,
anxiously; "it usually takes a great deal to affect me."

"My only fear," replied Dr. Daws, "is that I have made them too
strong. For this is the first time I have ever been called upon to
prepare these wonderful confections."

"Don't worry," said Claribel; "the stronger they act the better I
shall act myself."

She went away, after saying this, but stopping in at a dry goods
store to shop, she forgot the precious box in her new interest and
left it lying on the ribbon counter.

Then little Bessie Bostwick came to the counter to buy a hair ribbon
and laid her parcels beside the box. When she went away she gathered
up the box with her other bundles and trotted off home with it.

Bessie never knew, until after she had hung her coat in the hall
closet and counted up her parcels, that she had one too many. Then
she opened it and exclaimed:

"Why, it's a box of candy! Someone must have mislaid it. But it is
too small a matter to worry about; there are only a few pieces." So
she dumped the contents of the box into a bonbon dish that stood
upon the hall table and picking out the chocolate piece--she was
fond of chocolates--ate it daintily while she examined her purchases.

These were not many, for Bessie was only twelve years old and was
not yet trusted by her parents to expend much money at the stores.
But while she tried on the hair ribbon she suddenly felt a great
desire to play upon the piano, and the desire at last became so
overpowering that she went into the parlor and opened the
instrument.

The little girl had, with infinite pains, contrived to learn two
"pieces" which she usually executed with a jerky movement of her
right hand and a left hand that forgot to keep up and so made
dreadful discords. But under the influence of the chocolate bonbon
she sat down and ran her fingers lightly over the keys producing
such exquisite harmony that she was filled with amazement at her own
performance.

That was the prelude, however. The next moment she dashed into
Beethoven's seventh sonata and played it magnificently.

Her mother, hearing the unusual burst of melody, came downstairs to
see what musical guest had arrived; but when she discovered it was
her own little daughter who was playing so divinely she had an
attack of palpitation of the heart (to which she was subject) and
sat down upon a sofa until it should pass away.

Meanwhile Bessie played one piece after another with untiring
energy. She loved music, and now found that all she need do was to
sit at the piano and listen and watch her hands twinkle over the
keyboard.

Twilight deepened in the room and Bessie's father came home and hung
up his hat and overcoat and placed his umbrella in the rack. Then he
peeped into the parlor to see who was playing.

"Great Caesar!" he exclaimed. But the mother came to him softly with
her finger on her lips and whispered: "Don't interrupt her, John.
Our child seems to be in a trance. Did you ever hear such superb
music?"

"Why, she's an infant prodigy!" gasped the astounded father. "Beats
Blind Tom all hollow! It's--it's wonderful!"

As they stood listening the senator arrived, having been invited to
dine with them that evening. And before he had taken off his coat
the Yale professor--a man of deep learning and scholarly
attainments--joined the party.

Bessie played on; and the four elders stood in a huddled but silent
and amazed group, listening to the music and waiting for the sound
of the dinner gong.

Mr. Bostwick, who was hungry, picked up the bonbon dish that lay on
the table beside him and ate the pink confection. The professor was
watching him, so Mr. Bostwick courteously held the dish toward him.
The professor ate the lemon-yellow piece and the senator reached out
his hand and took the lavender piece. He did not eat it, however,
for, chancing to remember that it might spoil his dinner, he put it
in his vest pocket. Mrs. Bostwick, still intently listening to her
precocious daughter, without thinking what she did, took the
remaining piece, which was the white one, and slowly devoured it.

The dish was now empty, and Claribel Sudds' precious bonbons had
passed from her possession forever!

Suddenly Mr. Bostwick, who was a big man, began to sing in a shrill,
tremolo soprano voice. It was not the same song Bessie was playing,
and the discord was shocking that the professor smiled, the senator
put his hands to his ears and Mrs. Bostwick cried in a horrified
voice:

"William!"

Her husband continued to sing as if endeavoring to emulate the
famous Christine Nillson, and paid no attention whatever to his wife
or his guests.

Fortunately the dinner gong now sounded, and Mrs. Bostwick dragged
Bessie from the piano and ushered her guests into the dining-room.
Mr. Bostwick followed, singing "The Last Rose of Summer" as if it
had been an encore demanded by a thousand delighted hearers.

The poor woman was in despair at witnessing her husband's
undignified actions and wondered what she might do to control him.
The professor seemed more grave than usual; the senator's face wore
an offended expression, and Bessie kept moving her fingers as if she
still wanted to play the piano.

Mrs. Bostwick managed to get them all seated, although her husband
had broken into another aria; and then the maid brought in the soup.

When she carried a plate to the professor, he cried, in an excited
voice:

"Hold it higher! Higher--I say!" And springing up he gave it a
sudden kick that sent it nearly to the ceiling, from whence the dish
descended to scatter soup over Bessie and the maid and to smash in
pieces upon the crown of the professor's bald head.

At this atrocious act the senator rose from his seat with an
exclamation of horror and glanced at his hostess.

For some time Mrs. Bostwick had been staring straight ahead, with a
dazed expression; but now, catching the senator's eye, she bowed
gracefully and began reciting "The Charge of the Light Brigade" in
forceful tones.

The senator shuddered. Such disgraceful rioting he had never seen
nor heard before in a decent private family. He felt that his
reputation was at stake, and, being the only sane person,
apparently, in the room, there was no one to whom he might appeal.

The maid had run away to cry hysterically in the kitchen; Mr.
Bostwick was singing "O Promise Me;" the professor was trying to
kick the globes off the chandelier; Mrs. Bostwick had switched her
recitation to "The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck," and Bessie had
stolen into the parlor and was pounding out the overture from the
"Flying Dutchman."

The senator was not at all sure he would not go crazy himself,
presently; so he slipped away from the turmoil, and, catching up his
had and coat in the hall, hurried from the house.

That night he sat up late writing a political speech he was to
deliver the next afternoon at Faneuil hall, but his experiences at
the Bostwicks' had so unnerved him that he could scarcely collect
his thoughts, and often he would pause and shake his head pityingly
as he remembered the strange things he had seen in that usually
respectable home.

The next day he met Mr. Bostwick in the street, but passed him by
with a stony glare of oblivion. He felt he really could not afford
to know this gentleman in the future. Mr. Bostwick was naturally
indignant at the direct snub; yet in his mind lingered a faint
memory of some quite unusual occurrences at his dinner party the
evening before, and he hardly knew whether he dared resent the
senator's treatment or not.

The political meeting was the feature of the day, for the senator's
eloquence was well known in Boston. So the big hall was crowded with
people, and in one of the front rows sat the Bostwick family, with
the learned Yale professor beside them. They all looked tired and
pale, as if they had passed a rather dissipated evening, and the
senator was rendered so nervous by seeing them that he refused to
look in their direction a second time.

While the mayor was introducing him the great man sat fidgeting in
his chair; and, happening to put his thumb and finger into his vest
pocket, he found the lavender-colored bonbon he had placed there the
evening before.

"This may clear my throat," thought the senator, and slipped the
bonbon into his mouth.

A few minutes afterwards he arose before the vast audience, which
greeted him with enthusiastic plaudits.

"My friends," began the senator, in a grave voice, "this is a most
impressive and important occasion."

Then he paused, balanced himself upon his left foot, and kicked his
right leg into the air in the way favored by ballet-dancers!

There was a hum of amazement and horror from the spectators, but the
senator appeared not to notice it. He whirled around upon the tips
of his toes, kicked right and left in a graceful manner, and
startled a bald-headed man in the front row by casting a languishing
glance in his direction.

Suddenly Claribel Sudds, who happened to be present, uttered a scream
and sprang to her feet. Pointing an accusing finger at the dancing
senator, she cried in a loud voice:

"That's the man who stole my bonbons! Seize him! Arrest him! Don't
let him escape!"

But the ushers rushed her out of the hall, thinking she had gone
suddenly insane; and the senator's friends seized him firmly and
carried him out the stage entrance to the street, where they put him
into an open carriage and instructed the driver to take him home.

The effect of the magic bonbon was still powerful enough to control
the poor senator, who stood upon the rear seat of the carriage and
danced energetically all the way home, to the delight of the crowd
of small boys who followed the carriage and the grief of the
sober-minded citizens, who shook their heads sadly and whispered
that "another good man had gone wrong."

It took the senator several months to recover from the shame and
humiliation of this escapade; and, curiously enough, he never had
the slightest idea what had induced him to act in so extraordinary a
manner. Perhaps it was fortunate the last bonbon had now been eaten,
for they might easily have caused considerably more trouble than
they did.

Of course Claribel went again to the wise chemist and signed a check
for another box of magic bonbons; but she must have taken better
care of these, for she is now a famous vaudeville actress.

* * * * *

This story should teach us the folly of condemning others for
actions that we do not understand, for we never know what may happen
to ourselves. It may also serve as a hint to be careful about
leaving parcels in public places, and, incidentally, to let other
people's packages severely alone.




THE CAPTURE OF FATHER TIME


Jim was the son of a cowboy, and lived on the broad plains of
Arizona. His father had trained him to lasso a bronco or a young
bull with perfect accuracy, and had Jim possessed the strength to
back up his skill he would have been as good a cowboy as any in all
Arizona.

When he was twelve years old he made his first visit to the east,
where Uncle Charles, his father's brother, lived. Of course Jim took
his lasso with him, for he was proud of his skill in casting it, and
wanted to show his cousins what a cowboy could do.

At first the city boys and girls were much interested in watching
Jim lasso posts and fence pickets, but they soon tired of it, and
even Jim decided it was not the right sort of sport for cities.

But one day the butcher asked Jim to ride one of his horses into the
country, to a pasture that had been engaged, and Jim eagerly
consented. He had been longing for a horseback ride, and to make it
seem like old times he took his lasso with him.

He rode through the streets demurely enough, but on reaching the
open country roads his spirits broke forth into wild jubilation,
and, urging the butcher's horse to full gallop, he dashed away in
true cowboy fashion.

Then he wanted still more liberty, and letting down the bars that
led into a big field he began riding over the meadow and throwing
his lasso at imaginary cattle, while he yelled and whooped to his
heart's content.

Suddenly, on making a long cast with his lasso, the loop caught upon
something and rested about three feet from the ground, while the
rope drew taut and nearly pulled Jim from his horse.

This was unexpected. More than that, it was wonderful; for the field
seemed bare of even a stump. Jim's eyes grew big with amazement, but
he knew he had caught something when a voice cried out:

"Here, let go! Let go, I say! Can't you see what you've done?"

No, Jim couldn't see, nor did he intend to let go until he found out
what was holding the loop of the lasso. So he resorted to an old
trick his father had taught him and, putting the butcher's horse to
a run, began riding in a circle around the spot where his lasso had
caught.

As he thus drew nearer and nearer his quarry he saw the rope coil
up, yet it looked to be coiling over nothing but air. One end of the
lasso was made fast to a ring in the saddle, and when the rope was
almost wound up and the horse began to pull away and snort with
fear, Jim dismounted. Holding the reins of the bridle in one hand,
he followed the rope, and an instant later saw an old man caught
fast in the coils of the lasso.

His head was bald and uncovered, but long white whiskers grew down
to his waist. About his body was thrown a loose robe of fine white
linen. In one hand he bore a great scythe, and beneath the other arm
he carried an hourglass.

While Jim gazed wonderingly upon him, this venerable old man spoke
in an angry voice:

"Now, then--get that rope off as fast as you can! You've brought
everything on earth to a standstill by your foolishness! Well--what
are you staring at? Don't you know who I am?"

"No," said Jim, stupidly.

"Well, I'm Time--Father Time! Now, make haste and set me free--if
you want the world to run properly."

"How did I happen to catch you?" asked Jim, without making a move to
release his captive.

"I don't know. I've never been caught before," growled Father Time.
"But I suppose it was because you were foolishly throwing your lasso
at nothing."

"I didn't see you," said Jim.

"Of course you didn't. I'm invisible to the eyes of human beings
unless they get within three feet of me, and I take care to keep
more than that distance away from them. That's why I was crossing
this field, where I supposed no one would be. And I should have been
perfectly safe had it not been for your beastly lasso. Now, then,"
he added, crossly, "are you going to get that rope off?"

"Why should I?" asked Jim.

"Because everything in the world stopped moving the moment you
caught me. I don't suppose you want to make an end of all business
and pleasure, and war and love, and misery and ambition and
everything else, do you? Not a watch has ticked since you tied me up
here like a mummy!"

Jim laughed. It really was funny to see the old man wound round and
round with coils of rope from his knees up to his chin.

"It'll do you good to rest," said the boy. "From all I've heard you
lead a rather busy life."

"Indeed I do," replied Father Time, with a sigh. "I'm due in
Kamchatka this very minute. And to think one small boy is upsetting
all my regular habits!"

"Too bad!" said Jim, with a grin. "But since the world has stopped
anyhow, it won't matter if it takes a little longer recess. As soon
as I let you go Time will fly again. Where are your wings?"

"I haven't any," answered the old man. "That is a story cooked up by
some one who never saw me. As a matter of fact, I move rather
slowly."

"I see, you take your time," remarked the boy. "What do you use that
scythe for?"

"To mow down the people," said the ancient one. "Every time I swing
my scythe some one dies."

"Then I ought to win a life-saving medal by keeping you tied up,"
said Jim. "Some folks will live this much longer."

"But they won't know it," said Father Time, with a sad smile; "so it
will do them no good. You may as well untie me at once."

"No," said Jim, with a determined air. "I may never capture you
again; so I'll hold you for awhile and see how the world wags
without you."

Then he swung the old man, bound as he was, upon the back of the
butcher's horse, and, getting into the saddle himself, started back
toward town, one hand holding his prisoner and the other guiding the
reins.

When he reached the road his eye fell on a strange tableau. A horse
and buggy stood in the middle of the road, the horse in the act of
trotting, with his head held high and two legs in the air, but
perfectly motionless. In the buggy a man and a woman were seated;
but had they been turned into stone they could not have been more
still and stiff.

"There's no Time for them!" sighed the old man. "Won't you let me go
now?"

"Not yet," replied the boy.

He rode on until he reached the city, where all the people stood in
exactly the same positions they were in when Jim lassoed Father
Time. Stopping in front of a big dry goods store, the boy hitched
his horse and went in. The clerks were measuring out goods and
showing patterns to the rows of customers in front of them, but
everyone seemed suddenly to have become a statue.

There was something very unpleasant in this scene, and a cold shiver
began to run up and down Jim's back; so he hurried out again.

On the edge of the sidewalk sat a poor, crippled beggar, holding out
his hat, and beside him stood a prosperous-looking gentleman who was
about to drop a penny into the beggar's hat. Jim knew this gentleman
to be very rich but rather stingy, so he ventured to run his hand
into the man's pocket and take out his purse, in which was a $20
gold piece. This glittering coin he put in the gentleman's fingers
instead of the penny and then restored the purse to the rich man's
pocket.

"That donation will surprise him when he comes to life," thought the
boy.

He mounted the horse again and rode up the street. As he passed the
shop of his friend, the butcher, he noticed several pieces of meat
hanging outside.

"I'm afraid that meat'll spoil," he remarked.

"It takes Time to spoil meat," answered the old man.

This struck Jim as being queer, but true.

"It seems Time meddles with everything," said he.

"Yes; you've made a prisoner of the most important personage in the
world," groaned the old man; "and you haven't enough sense to let
him go again."

Jim did not reply, and soon they came to his uncle's house, where he
again dismounted. The street was filled with teams and people, but
all were motionless. His two little cousins were just coming out the
gate on their way to school, with their books and slates underneath
their arms; so Jim had to jump over the fence to avoid knocking them
down.

In the front room sat his aunt, reading her Bible. She was just
turning a page when Time stopped. In the dining-room was his uncle,
finishing his luncheon. His mouth was open and his fork poised just
before it, while his eyes were fixed upon the newspaper folded
beside him. Jim helped himself to his uncle's pie, and while he ate
it he walked out to his prisoner.

"There's one thing I don't understand," said he.

"What's that?" asked Father Time.

"Why is it that I'm able to move around while everyone else
is--is--froze up?"

"That is because I'm your prisoner," answered the other. "You can do
anything you wish with Time now. But unless you are careful you'll
do something you will be sorry for."

Jim threw the crust of his pie at a bird that was suspended in the
air, where it had been flying when Time stopped.

"Anyway," he laughed, "I'm living longer than anyone else. No one
will ever be able to catch up with me again."

"Each life has its allotted span," said the old man. "When you have
lived your proper time my scythe will mow you down."

"I forgot your scythe," said Jim, thoughtfully.

Then a spirit of mischief came into the boy's head, for he happened
to think that the present opportunity to have fun would never occur
again. He tied Father Time to his uncle's hitching post, that he
might not escape, and then crossed the road to the corner grocery.

The grocer had scolded Jim that very morning for stepping into a
basket of turnips by accident. So the boy went to the back end of
the grocery and turned on the faucet of the molasses barrel.

"That'll make a nice mess when Time starts the molasses running all
over the floor," said Jim, with a laugh.

A little further down the street was a barber shop, and sitting in
the barber's chair Jim saw the man that all the boys declared was
the "meanest man in town." He certainly did not like the boys and
the boys knew it. The barber was in the act of shampooing this
person when Time was captured. Jim ran to the drug store, and,
getting a bottle of mucilage, he returned and poured it over the
ruffled hair of the unpopular citizen.

"That'll probably surprise him when he wakes up," thought Jim.

Near by was the schoolhouse. Jim entered it and found that only a
few of the pupils were assembled. But the teacher sat at his desk,
stern and frowning as usual.

Taking a piece of chalk, Jim marked upon the blackboard in big
letters the following words:

"Every scholar is requested to yell the minute he enters the room.
He will also please throw his books at the teacher's head. Signed,
Prof. Sharpe."

"That ought to raise a nice rumpus," murmured the mischiefmaker, as
he walked away.

On the corner stood Policeman Mulligan, talking with old Miss
Scrapple, the worst gossip in town, who always delighted in saying
something disagreeable about her neighbors. Jim thought this
opportunity was too good to lose. So he took off the policeman's cap
and brass-buttoned coat and put them on Miss Scrapple, while the
lady's feathered and ribboned hat he placed jauntily upon the
policeman's head.

The effect was so comical that the boy laughed aloud, and as a good
many people were standing near the corner Jim decided that Miss
Scrapple and Officer Mulligan would create a sensation when Time
started upon his travels.

Then the young cowboy remembered his prisoner, and, walking back to
the hitching post, he came within three feet of it and saw Father
Time still standing patiently within the toils of the lasso. He
looked angry and annoyed, however, and growled out:

"Well, when do you intend to release me?"

"I've been thinking about that ugly scythe of yours," said Jim.

"What about it?" asked Father Time.

"Perhaps if I let you go you'll swing it at me the first thing, to
be revenged," replied the boy.

Father Time gave him a severe look, but said:

"I've known boys for thousands of years, and of course I know
they're mischievous and reckless. But I like boys, because they grow
up to be men and people my world. Now, if a man had caught me by
accident, as you did, I could have scared him into letting me go
instantly; but boys are harder to scare. I don't know as I blame
you. I was a boy myself, long ago, when the world was new. But
surely you've had enough fun with me by this time, and now I hope
you'll show the respect that is due to old age. Let me go, and in
return I will promise to forget all about my capture. The incident
won't do much harm, anyway, for no one will ever know that Time has
halted the last three hours or so."

"All right," said Jim, cheerfully, "since you've promised not to mow
me down, I'll let you go." But he had a notion some people in the
town would suspect Time had stopped when they returned to life.

He carefully unwound the rope from the old man, who, when he was
free, at once shouldered his scythe, rearranged his white robe and
nodded farewell.

The next moment he had disappeared, and with a rustle and rumble and
roar of activity the world came to life again and jogged along as it
always had before.

Jim wound up his lasso, mounted the butcher's horse and rode slowly
down the street.

Loud screams came from the corner, where a great crowd of people
quickly assembled. From his seat on the horse Jim saw Miss Scrapple,
attired in the policeman's uniform, angrily shaking her fists in
Mulligan's face, while the officer was furiously stamping upon the
lady's hat, which he had torn from his own head amidst the jeers of
the crowd.

As he rode past the schoolhouse he heard a tremendous chorus of
yells, and knew Prof. Sharpe was having a hard time to quell the
riot caused by the sign on the blackboard.

Through the window of the barber shop he saw the "mean man"
frantically belaboring the barber with a hair brush, while his hair
stood up stiff as bayonets in all directions. And the grocer ran out
of his door and yelled "Fire!" while his shoes left a track of
molasses wherever he stepped.

Jim's heart was filled with joy. He was fairly reveling in the
excitement he had caused when some one caught his leg and pulled him
from the horse.

"What're ye doin' hear, ye rascal?" cried the butcher, angrily;
"didn't ye promise to put that beast inter Plympton's pasture? An'
now I find ye ridin' the poor nag around like a gentleman o'
leisure!"

"That's a fact," said Jim, with surprise; "I clean forgot about the
horse!"

* * * * *

This story should teach us the supreme importance of Time and the
folly of trying to stop it. For should you succeed, as Jim did, in
bringing Time to a standstill, the world would soon become a dreary
place and life decidedly unpleasant.




THE WONDERFUL PUMP


Not many years ago there lived on a stony, barren New England farm a
man and his wife. They were sober, honest people, working hard from
early morning until dark to enable them to secure a scanty living
from their poor land.

Their house, a small, one-storied building, stood upon the side of a
steep hill, and the stones lay so thickly about it that scarce
anything green could grow from the ground. At the foot of the hill,
a quarter of a mile from the house by the winding path, was a small
brook, and the woman was obliged to go there for water and to carry
it up the hill to the house. This was a tedious task, and with the
other hard work that fell to her share had made her gaunt and bent
and lean.

Yet she never complained, but meekly and faithfully performed her
duties, doing the housework, carrying the water and helping her
husband hoe the scanty crop that grew upon the best part of their
land.

One day, as she walked down the path to the brook, her big shoes
scattering the pebbles right and left, she noticed a large beetle
lying upon its back and struggling hard with its little legs to turn
over, that its feet might again touch the ground. But this it could
not accomplish; so the woman, who had a kind heart, reached down and
gently turned the beetle with her finger. At once it scampered from
the path and she went on to the brook.

The next day, as she came for water, she was surprised to see the
beetle again lying upon its back and struggling helplessly to turn.
Once more the woman stopped and set him upon his feet; and then, as
she stooped over the tiny creature, she heard a small voice say:

"Oh, thank you! Thank you so much for saving me!"

Half frightened at hearing a beetle speak in her own language, the
woman started back and exclaimed:

"La sakes! Surely you can't talk like humans!" Then, recovering from
her alarm, she again bent over the beetle, who answered her:

"Why shouldn't I talk, if I have anything to say?

"'Cause you're a bug," replied the woman.

"That is true; and you saved my life--saved me from my enemies, the
sparrows. And this is the second time you have come to my
assistance, so I owe you a debt of gratitude. Bugs value their lives
as much as human beings, and I am a more important creature than
you, in your ignorance, may suppose. But, tell me, why do you come
each day to the brook?"

"For water," she answered, staring stupidly down at the talking
beetle.

"Isn't it hard work?" the creature inquired.

"Yes; but there's no water on the hill," said she.

"Then dig a well and put a pump in it," replied the beetle.

She shook her head.

"My man tried it once; but there was no water," she said, sadly.

"Try it again," commanded the beetle; "and in return for your
kindness to me I will make this promise: if you do not get water
from the well you will get that which is more precious to you. I
must go now. Do not forget. Dig a well."

And then, without pausing to say good-by, it ran swiftly away and
was lost among the stones.

The woman returned to the house much perplexed by what the beetle
had said, and when her husband came in from his work she told him
the whole story.

The poor man thought deeply for a time, and then declared:

"Wife, there may be truth in what the bug told you. There must be
magic in the world yet, if a beetle can speak; and if there is such
a thing as magic we may get water from the well. The pump I bought
to use in the well which proved to be dry is now lying in the barn,
and the only expense in following the talking bug's advice will be
the labor of digging the hole. Labor I am used to; so I will dig the
well."

Next day he set about it, and dug so far down in the ground that he
could hardly reach the top to climb out again; but not a drop of
water was found.

"Perhaps you did not dig deep enough," his wife said, when he told
her of his failure.

So the following day he made a long ladder, which he put into the
hole; and then he dug, and dug, and dug, until the top of the ladder
barely reached the top of the hole. But still there was no water.

When the woman next went to the brook with her pail she saw the
beetle sitting upon a stone beside her path. So she stopped and
said:

"My husband has dug the well; but there is no water."

"Did he put the pump in the well?" asked the beetle.

"No," she answered.

"Then do as I commanded; put in the pump, and if you do not get
water I promise you something still more precious."

Saying which, the beetle swiftly slid from the stone and
disappeared. The woman went back to the house and told her husband
what the bug had said.

"Well," replied the simple fellow, "there can be no harm in trying."

So he got the pump from the barn and placed it in the well, and then
he took hold of the handle and began to pump, while his wife stood
by to watch what would happen.

No water came, but after a few moments a gold piece dropped from the
spout of the pump, and then another, and another, until several
handfuls of gold lay in a little heap upon the ground.

The man stopped pumping then and ran to help his wife gather the
gold pieces into her apron; but their hands trembled so greatly
through excitement and joy that they could scarcely pick up the
sparkling coins.

At last she gathered them close to her bosom and together they ran
to the house, where they emptied the precious gold upon the table
and counted the pieces.

All were stamped with the design of the United States mint and were
worth five dollars each. Some were worn and somewhat discolored from
use, while others seemed bright and new, as if they had not been
much handled. When the value of the pieces was added together they
were found to be worth three hundred dollars.

Suddenly the woman spoke.

"Husband, the beetle said truly when he declared we should get
something more precious than water from the well. But run at once
and take away the handle from the pump, lest anyone should pass this
way and discover our secret."

So the man ran to the pump and removed the handle, which he carried
to the house and hid underneath the bed.

They hardly slept a wink that night, lying awake to think of their
good fortune and what they should do with their store of yellow
gold. In all their former lives they had never possessed more than a
few dollars at a time, and now the cracked teapot was nearly full of
gold coins.

The following day was Sunday, and they arose early and ran to see if
their treasure was safe. There it lay, heaped snugly within the
teapot, and they were so willing to feast their eyes upon it that it
was long before the man could leave it to build the fire or the
woman to cook the breakfast.

While they ate their simple meal the woman said:

"We will go to church to-day and return thanks for the riches that
have come to us so suddenly. And I will give the pastor one of the
gold pieces."

"It is well enough to go to church," replied her husband, "and also
to return thanks. But in the night I decided how we will spend all
our money; so there will be none left for the pastor."

"We can pump more," said the woman.

"Perhaps; and perhaps not," he answered, cautiously. "What we have
we can depend upon, but whether or not there be more in the well I
cannot say."

"Then go and find out," she returned, "for I am anxious to give
something to the pastor, who is a poor man and deserving."

So the man got the pump handle from beneath the bed, and, going to
the pump, fitted it in place. Then he set a large wooden bucket
under the spout and began to pump. To their joy the gold pieces soon
began flowing into the pail, and, seeing it about to run over the
brim, the woman brought another pail. But now the stream suddenly
stopped, and the man said, cheerfully:

"That is enough for to-day, good wife! We have added greatly to our
treasure, and the parson shall have his gold piece. Indeed, I think
I shall also put a coin into the contribution box."

Then, because the teapot would hold no more gold, the farmer emptied
the pail into the wood-box, covering the money with dried leaves and
twigs, that no one might suspect what lay underneath.

Afterward they dressed themselves in their best clothing and started
for the church, each taking a bright gold piece from the teapot as a
gift to the pastor.

Over the hill and down into the valley beyond they walked, feeling
so gay and light-hearted that they did not mind the distance at all.
At last they came to the little country church and entered just as
the services began.

Being proud of their wealth and of the gifts they had brought for
the pastor, they could scarcely wait for the moment when the deacon
passed the contribution box. But at last the time came, and the
farmer held his hand high over the box and dropped the gold piece so
that all the congregation could see what he had given. The woman did
likewise, feeling important and happy at being able to give the good
parson so much.

The parson, watching from the pulpit, saw the gold drop into the
box, and could hardly believe that his eyes did not deceive him.
However, when the box was laid upon his desk there were the two gold
pieces, and he was so surprised that he nearly forgot his sermon.

When the people were leaving the church at the close of the services
the good man stopped the farmer and his wife and asked:

"Where did you get so much gold?"

The woman gladly told him how she had rescued the beetle, and how,
in return, they had been rewarded with the wonderful pump. The
pastor listened to it all gravely, and when the story was finished
he said:

"According to tradition strange things happened in this world ages
ago, and now I find that strange things may also happen to-day. For
by your tale you have found a beetle that can speak and also has
power to bestow upon you great wealth." Then he looked carefully at
the gold pieces and continued: "Either this money is fairy gold or
it is genuine metal, stamped at the mint of the United States
government. If it is fairy gold it will disappear within 24 hours,
and will therefore do no one any good. If it is real money, then
your beetle must have robbed some one of the gold and placed it in
your well. For all money belongs to some one, and if you have not
earned it honestly, but have come by it in the mysterious way you
mention, it was surely taken from the persons who owned it, without
their consent. Where else could real money come from?"

The farmer and his wife were confused by this statement and looked
guiltily at each other, for they were honest people and wished to
wrong no one.

"Then you think the beetle stole the money?" asked the woman.

"By his magic powers he probably took it from its rightful owners.
Even bugs which can speak have no consciences and cannot tell the
difference between right and wrong. With a desire to reward you for
your kindness the beetle took from its lawful possessors the money
you pumped from the well."

"Perhaps it really is fairy gold," suggested the man. "If so, we
must go to the town and spend the money before it disappears."

"That would be wrong," answered the pastor; "for then the merchants
would have neither money nor goods. To give them fairy gold would be
to rob them."

"What, then, shall we do?" asked the poor woman, wringing her hands
with grief and disappointment.

"Go home and wait until to-morrow. If the gold is then in your
possession it is real money and not fairy gold. But if it is real
money you must try to restore it to its rightful owners. Take, also,
these pieces which you have given me, for I cannot accept gold that
is not honestly come by."

Sadly the poor people returned to their home, being greatly
disturbed by what they had heard. Another sleepless night was
passed, and on Monday morning they arose at daylight and ran to see
if the gold was still visible.

"It is real money, after all!" cried the man; "for not a single
piece has disappeared."

When the woman went to the brook that day she looked for the beetle,
and, sure enough, there he sat upon the flat stone.

"Are you happy now?" asked the beetle, as the woman paused before
him.

"We are very unhappy," she answered; "for, although you have given
us much gold, our good parson says it surely belongs to some one
else, and was stolen by you to reward us."

"Your parson may be a good man," returned the beetle, with some
indignation, "but he certainly is not overwise. Nevertheless, if you
do not want the gold I can take it from you as easily as I gave it."

"But we do want it!" cried the woman, fearfully. "That is," she
added, "if it is honestly come by."

"It is not stolen," replied the beetle, sulkily, "and now belongs to
no one but yourselves. When you saved my life I thought how I might
reward you; and, knowing you to be poor, I decided gold would make
you happier than anything else.

"You must know," he continued, "that although I appear so small and
insignificant, I am really king of all the insects, and my people
obey my slightest wish. Living, as they do, close to the ground, the
insects often come across gold and other pieces of money which have
been lost by men and have fallen into cracks or crevasses or become
covered with earth or hidden by grass or weeds. Whenever my people
find money in this way they report the fact to me; but I have always
let it lie, because it could be of no possible use to an insect.

"However, when I decided to give you gold I knew just where to
obtain it without robbing any of your fellow creatures. Thousands of
insects were at once sent by me in every direction to bring the
pieces of lost gold to his hill. It cost my people several days of
hard labor, as you may suppose; but by the time your husband had
finished the well the gold began to arrive from all parts of the
country, and during the night my subjects dumped it all into the
well. So you may use it with a clear conscience, knowing that you
wrong no one."

This explanation delighted the woman, and when she returned to the
house and reported to her husband what the beetle had said he also
was overjoyed.

So they at once took a number of the gold pieces and went to the
town to purchase provisions and clothing and many things of which
they had long stood in need; but so proud were they of their newly
acquired wealth that they took no pains to conceal it. They wanted
everyone to know they had money, and so it was no wonder that when
some of the wicked men in the village saw the gold they longed to
possess it themselves.

"If they spend this money so freely," whispered one to another,
"there must be a great store of gold at their home."

"That is true," was the answer. "Let us hasten there before they
return and ransack the house."

So they left the village and hurried away to the farm on the hill,
where they broke down the door and turned everything topsy turvy
until they had discovered the gold in the wood-box and the teapot.
It did not take them long to make this into bundles, which they
slung upon their backs and carried off, and it was probably because
they were in a great hurry that they did not stop to put the house
in order again.

Presently the good woman and her husband came up the hill from the
village with their arms full of bundles and followed by a crowd of
small boys who had been hired to help carry the purchases. Then
followed others, youngsters and country louts, attracted by the
wealth and prodigality of the pair, who, from simple curiosity,
trailed along behind like the tail of a comet and helped swell the
concourse into a triumphal procession. Last of all came Guggins, the
shopkeeper, carrying with much tenderness a new silk dress which was
to be paid for when they reached the house, all the money they had
taken to the village having been lavishly expended.

The farmer, who had formerly been a modest man, was now so swelled
with pride that he tipped the rim of his hat over his left ear and
smoked a big cigar that was fast making him ill. His wife strutted
along beside him like a peacock, enjoying to the full the homage and
respect her wealth had won from those who formerly deigned not to
notice her, and glancing from time to time at the admiring
procession in the rear.

But, alas for their new-born pride! when they reached the farmhouse
they found the door broken in, the furniture strewn in all
directions and their treasure stolen to the very last gold piece.

The crowd grinned and made slighting remarks of a personal nature,
and Guggins, the shopkeeper, demanded in a loud voice the money for
the silk dress he had brought.

Then the woman whispered to her husband to run and pump some more
gold while she kept the crowd quiet, and he obeyed quickly. But
after a few moments he returned with a white face to tell her the
pump was dry, and not a gold piece could now be coaxed from the
spout.

The procession marched back to the village laughing and jeering at
the farmer and his wife, who had pretended to be so rich; and some
of the boys were naughty enough to throw stones at the house from
the top of the hill. Mr. Guggins carried away his dress after
severely scolding the woman for deceiving him, and when the couple
at last found themselves alone their pride had turned to humiliation
and their joy to bitter grief.

Just before sundown the woman dried her eyes and, having resumed her
ordinary attire, went to the brook for water. When she came to the
flat stone she saw the King Beetle sitting upon it.

"The well is dry!" she cried out, angrily.

"Yes," answered the beetle, calmly, "you have pumped from it all the
gold my people could find."

"But we are now ruined," said the woman, sitting down in the path
beginning to weep; "for robbers have stolen from us every penny we
possessed."

"I'm sorry," returned the beetle; "but it is your own fault. Had you
not made so great a show of your wealth no one would have suspected
you possessed a treasure, or thought to rob you. As it is, you have
merely lost the gold which others have lost before you. It will
probably be lost many times more before the world comes to an end."

"But what are we to do now?" she asked.

"What did you do before I gave you the money?"

"We worked from morning 'til night," said she.

"Then work still remains for you," remarked the beetle, composedly;
"no one will ever try to rob you of that, you may be sure!" And he
slid from the stone and disappeared for the last time.

* * * * *

This story should teach us to accept good fortune with humble hearts
and to use it with moderation. For, had the farmer and his wife
resisted the temptation to display their wealth ostentatiously, they
might have retained it to this very day.




THE DUMMY THAT LIVED


In all Fairyland there is no more mischievous a person than
Tanko-Mankie the Yellow Ryl. He flew through the city one
afternoon--quite invisible to moral eyes, but seeing everything
himself--and noticed a figure of a wax lady standing behind the big
plate glass window of Mr. Floman's department store.

The wax lady was beautifully dressed, and extended in her stiff left
hand was a card bearing the words:

    "RARE BARGIN!
    This Stylish Costume
    (Imported from Paris)
    Former Price, $20,
    REDUCED TO ONLY $19.98."

This impressive announcement had drawn before the window a crowd of
women shoppers, who stood looking at the wax lady with critical
eyes.

Tanko-Mankie laughed to himself the low, gurgling little laugh that
always means mischief. Then he flew close to the wax figure and
breathed twice upon its forehead.

From that instant the dummy began to live, but so dazed and
astonished was she at the unexpected sensation that she continued to
stand stupidly staring at the women outside and holding out the
placard as before.

The ryl laughed again and flew away. Anyone but Tanko-Mankie would
have remained to help the wax lady out of the troubles that were
sure to overtake her; but this naughty elf thought it rare fun to
turn the inexperienced lady loose in a cold and heartless world and
leave her to shift for herself.

Fortunately it was almost six o'clock when the dummy first realized
that she was alive, and before she had collected her new thoughts
and decided what to do a man came around and drew down all the
window shades, shutting off the view from the curious shoppers.

Then the clerks and cashiers and floorwalkers and cash girls went
home and the store was closed for the night, although the sweepers
and scrubbers remained to clean the floors for the following day.

The window inhabited by the wax lady was boxed in, like a little
room, one small door being left at the side for the window-trimmer
to creep in and out of. So the scrubbers never noticed that the
dummy, when left to herself, dropped the placard to the floor and
sat down upon a pile of silks to wonder who she was, where she was,
and how she happened to be alive.

For you must consider, dear reader, that in spite of her size and
her rich costume, in spite of her pink cheeks and fluffy yellow
hair, this lady was very young--no older, in reality, than a baby
born but half an hour. All she knew of the world was contained in
the glimpse she had secured of the busy street facing her window;
all she knew of people lay in the actions of the group of women
which had stood before her on the other side of the window pane and
criticised the fit of her dress or remarked upon its stylish
appearance.

So she had little enough to think about, and her thoughts moved
somewhat slowly; yet one thing she really decided upon, and that was
not to remain in the window and be insolently stared at by a lot of
women who were not nearly so handsome or well dressed as herself.

By the time she reached this important conclusion, it was after
midnight; but dim lights were burning in the big, deserted store, so
she crept through the door of her window and walked down the long
aisles, pausing now and then to look with much curiosity at the
wealth of finery confronting her on every side.

When she came to the glass cases filled with trimmed hats she
remembered having seen upon the heads of the women in the street
similar creations. So she selected one that suited her fancy and
placed it carefully upon her yellow locks. I won't attempt to
explain what instinct it was that made her glance into a near-by
mirror to see if the hat was straight, but this she certainly did.
It didn't correspond with her dress very well, but the poor thing
was too young to have much taste in matching colors.

When she reached the glove counter she remembered that gloves were
also worn by the women she had seen. She took a pair from the case
and tried to fit them upon her stiff, wax-coated fingers; but the
gloves were too small and ripped in the seams. Then she tried
another pair, and several others, as well; but hours passed before
she finally succeeded in getting her hands covered with a pair of
pea-green kids.

Next she selected a parasol from a large and varied assortment in
the rear of the store. Not that she had any idea what it was used
for; but other ladies carried such things, so she also would have
one.

When she again examined herself critically in the mirror she decided
her outfit was now complete, and to her inexperienced eyes there was
no perceptible difference between her and the women who had stood
outside the window. Whereupon she tried to leave the store, but
found every door fast locked.

The wax lady was in no hurry. She inherited patience from her
previous existence. Just to be alive and to wear beautiful clothes
was sufficient enjoyment for her at present. So she sat down upon a
stool and waited quietly until daylight.

When the janitor unlocked the door in the morning the wax lady swept
past him and walked with stiff but stately strides down the street.
The poor fellow was so completely whuckered at seeing the well-known
wax lady leave her window and march away from the store that he fell
over in a heap and only saved himself from fainting by striking his
funny bone against the doorstep. When he recovered his wits she had
turned the corner and disappeared.

The wax lady's immature mind had reasoned that, since she had come
to life, her evident duty was to mix with the world and do whatever
other folks did. She could not realize how different she was from
people of flesh and blood; nor did she know she was the first dummy
that had ever lived, or that she owed her unique experience to
Tanko-Mankie's love of mischief. So ignorance gave her a confidence
in herself that she was not justly entitled to.

It was yet early in the day, and the few people she met were
hurrying along the streets. Many of them turned into restaurants and
eating houses, and following their example the wax lady also entered
one and sat upon a stool before a lunch counter.

"Coffee 'n' rolls!" said a shop girl on the next stool.

"Coffee 'n' rolls!" repeated the dummy, and soon the waiter placed
them before her. Of course she had no appetite, as her constitution,
being mostly wood, did not require food; but she watched the shop
girl, and saw her put the coffee to her mouth and drink it.
Therefore the wax lady did the same, and the next instant was
surprised to feel the hot liquid trickling out between her wooden
ribs. The coffee also blistered her wax lips, and so disagreeable
was the experience that she arose and left the restaurant, paying no
attention to the demands of the waiter for "20 cents, mum." Not that
she intended to defraud him, but the poor creature had no idea what
he meant by "20 cents, mum."

As she came out she met the window trimmer at Floman's store. The
man was rather near-sighted, but seeing something familiar in the
lady's features he politely raised his hat. The wax lady also raised
her hat, thinking it the proper thing to do, and the man hurried
away with a horrified face.

Then a woman touched her arm and said:

"Beg pardon, ma'am; but there's a price-mark hanging on your dress
behind."

"Yes, I know," replied the wax lady, stiffly; "it was originally
$20, but it's been reduced to $19.98."

The woman looked surprised at such indifference and walked on. Some
carriages were standing at the edge of the sidewalk, and seeing the
dummy hesitate a driver approached her and touched his cap.

"Cab, ma'am?" he asked.

"No," said she, misunderstanding him; "I'm wax."

"Oh!" he exclaimed, and looked after her wonderingly.

"Here's yer mornin' paper!" yelled a newsboy.

"Mine, did you say?" she asked.

"Sure! Chronicle, 'Quirer, R'public 'n' 'Spatch! Wot'll ye 'ave?"

"What are they for?" inquired the wax lady, simply.

"W'y, ter read, o' course. All the news, you know."

She shook her head and glanced at a paper.

"It looks all speckled and mixed up," she said. "I'm afraid I can't
read."

"Ever ben to school?" asked the boy, becoming interested.

"No; what's school?" she inquired.

The boy gave her an indignant look.

"Say!" he cried, "ye'r just a dummy, that's wot ye are!" and ran
away to seek a more promising customer.

"I wonder that he means," thought the poor lady. "Am I really
different in some way from all the others? I look like them,
certainly; and I try to act like them; yet that boy called me a
dummy and seemed to think I acted queerly."

This idea worried her a little, but she walked on to the corner,
where she noticed a street car stop to let some people on. The wax
lady, still determined to do as others did, also boarded the car and
sat down quietly in a corner.

After riding a few blocks the conductor approached her and said:

"Fare, please!"

"What's that?" she inquired, innocently.

"Your fare!" said the man, impatiently.

She stared at him stupidly, trying to think what he meant.

"Come, come!" growled the conductor, "either pay up or get off!"

Still she did not understand, and he grabbed her rudely by the arm
and lifted her to her feet. But when his hand came in contact with
the hard wood of which her arm was made the fellow was filled with
surprise. He stooped down and peered into her face, and, seeing it
was wax instead of flesh, he gave a yell of fear and jumped from the
car, running as if he had seen a ghost.

At this the other passengers also yelled and sprang from the car,
fearing a collision; and the motorman, knowing something was wrong,
followed suit. The wax lady, seeing the others run, jumped from the
car last of all, and stepped in front of another car coming at full
speed from the opposite direction.

She heard cries of fear and of warning on all sides, but before she
understood her danger she was knocked down and dragged for half a
block.

When the car was brought to a stop a policeman reached down and
pulled her from under the wheels. Her dress was badly torn and
soiled. Her left ear was entirely gone, and the left side of her
head was caved in; but she quickly scrambled to her feet and asked
for her hat. This a gentleman had already picked up, and when the
policeman handed it to her and noticed the great hole in her head
and the hollow place it disclosed, the poor fellow trembled so
frightfully that his knees actually knocked together.

"Why--why, ma'am, you're killed!" he gasped.

"What does it mean to be killed?" asked the wax lady.

The policeman shuddered and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead.

"You're it!" he answered, with a groan.

The crowd that had collected were looking upon the lady wonderingly,
and a middle-aged gentleman now exclaimed:

"Why, she's wax!"

"Wax!" echoed the policeman.

"Certainly. She's one of those dummies they put in the windows,"
declared the middle-aged man.

The people who had collected shouted: "You're right!" "That's what
she is!" "She's a dummy!"

"Are you?" inquired the policeman, sternly.

The wax lady did not reply. She began to fear she was getting into
trouble, and the staring crowd seemed to embarrass her.

Suddenly a bootblack attempted to solve the problem by saying: "You
guys is all wrong! Can a dummy talk? Can a dummy walk? Can a dummy
live?"

"Hush!" murmured the policeman. "Look here!" and he pointed to the
hold in the lady's head. The newsboy looked, turned pale and
whistled to keep himself from shivering.

A second policeman now arrived, and after a brief conference it was
decided to take the strange creature to headquarters. So they called
a hurry-up wagon, and the damaged wax lady was helped inside and
driven to the police station. There the policeman locked her in a
cell and hastened to tell Inspector Mugg their wonderful story.

Inspector Mugg had just eaten a poor breakfast, and was not in a
pleasant mood; so he roared and stormed at the unlucky policemen,
saying they were themselves dummies to bring such a fairy tale to a
man of sense. He also hinted that they had been guilty of
intemperance.

The policemen tried to explain, but Inspector Mugg would not listen;
and while they were still disputing in rushed Mr. Floman, the owner
of the department store.

"I want a dozen detectives, at once, inspector!" he cried.

"What for?" demanded Mugg.

"One of the wax ladies has escaped from my store and eloped with a
$19.98 costume, a $4.23 hat, a $2.19 parasol and a 76-cent pair of
gloves, and I want her arrested!"

While he paused for breath the inspector glared at him in amazement.

"Is everybody going crazy at the same time?" he inquired,
sarcastically. "How could a wax dummy run away?"

"I don't know; but she did. When my janitor opened the door this
morning he saw her run out."

"Why didn't he stop her?" asked Mugg.

"He was too frightened. But she's stolen my property, your honor,
and I want her arrested!" declared the storekeeper.

The inspector thought for a moment.

"You wouldn't be able to prosecute her," he said, "for there's no
law against dummies stealing."

Mr. Floman sighed bitterly.

"Am I to lose that $19.98 costume and the $4.25 hat and--"

"By no means," interrupted Inspector Mugg. "The police of this city
are ever prompt to act in defense of our worthy citizens. We have
already arrested the wax lady, and she is locked up in cell No. 16.
You may go there and recover your property, if you wish, but before
you prosecute her for stealing you'd better hunt up a law that
applies to dummies."

"All I want," said Mr. Floman, "is that $19.98 costume and--"

"Come along!" interrupted the policeman. "I'll take you to the
cell."

But when they entered No. 16 they found only a lifeless dummy lying
prone upon the floor. Its wax was cracked and blistered, its head
was badly damaged, and the bargain costume was dusty, soiled and
much bedraggled. For the mischief-loving Tanko-Mankie had flown by
and breathed once more upon the poor wax lady, and in that instant
her brief life ended.

"It's just as I thought," said Inspector Mugg, leaning back in his
chair contentedly. "I knew all the time the thing was a fake. It
seems sometimes as though the whole world would go crazy if there
wasn't some level-headed man around to bring 'em to their senses.
Dummies are wood an' wax, an' that's all there is of 'em."

"That may be the rule," whispered the policeman to himself, "but
this one were a dummy as lived!"




THE KING OF THE POLAR BEARS


The King of the Polar Bears lived among the icebergs in the far
north country. He was old and monstrous big; he was wise and
friendly to all who knew him. His body was thickly covered with
long, white hair that glistened like silver under the rays of the
midnight sun. His claws were strong and sharp, that he might walk
safely over the smooth ice or grasp and tear the fishes and seals
upon which he fed.

The seals were afraid when he drew near, and tried to avoid him; but
the gulls, both white and gray, loved him because he left the
remnants of his feasts for them to devour.

Often his subjects, the polar bears, came to him for advice when ill
or in trouble; but they wisely kept away from his hunting grounds,
lest they might interfere with his sport and arouse his anger.

The wolves, who sometimes came as far north as the icebergs,
whispered among themselves that the King of the Polar Bears was
either a magician or under the protection of a powerful fairy. For
no earthly thing seemed able to harm him; he never failed to secure
plenty of food, and he grew bigger and stronger day by day and year
by year.

Yet the time came when this monarch of the north met man, and his
wisdom failed him.

He came out of his cave among the icebergs one day and saw a boat
moving through the strip of water which had been uncovered by the
shifting of the summer ice. In the boat were men.

The great bear had never seen such creatures before, and therefore
advanced toward the boat, sniffing the strange scent with aroused
curiosity and wondering whether he might take them for friends or
foes, food or carrion.

When the king came near the water's edge a man stood up in the boat
and with a queer instrument made a loud "bang!" The polar bear felt
a shock; his brain became numb; his thoughts deserted him; his great
limbs shook and gave way beneath him and his body fell heavily upon
the hard ice.

That was all he remembered for a time.

When he awoke he was smarting with pain on every inch of his huge
bulk, for the men had cut away his hide with its glorious white hair
and carried it with them to a distant ship.

Above him circled thousands of his friends the gulls, wondering if
their benefactor were really dead and it was proper to eat him. But
when they saw him raise his head and groan and tremble they knew he
still lived, and one of them said to his comrades:

"The wolves were right. The king is a great magician, for even men
cannot kill him. But he suffers for lack of covering. Let us repay
his kindness to us by each giving him as many feathers as we can
spare."

This idea pleased the gulls. One after another they plucked with
their beaks the softest feathers from under their wings, and, flying
down, dropped then gently upon the body of the King of the Polar
Bears.

Then they called to him in a chorus:

"Courage, friend! Our feathers are as soft and beautiful as your own
shaggy hair. They will guard you from the cold winds and warm you
while you sleep. Have courage, then, and live!"

And the King of the Polar Bears had courage to bear his pain and
lived and was strong again.

The feathers grew as they had grown upon the bodies of the birds and
covered him as his own hair had done. Mostly they were pure white in
color, but some from the gray gulls gave his majesty a slight
mottled appearance.

The rest of that summer and all through the six months of night the
king left his icy cavern only to fish or catch seals for food. He
felt no shame at his feathery covering, but it was still strange to
him, and he avoided meeting any of his brother bears.

During this period of retirement he thought much of the men who had
harmed him, and remembered the way they had made the great "bang!"
And he decided it was best to keep away from such fierce creatures.
Thus he added to his store of wisdom.

When the moon fell away from the sky and the sun came to make the
icebergs glitter with the gorgeous tintings of the rainbow, two of
the polar bears arrived at the king's cavern to ask his advice about
the hunting season. But when they saw his great body covered with
feathers instead of hair they began to laugh, and one said:

"Our mighty king has become a bird! Who ever before heard of a
feathered polar bear?"

Then the king gave way to wrath. He advanced upon them with deep
growls and stately tread and with one blow of his monstrous paw
stretched the mocker lifeless at his feet.

The other ran away to his fellows and carried the news of the king's
strange appearance. The result was a meeting of all the polar bears
upon a broad field of ice, where they talked gravely of the
remarkable change that had come upon their monarch.

"He is, in reality, no longer a bear," said one; "nor can he justly
be called a bird. But he is half bird and half bear, and so unfitted
to remain our king."

"Then who shall take his place?" asked another.

"He who can fight the bird-bear and overcome him," answered an aged
member of the group. "Only the strongest is fit to rule our race."

There was silence for a time, but at length a great bear moved to
the front and said:

"I will fight him; I--Woof--the strongest of our race! And I will be
King of the Polar Bears."

The others nodded assent, and dispatched a messenger to the king to
say he must fight the great Woof and master him or resign his
sovereignty.

"For a bear with feathers," added the messenger, "is no bear at all,
and the king we obey must resemble the rest of us."

"I wear feathers because it pleases me," growled the king. "Am I not
a great magician? But I will fight, nevertheless, and if Woof
masters me he shall be king in my stead."

Then he visited his friends, the gulls, who were even then feasting
upon the dead bear, and told them of the coming battle.

"I shall conquer," he said, proudly. "Yet my people are in the
right, for only a hairy one like themselves can hope to command
their obedience."

The queen gull said:

"I met an eagle yesterday, which had made its escape from a big city
of men. And the eagle told me he had seen a monstrous polar bear
skin thrown over the back of a carriage that rolled along the
street. That skin must have been yours, oh king, and if you wish I
will sent an hundred of my gulls to the city to bring it back to
you."

"Let them go!" said the king, gruffly. And the hundred gulls were
soon flying rapidly southward.

For three days they flew straight as an arrow, until they came to
scattered houses, to villages, and to cities. Then their search
began.

The gulls were brave, and cunning, and wise. Upon the fourth day
they reached the great metropolis, and hovered over the streets
until a carriage rolled along with a great white bear robe thrown
over the back seat. Then the birds swooped down--the whole hundred
of them--and seizing the skin in their beaks flew quickly away.

They were late. The king's great battle was upon the seventh day,
and they must fly swiftly to reach the Polar regions by that time.

Meanwhile the bird-bear was preparing for his fight. He sharpened
his claws in the small crevasses of the ice. He caught a seal and
tested his big yellow teeth by crunching its bones between them. And
the queen gull set her band to pluming the king bear's feathers
until they lay smoothly upon his body.

But every day they cast anxious glances into the southern sky,
watching for the hundred gulls to bring back the king's own skin.

The seventh day came, and all the Polar bears in that region
gathered around the king's cavern. Among them was Woof, strong and
confident of his success.

"The bird-bear's feathers will fly fast enough when I get my claws
upon him!" he boasted; and the others laughed and encouraged him.

The king was disappointed at not having recovered his skin, but he
resolved to fight bravely without it. He advanced from the opening
of his cavern with a proud and kingly bearing, and when he faced his
enemy he gave so terrible a growl that Woof's heart stopped beating
for a moment, and he began to realize that a fight with the wise and
mighty king of his race was no laughing matter.

After exchanging one or two heavy blows with his foe Woof's courage
returned, and he determined to dishearten his adversary by bluster.

"Come nearer, bird-bear!" he cried. "Come nearer, that I may pluck
your plumage!"

The defiance filled the king with rage. He ruffled his feathers as a
bird does, till he appeared to be twice his actual size, and then he
strode forward and struck Woof so powerful a blow that his skull
crackled like an egg-shell and he fell prone upon the ground.

While the assembled bears stood looking with fear and wonder at
their fallen champion the sky became darkened.

An hundred gulls flew down from above and dripped upon the king's
body a skin covered with pure white hair that glittered in the sun
like silver.

And behold! the bears saw before them the well-known form of their
wise and respected master, and with one accord they bowed their
shaggy heads in homage to the mighty King of the Polar Bears.

* * * * *

This story teaches us that true dignity and courage depend not upon
outward appearance, but come rather from within; also that brag and
bluster are poor weapons to carry into battle.




THE MANDARIN AND THE BUTTERFLY


A mandarin once lived in Kiang-ho who was so exceedingly cross and
disagreeable that everyone hated him. He snarled and stormed at
every person he met and was never known to laugh or be merry under
any circumstances. Especially he hated boys and girls; for the boys
jeered at him, which aroused his wrath, and the girls made fun of
him, which hurt his pride.

When he had become so unpopular that no one would speak to him, the
emperor heard about it and commanded him to emigrate to America.
This suited the mandarin very well; but before he left China he
stole the Great Book of Magic that belonged to the wise magician
Haot-sai. Then, gathering up his little store of money, he took ship
for America.

He settled in a city of the middle west and of course started a
laundry, since that seems to be the natural vocation of every
Chinaman, be he coolie or mandarin.

He made no acquaintances with the other Chinamen of the town, who,
when they met him and saw the red button in his hat, knew him for a
real mandarin and bowed low before him. He put up a red and white
sign and people brought their laundry to him and got paper checks,
with Chinese characters upon them, in exchange, this being the only
sort of character the mandarin had left.

One day as the ugly one was ironing in his shop in the basement of
263 1/2 Main street, he looked up and saw a crowd of childish faces
pressed against the window. Most Chinamen make friends with
children; this one hated them and tried to drive them away. But as
soon as he returned to his work they were back at the window again,
mischievously smiling down upon him.

The naughty mandarin uttered horrid words in the Manchu language and
made fierce gestures; but this did no good at all. The children
stayed as long as they pleased, and they came again the very next
day as soon as school was over, and likewise the next day, and the
next. For they saw their presence at the window bothered the
Chinaman and were delighted accordingly.

The following day being Sunday the children did not appear, but as
the mandarin, being a heathen, worked in his little shop a big
butterfly flew in at the open door and fluttered about the room.

The mandarin closed the door and chased the butterfly until he
caught it, when he pinned it against the wall by sticking two pins
through its beautiful wings. This did not hurt the butterfly, there
being no feeling in its wings; but it made him a safe prisoner.

This butterfly was of large size and its wings were exquisitely
marked by gorgeous colors laid out in regular designs like the
stained glass windows of a cathedral.

The mandarin now opened his wooden chest and drew forth the Great
Book of Magic he had stolen from Haot-sai. Turning the pages slowly
he came to a passage describing "How to understand the language of
butterflies." This he read carefully and then mixed a magic formula
in a tin cup and drank it down with a wry face. Immediately
thereafter he spoke to the butterfly in its own language, saying:

"Why did you enter this room?"

"I smelled bees-wax," answered the butterfly; "therefore I thought
I might find honey here."

"But you are my prisoner," said the mandarin. "If I please I can kill
you, or leave you on the wall to starve to death."

"I expect that," replied the butterfly, with a sigh. "But my race is
shortlived, anyway; it doesn't matter whether death comes sooner or
later."

"Yet you like to live, do you not?" asked the mandarin.

"Yet; life is pleasant and the world is beautiful. I do not seek
death."

"Then," said the mandarin, "I will give you life--a long and
pleasant life--if you will promise to obey me for a time and carry
out my instructions."

"How can a butterfly serve a man?" asked the creature, in surprise.

"Usually they cannot," was the reply. "But I have a book of magic
which teaches me strange things. Do you promise?"

"Oh, yes; I promise," answered the butterfly; "for even as your
slave I will get some enjoyment out of life, while should you kill
me--that is the end of everything!"

"Truly," said the mandarin, "butterflies have no souls, and
therefore cannot live again."

"But I have enjoyed three lives already," returned the butterfly,
with some pride. "I have been a caterpillar and a chrysalis before I
became a butterfly. You were never anything but a Chinaman, although
I admit your life is longer than mine."

"I will extend your life for many days, if you will obey me,"
declared the Chinaman. "I can easily do so by means of my magic."

"Of course I will obey you," said the butterfly, carelessly.

"Then, listen! You know children, do you not?--boys and girls?"

"Yes, I know them. They chase me, and try to catch me, as you have
done," replied the butterfly.

"And they mock me, and jeer at me through the window," continued the
mandarin, bitterly. "Therefore, they are your enemies and mine! But
with your aid and the help of the magic book we shall have a fine
revenge for their insults."

"I don't care much for revenge," said the butterfly. "They are but
children, and 'tis natural they should wish to catch such a
beautiful creature as I am."

"Nevertheless, I care! and you must obey me," retorted the mandarin,
harshly. "I, at least, will have my revenge."

Then he stuck a drop of molasses upon the wall beside the
butterfly's head and said:

"Eat that, while I read my book and prepare my magic formula."

So the butterfly feasted upon the molasses and the mandarin studied
his book, after which he began to mix a magic compound in the tin
cup.

When the mixture was ready he released the butterfly from the wall
and said to it:

"I command you to dip your two front feet into this magic compound
and then fly away until you meet a child. Fly close, whether it be a
boy or a girl, and touch the child upon its forehead with your feet.
Whosoever is thus touched, the book declares, will at once become a
pig, and will remain such forever after. Then return to me and dip
you legs afresh in the contents of this cup. So shall all my
enemies, the children, become miserable swine, while no one will
think of accusing me of the sorcery."

"Very well; since such is your command, I obey," said the butterfly.
Then it dipped its front legs, which were the shortest of the six,
into the contents of the tin cup, and flew out of the door and away
over the houses to the edge of the town. There it alighted in a
flower garden and soon forgot all about its mission to turn children
into swine.

In going from flower to flower it soon brushed the magic compound
from its legs, so that when the sun began to set and the butterfly
finally remembered its master, the mandarin, it could not have
injured a child had it tried.

But it did not intend to try.

"That horrid old Chinaman," it thought, "hates children and wishes
to destroy them. But I rather like children myself and shall not
harm them. Of course I must return to my master, for he is a
magician, and would seek me out and kill me; but I can deceive him
about this matter easily enough."

When the butterfly flew in at the door of the mandarin's laundry he
asked, eagerly:

"Well, did you meet a child?"

"I did," replied the butterfly, calmly. "It was a pretty,
golden-haired girl--but now 'tis a grunting pig!"

"Good! Good! Good!" cried the mandarin, dancing joyfully about the
room. "You shall have molasses for your supper, and to-morrow you
must change two children into pigs."

The butterfly did not reply, but ate the molasses in silence. Having
no soul it had no conscience, and having no conscience it was able
to lie to the mandarin with great readiness and a certain amount of
enjoyment.

Next morning, by the mandarin's command, the butterfly dipped its
legs in the mixture and flew away in search of children.

When it came to the edge of the town it noticed a pig in a sty, and
alighting upon the rail of the sty it looked down at the creature
and thought.

"If I could change a child into a pig by touching it with the magic
compound, what could I change a pig into, I wonder?"

Being curious to determine this fine point in sorcery the butterfly
fluttered down and touched its front feet to the pig's nose.
Instantly the animal disappeared, and in its place was a
shock-headed, dirty looking boy, which sprang from the sty and ran
down the road uttering load whoops.

"That's funny," said the butterfly to itself. "The mandarin would be
very angry with me if he knew of this, for I have liberated one more
of the creatures that bother him."

It fluttered along after the boy, who had paused to throw stones at
a cat. But pussy escaped by running up a tree, where thick branches
protected her from the stones. Then the boy discovered a
newly-planted garden, and trampled upon the beds until the seeds
were scattered far and wide, and the garden was ruined. Next he
caught up a switch and struck with it a young calf that stood
quietly grazing in a field. The poor creature ran away with piteous
bleats, and the boy laughed and followed after it, striking the
frightened animal again and again.

"Really," thought the butterfly, "I do not wonder the mandarin hates
children, if they are all so cruel and wicked as this one."

The calf having escaped him the boy came back to the road, where he
met two little girls on their way to school. One of them had a red
apple in her hand, and the boy snatched it away and began eating it.
The little girl commenced to cry, but her companion, more brave and
sturdy, cried out:

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, you nasty boy!"

At this the boy reached out and slapped her pretty face, whereupon
she also began to sob.

Although possessed of neither soul nor conscience, the butterfly had
a very tender heart, and now decided it could endure this boy no
longer.

"If I permitted him to exist," it reflected, "I should never forgive
myself, for the monster would do nothing but evil from morning 'til
night."

So it flew directly into his face and touched his forehead with its
sticky front feet.

The next instant the boy had disappeared, but a grunting pig ran
swiftly up the road in the direction of its sty.

The butterfly gave a sigh of relief.

"This time I have indeed used the mandarin's magic upon a child," it
whispered, as it floated lazily upon the light breeze; "but since
the child was originally a pig I do not think I have any cause to
reproach myself. The little girls were sweet and gentle, and I would
not injure them to save my life, but were all boys like this
transformed pig, I should not hesitate to carry out the mandarin's
orders."

Then it flew into a rose bush, where it remained comfortably until
evening. At sundown it returned to its master.

"Have you changed two of them into pigs?" he asked, at once.

"I have," replied the butterfly. "One was a pretty, black-eyed baby,
and the other a freckle-faced, red-haired, barefooted newboy."

"Good! Good! Good!" screamed the mandarin, in an ecstasy of delight.
"Those are the ones who torment me the most! Change every newboy you
meet into a pig!"

"Very well," answered the butterfly, quietly, and ate its supper of
molasses.

Several days were passed by the butterfly in the same manner. It
fluttered aimlessly about the flower gardens while the sun shone,
and returned at night to the mandarin with false tales of turning
children into swine. Sometimes it would be one child which was
transformed, sometimes two, and occasionally three; but the mandarin
always greeted the butterfly's report with intense delight and gave
him molasses for supper.

One evening, however, the butterfly thought it might be well to vary
the report, so that the mandarin might not grow suspicious; and when
its master asked what child had been had been changed into a pig
that day the lying creature answered:

"It was a Chinese boy, and when I touched him he became a black
pig."

This angered the mandarin, who was in an especially cross mood. He
spitefully snapped the butterfly with his finger, and nearly broke
its beautiful wing; for he forgot that Chinese boys had once mocked
him and only remembered his hatred for American boys.

The butterfly became very indignant at this abuse from the mandarin.
It refused to eat its molasses and sulked all the evening, for it
had grown to hate the mandarin almost as much as the mandarin hated
children.

When morning came it was still trembling with indignation; but the
mandarin cried out:

"Make haste, miserable slave; for to-day you must change four
children into pigs, to make up for yesterday."

The butterfly did not reply. His little black eyes were sparkling
wickedly, and no sooner had he dipped his feet into the magic
compound than he flew full in the mandarin's face, and touched him
upon his ugly, flat forehead.

Soon after a gentleman came into the room for his laundry. The
mandarin was not there, but running around the place was a
repulsive, scrawny pig, which squealed most miserably.

The butterfly flew away to a brook and washed from its feet all
traces of the magic compound. When night came it slept in a rose
bush.





CHAPTER I

THE DOYLES ARE ASTONISHED


It was Sunday afternoon in Miss Patricia Doyle's pretty flat at 3708
Willing Square. In the small drawing room Patricia--or Patsy, as she
preferred to be called--was seated at the piano softly playing the one
"piece" the music teacher had succeeded in drilling into her flighty
head by virtue of much patience and perseverance. In a thick cushioned
morris-chair reclined the motionless form of Uncle John, a chubby little
man in a gray suit, whose features were temporarily eclipsed by the
newspaper that was spread carefully over them. Occasionally a gasp or a
snore from beneath the paper suggested that the little man was
"snoozing" as he sometimes gravely called it, instead of listening to
the music.

Major Doyle sat opposite, stiffly erect, with his admiring eyes full
upon Patsy. At times he drummed upon the arms of his chair in unison
with the music, nodding his grizzled head to mark the time as well as to
emphasize his evident approbation. Patsy had played this same piece from
start to finish seven times since dinner, because it was the only one
she knew; but the Major could have listened to it seven hundred times
without the flicker of an eyelash. It was not that he admired so much
the "piece" the girl was playing as the girl who was playing the
"piece." His pride in Patsy was unbounded. That she should have
succeeded at all in mastering that imposing looking instrument--making
it actually "play chunes"--was surely a thing to wonder at. But then,
Patsy could do anything, if she but tried.

Suddenly Uncle John gave a dreadful snort and sat bolt upright, gazing
at his companions with a startled look that melted into one of benign
complacency as he observed his surroundings and realized where he was.
The interruption gave Patsy an opportunity to stop playing the tune. She
swung around on the stool and looked with amusement at her newly
awakened uncle.

"You've been asleep," she said.

"No, indeed; quite a mistake," replied the little man, seriously. "I've
only been thinking."

"An' such _beaut_chiful thoughts," observed the Major, testily, for he
resented the interruption of his Sunday afternoon treat. "You thought
'em aloud, sir, and the sound of it was a bad imithation of a bullfrog
in a marsh. You'll have to give up eating the salad, sir."

"Bah! don't I know?" asked Uncle John, indignantly.

"Well, if your knowledge is better than our hearing, I suppose you do,"
retorted the Major. "But to an ignorant individual like meself the
impression conveyed was that you snored like a man that has forgotten
his manners an' gone to sleep in the prisence of a lady."

"Then no one has a better right to do that," declared Patsy, soothingly;
"and I'm sure our dear Uncle John's thoughts were just the most
beautiful dreams in the world. Tell us of them, sir, and we'll prove the
Major utterly wrong."

Even her father smiled at the girl's diplomacy, and Uncle John, who was
on the verge of unreasonable anger, beamed upon her gratefully.

"I'm going to Europe," he said.

The Major gave an involuntary start, and then turned to look at him
curiously.

"And I'm going to take Patsy along," he continued, with a mischievous
grin.

The Major frowned.

"Conthrol yourself, sir, until you are fully awake," said he. "You're
dreaming again."

Patsy swung her feet from side to side, for she was such a little thing
that the stool raised her entirely off the floor. There was a thoughtful
look on her round, freckled face, and a wistful one in her great blue
eyes as the full meaning of Uncle John's abrupt avowal became apparent.

The Major was still frowning, but a half frightened expression had
replaced the one of scornful raillery. For he, too, knew that his
eccentric brother-in-law was likely to propose any preposterous thing,
and then carry it out in spite of all opposition. But to take Patsy to
Europe would be like pulling the Major's eye teeth or amputating his
good right arm. Worse; far worse! It would mean taking the sunshine out
of her old father's sky altogether, and painting it a grim, despairing
gray.

But he resolved not to submit without a struggle.

"Sir," said he, sternly--he always called his brother-in-law "sir" when
he was in a sarcastic or reproachful mood--"I've had an idea for some
time that you were plotting mischief. You haven't looked me straight in
the eye for a week, and you've twice been late to dinner. I will ask you
to explain to us, sir, the brutal suggestion you have just advanced."

Uncle John laughed. In the days when Major Doyle had thought him a poor
man and in need of a helping hand, the grizzled old Irishman had been as
tender toward him as a woman and studiously avoided any speech or
epithet that by chance might injure the feelings of his dead wife's
only brother. But the Major's invariable courtesy to the poor or
unfortunate was no longer in evidence when he found that John Merrick
was a multi-millionaire with a strongly defined habit of doing good to
others and striving in obscure and unconventional ways to make everybody
around him happy. His affection for the little man increased mightily,
but his respectful attitude promptly changed, and a chance to reprove or
discomfit his absurdly rich brother-in-law was one of his most
satisfactory diversions. Uncle John appreciated this, and holding the
dignified Major in loving regard was glad to cross swords with him now
and then to add variety to their pleasant relations.

"It's this way, Major Doyle," he now remarked, coolly. "I've been
worried to death, lately, over business matters; and I need a change."

"Phoo! All your business is attended to by Isham, Marvin & Co. You've no
worry at all. Why, we've just made you a quarter of a million in C.H. &
D's."

The "we" is explained by stating that the Major held an important
position in the great banking house--a position Mr. Merrick had secured
for him some months previously.

"That's it!" said Uncle John. "You've made me a quarter of a million
that I don't want. The C.H. & D. stocks were going to pieces when I
bought them, and I had reason to hope I'd lose a good round sum on them.
But the confounded luck turned, and the result is an accumulation of all
this dreadful money. So, my dear Major, before I'm tempted to do
some-other foolish thing I've determined to run away, where business
can't follow me, and where by industry and perseverance I can scatter
some of my ill-gotten gains."

The Major smiled grimly.

"That's Europe, right enough," he said. "And I don't object, John, to
your going there whenever you please. You're disgracefully countryfied
and uninformed for a man of means, and Europe'll open your eyes and
prove to you how insignificant you really are. I advise you to visit
Ireland, sor, which I'm reliably informed is the centhral jewel in
Europe's crown of beauty. Go; and go whinever you please, sor; but
forbear the wickedness of putting foolish thoughts into our Patsy's
sweet head. She can't go a step, and you know it. It's positive cruelty
to her, sir, to suggest such a thing!"

The Major's speech had a touch of the brogue when he became excited, but
recovered when he calmed down.

"Why, you selfish old humbug!" cried Uncle John, indignantly. "Why can't
she go, when there's money and time to spare? Would you keep her here to
cuddle and spoil a vigorous man like yourself, when she can run away and
see the world and be happy?"

"It's a great happiness to cuddle the Major," said Patsy, softly; "and
the poor man needs it as much as he does his slippers or his oatmeal for
breakfast."

"And Patsy has the house to look after," added the Major, complacently.

Uncle John gave a snort of contempt.

"For an unreasonable man, show me an Irishman," he remarked. "Here
you've been telling me how Europe is an education and a delight, and in
the next breath you deliberately deprive your little daughter, whom you
pretend to love, of the advantages she might gain by a trip abroad! And
why? Just because you want her yourself, and might be a bit lonesome
without her. But I'll settle that foolishness, sir, in short order. You
shall go with us."

"Impossible!" ejaculated the Major. "It's the time of year I'm most
needed in the office, and Mr. Marvin has been so kind and considerate
that I won't play him a dirty trick by leaving him in the lurch."

Patsy nodded approval.

"That's right, daddy," she said.

Uncle John lay back in the chair and put the newspaper over his face
again. Patsy and her father stared at one another with grave intentness.
Then the Major drew out his handkerchief and mopped his brow.

"You'd like to go, mavourneen?" he asked, softly.

"Yes, daddy; but I won't, of course."

"Tut-tut! don't you go putting yourself against your old father's will,
Patsy. It's not so far to Europe," he continued, thoughtfully, "and you
won't be away much longer than you were when you went to Elmhurst after
Aunt Jane's money--which you didn't get. Mary takes fine care of our
little rooms, and doubtless I shall be so busy that I won't miss you at
all, at all."

"Daddy!"

She was in his lap, now, her chubby arms clasped around his neck and her
soft cheek laid close beside his rough and ruddy one.

"And when ye get back, Patsy darlin'," he whispered, tenderly stroking
her hair, "the joy of the meeting will make up for all that we've
suffered. It's the way of life, mavourneen. Unless a couple happens to
be Siamese twins, they're bound to get separated in the course of
events, more or less, if not frequently."

"I won't go, daddy."

"Oh, yes you will. It's not like you to be breakin' my heart by stayin'
home. Next week, said that wicked old uncle--he remoinds me of the one
that tried to desthroy the Babes in the Woods, Patsy dear. You must try
to reclaim him to humanity, for I'm hopin' there's a bit of good in the
old rascal yet." And he looked affectionately at the round little man
under the newspaper.

Uncle John emerged again. It was wonderful how well he understood the
Doyle family. His face was now smiling and wore a look of supreme
satisfaction.

"Your selfishness, my dear Major," said he, "is like the husk on a
cocoanut. When you crack it there's plenty of milk within--and in your
case it's the milk of human kindness. Come! let's talk over the trip."




CHAPTER II

UNCLE JOHN MAKES PLANS


"The thought came to me a long time ago," Uncle John resumed; "but it
was only yesterday that I got all the details fixed and settled in my
mind. I've been a rough old duffer, Patsy, and in all my hard working
life never thought of such a thing as travelling or enjoying myself
until I fell in with you, and you taught me how pleasant it is to
scatter sunshine in the hearts of others. For to make others happy means
a lot of joy for yourself--a secret you were trying to keep from me, you
crafty young woman, until I discovered it by accident. Now, here I am
with three nieces on my hands--"

"You may say two, sir," interrupted the Major. "Patsy can take care of
herself."

"Hold your tongue," said Uncle John. "I say I've got three nieces--as
fine a trio of intelligent, sweet and attractive young women as you'll
run across in a month of Sundays. I dare you to deny it, sir. And they
are all at an age when an European trip will do them a world of good. So
off we go, a week from Tuesday, in the first-class steamer 'Princess
Irene,' bound from New York for the Bay of Naples!"

Patsy's eyes showed her delight. They fairly danced.

"Have you told Beth and Louise?" she asked.

His face fell.

"Not yet," he said. "I'd forgotten to mention it to them."

"For my part," continued the girl, "I can get ready in a week, easily.
But Beth is way out in Ohio, and we don't know whether she can go or
not."

"I'll telegraph her, and find out," said Uncle John.

"Do it to-day," suggested the Major.

"I will."

"And to-morrow you must see Louise," added Patsy. "I'm not sure she'll
want to go, dear. She's such a social butterfly, you know, that her
engagements may keep her at home."

"Do you mean to say she's engaged?" asked Mr. Merrick, aghast.

"Only for the parties and receptions, Uncle. But it wouldn't surprise me
if she was married soon. She's older than Beth or me, and has a host of
admirers."

"Perhaps she's old enough to be sensible," suggested the Major.

"Well, I'll see her and her mother to-morrow morning," decided Uncle
John, "and if she can't find time for a trip to Europe at my expense,
you and Beth shall go anyhow--and we'll bring Louise a wedding present."

With this declaration he took his hat and walking stick and started for
the telegraph station, leaving Patsy and her father to canvass the
unexpected situation.

John Merrick was sixty years old, but as hale and rugged as a boy of
twenty. He had made his vast fortune on the Pacific Coast and during his
years of busy activity had been practically forgotten by the Eastern
members of his family, who never had credited him with sufficient
ability to earn more than a precarious livelihood. But the man was
shrewd enough in a business way, although simple almost to childishness
in many other matters. When he returned, quite unheralded, to end his
days "at home" and employ his ample wealth to the best advantage, he for
a time kept his success a secret, and so learned much of the
dispositions and personal characteristics of his three nieces.

They were at that time visiting his unmarried sister, Jane, at her
estate at Elmhurst, whither they had been invited for the first time;
and in the race for Aunt Jane's fortune he watched the three girls
carefully and found much to admire in each one of them. Patsy Doyle,
however, proved exceptionally frank and genuine, and when Aunt Jane at
last died and it was found she had no estate to bequeath, Patsy proved
the one bright star in the firmament of disappointment. Supposing Uncle
John to be poor, she insisted upon carrying him to New York with her and
sharing with him the humble tenement room in which she lived with her
father--a retired veteran who helped pay the family expenses by keeping
books for a mercantile firm, while Patsy worked in a hair-dresser's
shop.

It was now that Uncle John proved a modern fairy godfather to Aunt
Jane's nieces--who were likewise his own nieces. The three girls had
little in common except their poverty, Elizabeth De Graf being the
daughter of a music teacher, in Cloverton, Ohio, while Louise Merrick
lived with her widowed mother in a social atmosphere of the second class
in New York, where the two women frankly intrigued to ensnare for Louise
a husband who had sufficient means to ensure both mother and daughter a
comfortable home. In spite of this worldly and unlovely ambition, which
their circumstances might partially excuse, Louise, who was but
seventeen, had many good and womanly qualities, could they have been
developed in an atmosphere uninfluenced by the schemes of her vain and
selfish mother.

Uncle John, casting aside the mask of poverty, came to the relief of all
three girls. He settled the incomes of substantial sums of money upon
both Beth and Louise, making them practically independent. For Patsy he
bought a handsome modern flat building located at 3708 Willing Square,
and installed her and the Major in its cosiest apartment, the rents of
the remaining flats giving the Doyles an adequate income for all time to
come. Here Uncle John, believing himself cordially welcome, as indeed he
was, made his own home, and it required no shrewd guessing to arrive at
the conclusion that little Patsy was destined to inherit some day all
his millions.

The great banking and brokerage firm of Isham, Marvin & Co. had long
managed successfully John Merrick's vast fortune, and at his
solicitation it gave Major Doyle a responsible position in its main
office, with a salary that rendered him independent of his daughter's
suddenly acquired wealth and made him proud and self-respecting.

Money had no power to change the nature of the Doyles. The Major
remained the same simple, honest, courteous yet brusque old warrior who
had won Uncle John's love as a hard working book-keeper; and Patsy's
bright and sunny disposition had certain power to cheer any home,
whether located in a palace or a hovel.

Never before in his life had Uncle John been so supremely happy, and
never before had Aunt Jane's three nieces had so many advantages and
pleasures. It was to confer still further benefits upon these girls that
their eccentric uncle had planned this unexpected European trip.

His telegram to Elizabeth was characteristic:

"Patsy, Louise and I sail for Europe next Tuesday. Will you join us as
my guest? If so, take first train to New York, where I will look after
your outfit. Answer immediately."

That was a message likely to surprise a country girl, but it did not
strike John Merrick as in any way extraordinary. He thought he could
depend upon Beth. She would be as eager to go as he was to have her, and
when he had paid for the telegram he dismissed the matter from further
thought.

Next morning Patsy reminded him that instead of going down town he must
personally notify Louise Merrick of the proposed trip; so he took a
cross-town line and arrived at the Merrick's home at nine o'clock.

Mrs. Merrick was in a morning wrapper, sipping her coffee in an upper
room. But she could not deny herself to Uncle John, her dead husband's
brother and her only daughter's benefactor (which meant indirectly her
own benefactor), so she ordered the maid to show him up at once.

"Louise is still sweetly sleeping," she said, "and won't waken for hours
yet."

"Is anything wrong with her?" he asked, anxiously.

"Oh, dear, no! but everyone does not get up with the milkman, as you do,
John; and the dear child was at the opera last night, which made her
late in getting home."

"Doesn't the opera let out before midnight, the same as the theatres?"
he asked.

"I believe so; but there is the supper, afterward, you know."

"Ah, yes," he returned, thoughtfully. "I've always noticed that the
opera makes folks desperately hungry, for they flock to the restaurants
as soon as they can get away. Singular, isn't it?"

"Why, I never thought of it in that light."

"But Louise is well?"

"Quite well, thank you."

"That's a great relief, for I'm going to take her to Europe with me next
week," he said.

Mrs. Merrick was so astonished that she nearly dropped her coffee-cup
and could make no better reply than to stare blankly at her
brother-in-law.

"We sail Tuesday," continued Uncle John, "and you must have my niece
ready in time and deliver her on board the 'Princess Irene' at Hoboken
at nine o'clock, sharp."

"But John--John!" gasped Mrs. Merrick, feebly, "it will take a month, at
least, to make her gowns, and--"

"Stuff and rubbish!" he growled. "That shows, Martha, how little you
know about European trips. No one makes gowns to go abroad with; you buy
'em in Paris to bring home."

"Ah, yes; to be sure," she muttered. "Perhaps, then, it can be done, if
Louise, has no other engagements."

"Just what Patsy said. See here, Martha, do you imagine that any girl
who is half human could have engagements that would keep her from
Europe?"

"But the requirements of society--"

"You'll get me riled, pretty soon, Martha; and if you do you'll wish you
hadn't."

This speech frightened the woman. It wouldn't do to provoke Uncle John,
however unreasonable he happened to be. So she said, meekly:

"I've no doubt Louise will be delighted to go, and so will I."

"You!"

"Why--why--whom do you intend taking?"

"Just the three girls--Aunt Jane's three nieces. Also mine."

"But you'll want a chaperone for them."

"Why so?"

"Propriety requires it; and so does ordinary prudence. Louise, I know,
will be discreet, for it is her nature; but Patsy is such a little
flyaway and Beth so deep and demure, that without a chaperone they might
cause you a lot of trouble."

Uncle John grew red and his eyes flashed.

"A chaperone!" he cried, contemptuously; "not any in mine, Martha
Merrick. Either we young folks go alone, without any death's head to
perpetually glower at us, or we don't go at all! Three better girls
never lived, and I'll trust 'em anywhere. Besides that, we aren't going
to any of your confounded social functions; we're going on a reg'lar
picnic, and if I don't give those girls the time of their lives my name
ain't John Merrick. A chaperone, indeed!"

Mrs. Merrick held up her hands in horror.

"I'm not sure, John," she gasped, "that I ought to trust my dear child
with an uncle who disregards so openly the proprieties."

"Well, I'm sure; and the thing's settled," he said, more calmly. "Don't
worry, ma'am. I'll look after Patsy and Beth, and Louise will look after
all of us--just as she does after you--because she's so discreet. Talk
about your being a chaperone! Why, you don't dare say your soul's your
own when Louise is awake. That chaperone business is all
humbuggery--unless an old uncle like me can be a chaperone. Anyhow, I'm
the only one that's going to be appointed. I won't wait for Louise to
wake up. Just tell her the news and help her to get ready on time. And
now, I'm off. Good morning, Martha."

She really had no words of protest ready at hand, and it was long after
queer old John Merrick had gone away that she remembered a dozen
effective speeches that she might have delivered.

"After all," she sighed, taking up her cup again, "it may be the best
thing in the world for Louise. We don't know whether that young Weldon,
who is paying her attentions just now, is going to inherit his father's
money or not. He's been a bit wild, I've heard, and it is just as well
to postpone any engagement until we find out the facts. I can do that
nicely while my sweet child is in Europe with Uncle John, and away from
all danger of entanglements. Really, it's an ill wind that blows no
good! I'll go talk with Louise."




CHAPTER III

"ALL ASHORE"


Beth De Graf was a puzzle to all who knew her. She was a puzzle even to
herself, and was wont to say, indifferently, that the problem was not
worth a solution. For this beautiful girl of fifteen was somewhat bitter
and misanthropic, a condition perhaps due to the uncongenial atmosphere
in which she had been reared. She was of dark complexion and her big
brown eyes held a sombre and unfathomable expression. Once she had
secretly studied their reflection in a mirror, and the eyes awed and
frightened her, and made her uneasy. She had analyzed them much as if
they belonged to someone else, and wondered what lay behind their mask,
and what their capabilities might be.

But this morbid condition mostly affected her when she was at home,
listening to the unpleasant bickerings of her father and mother, who
quarrelled constantly over trifles that Beth completely ignored. Her
parents seemed like two ill tempered animals confined in the same cage,
she thought, and their snarls had long since ceased to interest her.

This condition had, of course, been infinitely worse in all those
dreadful years when they were poverty stricken. Since Uncle John had
settled a comfortable income on his niece the grocer was paid promptly
and Mrs. De Graf wore a silk dress on Sundays and held her chin a little
higher than any other of the Cloverton ladies dared do. The Professor,
no longer harrassed by debts, devoted less time to the drudgery of
teaching and began the composition of an oratorio that he firmly
believed would render his name famous. So, there being less to quarrel
about, Beth's parents indulged more moderately in that pastime; but
their natures were discordant, and harmony in the De Graf household was
impossible.

When away from home Beth's disposition softened. Some of her
school-friends had seen her smile--a wonderful and charming phenomenon,
during which her expression grew sweet and bewitchingly animated and her
brown eyes radiant with mirthful light. It was not the same Beth at all.

Sometimes, when the nieces were all at Aunt Jane's, Beth had snuggled in
the arms of her cousin Louise, who had a way of rendering herself
agreeable to all with whom she came in contact, and tried hard to win
the affection of the frankly antagonistic girl. At such times the
gentleness of Elizabeth, her almost passionate desire to be loved and
fondled, completely transformed her for the moment. Louise, shrewd at
reading others, told herself that Beth possessed a reserve force of
tenderness, amiability and fond devotion that would render her adorable
if she ever allowed those qualities full expression. But she did not
tell Beth that. The girl was so accustomed to despise herself and so
suspicious of any creditable impulses that at times unexpectedly
obtruded themselves, that she would have dismissed such a suggestion as
arrant flattery, and Louise was clever enough not to wish to arouse her
cousin to a full consciousness of her own possibilities.

The trained if not native indifference of this strange girl of fifteen
was demonstrated by her reception of Uncle John's telegram. She quietly
handed it to her mother and said, as calmly as if it were an invitation
to a church picnic:

"I think I shall go."

"Nothing like that ever happened to me," remarked Mrs. De Graf,
enviously. "If John Merrick had an atom of common sense he'd have taken
me to Europe instead of a troop of stupid school girls. But John always
was a fool, and always will be. When will you start, Beth?"

"To-morrow morning. There's nothing to keep me. I'll go to Patsy and
stay with her until we sail."

"Are you glad?" asked her mother, looking into the expressionless face
half curiously.

"Yes," returned Beth, as if considering her reply; "a change is always
interesting, and I have never travelled except to visit Aunt Jane at
Elmhurst. So I think I am pleased to go to Europe."

Mrs. De Graf sighed. There was little in common between mother and
daughter; but that, to a grave extent, was the woman's fault. She had
never tried to understand her child's complex nature, and somewhat
resented Beth's youth and good looks, which she considered contrasted
unfavorably with her own deepening wrinkles and graying hair. For Mrs.
De Graf was vain and self-important, and still thought herself
attractive and even girlish. It would really be a relief to have Beth
out of the way for a few months.

The girl packed her own trunk and arranged for it to be taken to the
station. In the morning she entered the music room to bid the Professor
good-bye. He frowned at the interruption, for the oratorio was
especially engrossing at the time. Mrs. De Graf kissed her daughter
lightly upon the lips and said in a perfunctory way that she hoped Beth
would have a good time.

The girl had no thought of resenting the lack of affection displayed by
her parents. It was what she had always been accustomed to, and she had
no reason to expect anything different.

Patsy met her at the train in New York and embraced her rapturously.
Patsy was really fond of Beth; but it was her nature to be fond of
everyone, and her cousin, escaping from her smacking and enthusiastic
kisses, told herself that Patsy would have embraced a cat with the same
spontaneous ecstacy. That was not strictly true, but there was nothing
half hearted or halfway about Miss Doyle. If she loved you, there would
never be an occasion for you to doubt the fact. It was Patsy's way.

Uncle John also was cordial in his greetings. He was very proud of his
pretty niece, and discerning enough to realize there was a broad strata
of womanliness somewhere in Elizabeth's undemonstrative character. He
had promised himself to "dig it out" some day, and perhaps the European
trip would give him his opportunity.

Patsy and Elizabeth shopped for the next few days most strenuously and
delightfully. Sometimes their dainty cousin Louise joined them, and the
three girls canvassed gravely their requirements for a trip that was as
new to them as a flight to the moon. Naturally, they bought much that
was unnecessary and forgot many things that would have been useful. You
have to go twice to Europe to know what to take along.

Louise needed less than the others, for her wardrobe was more extensive
and she already possessed all that a young girl could possibly make use
of. This niece, the eldest of Uncle John's trio, was vastly more
experienced in the ways of the world than the others, although as a
traveller she had no advantage of them. Urged thereto by her worldly
mother, she led a sort of trivial, butterfly existence, and her
character was decidedly superficial to any close observer. Indeed, her
very suavity and sweetness of manner was assumed, because it was so much
more comfortable and effective to be agreeable than otherwise. She was
now past seventeen years of age, tall and well formed, with a delicate
and attractive face which, without being beautiful, was considered
pleasant and winning. Her eyes were good, though a bit too shrewd, and
her light brown hair was fluffy as spun silk. Graceful of carriage,
gracious of manner, yet affecting a languor unsuited to her years,
Louise Merrick was a girl calculated to draw from the passing throng
glances of admiration and approval, and to convey the impression of good
breeding and feminine cleverness.

All this, however, was outward. Neither Patsy nor Beth displayed any
undue affection for their cousin, although all of the girls exhibited a
fair amount of cousinly friendship for one another. They had once been
thrown together under trying circumstances, when various qualities of
temperament not altogether admirable were liable to assert themselves.
Those events were too recent to be already forgotten, yet the girls were
generous enough to be considerate of each others' failings, and had
resolved to entertain no sentiment other than good will on the eve of
their departure for such a charming outing as Uncle John had planned for
them.

Mr. Merrick being a man, saw nothing radically wrong in the dispositions
of any of his nieces. Their youth and girlishness appealed to him
strongly, and he loved to have them by his side. It is true that he
secretly regretted Louise was not more genuine, that Beth was so
cynical and frank, and that Patsy was not more diplomatic. But he
reflected that he had had no hand in molding their characters, although
he might be instrumental in improving them; so he accepted the girls as
they were, thankful that their faults were not glaring, and happy to
have found three such interesting nieces to cheer his old age.

At last the preparations were complete. Tuesday arrived, and Uncle John
"corralled his females," as he expressed it, and delivered them safely
on board the staunch and comfortable ocean greyhound known as the
"Princess Irene," together with their bags and baggage, their flowers
and fruits and candy boxes and all those other useless accessories to a
voyage so eagerly thrust upon the departing travellers by their
affectionate but ill-advised friends.

Mrs. Merrick undertook the exertion of going to Hoboken to see her
daughter off, and whispered in the ear of Louise many worldly
admonitions and such bits of practical advice as she could call to mind
on the spur of the moment.

Major Gregory Doyle was there, pompous and straight of form and wearing
an assumed smile that was meant to assure Patsy he was delighted at her
going, but which had the effect of scaring the girl because she at first
thought the dreadful expression was due to convulsions.

The Major had no admonitions for Patsy, but she had plenty for him, and
gave him a long list of directions that would, as he said, cause him to
"walk mighty sthraight" if by good luck he managed to remember them all.

Having made up his mind to let the child go to Europe, the old fellow
allowed no wails or bemoanings to reach Patsy's ears to deprive her of a
moment's joyful anticipation of the delights in store for her. He
laughed and joked perpetually during that last day, and promised the
girl that he would take a vacation while she was gone and visit his old
colonel in Virginia, which she knew was the rarest pleasure he could
enjoy. And now he stood upon the deck amusing them all with his quaint
sayings and appearing so outwardly jolly and unaffected that only Patsy
herself suspected the deep grief that was gripping his kindly old
heart.

Uncle John guessed, perhaps, for he hugged the Major in a tight embrace,
whispering that Patsy should be now, as ever, the apple of his eye and
the subject of his most loving care.

"An' don't be forgetting to bring me the meerschaum pipe from Sicily an'
the leathern pocket-book from Florence," the Major said to Patsy,
impressively. "It's little enough for ye to remember if ye go that way,
an' to tell the truth I'm sending ye abroad just for to get them. An'
don't be gettin' off the boat till it stops at a station; an' remember
that Uncle John is full of rheumatics an' can't walk more n' thirty mile
an hour, an'--"

"It's a slander," said Uncle John, stoutly. "I never had rheumatics in
my life."

"Major," observed Patsy, her blue eyes full of tears but her lips trying
to smile, "do have the tailor sponge your vest every Saturday. It's full
of spots even now, and I've been too busy lately to look after you
properly. You're--you're--just disgraceful, Major!"

"All ashore!" called a loud voice.

The Major gathered Patsy into an embrace that threatened to crush her,
and then tossed her into Uncle John's arms and hurried away. Mrs.
Merrick followed, with good wishes for all for a pleasant journey; and
then the four voyagers pressed to the rail and waved their handkerchiefs
frantically to those upon the dock while the band played vociferously
and the sailors ran here and there in sudden excitement and the great
ship left her moorings and moved with proud deliberation down the bay to
begin her long voyage to Gibraltar and the blue waters of the
Mediterranean.




CHAPTER IV

SOME NEW ACQUAINTANCES, AND A WARNING


For an inexperienced tourist Uncle John managed their arrangements most
admirably. He knew nothing at all about ocean travel or what was the
proper method to secure comfortable accommodations; but while most of
the passengers were writing hurried letters in the second deck gallery,
which were to be sent back by the pilot, Mr. Merrick took occasion to
interview the chief steward and the deck steward and whatever other
official he could find, and purchased their good will so liberally that
the effect of his astute diplomacy was immediately apparent.

His nieces found that the sunniest deck chairs bore their names; the
most desirable seats in the dining hall were theirs when, half famished
because breakfast had been disregarded, they trooped in to luncheon; the
best waiters on the ship attended to their wants, and afterward their
cabins were found to be cosily arranged with every comfort the heart of
maid could wish for.

At luncheon it was found that the steward had placed a letter before
Uncle John's plate. The handwriting of the address Louise, who sat next
her uncle, at once recognized as that of her mother; but she said
nothing.

Mr. Merrick was amazed at the contents of the communication, especially
as he had so recently parted with the lady who had written it.

It said: "I must warn you, John, that my daughter has just escaped a
serious entanglement, and I am therefore more grateful than I can
express that you are taking her far from home for a few weeks. A young
man named Arthur Weldon--a son of the big railroad president, you
know--has been paying Louise marked attentions lately; but I cautioned
her not to encourage him because a rumor had reached me that he has
quarrelled with his father and been disinherited. My informant also
asserted that the young man is wild and headstrong and cannot be
controlled by his parent; but he always seemed gentlemanly enough at
our house, and my greatest objection to him is that he is not likely to
inherit a dollar of his father's money. Louise and I decided to keep him
dangling until we could learn the truth of this matter, for you can
easily understand that with her exceptional attractions there is no
object in Louise throwing herself away upon a poor man, or one who
cannot give her a prominent position in society. Imagine my horror,
John, when I discovered last evening that my only child, whom I have so
fondly cherished, has ungratefully deceived me. Carried away by the
impetuous avowals of this young scapegrace, whom his own father disowns,
she has confessed her love for him--love for a pauper!--and only by the
most stringent exercise of my authority have I been able to exact from
Louise a promise that she will not become formally engaged to Arthur
Weldon, or even correspond with him, until she has returned home. By
that time I shall have learned more of his history and prospects, when I
can better decide whether to allow the affair to go on. Of course I have
hopes that in case my fears are proven to have been well founded, I can
arouse Louise to a proper spirit and induce her to throw the fellow
over. Meantime, I implore you, as my daughter's temporary guardian, not
to allow Louise to speak of or dwell upon this young man, but try to
interest her in other gentlemen whom you may meet and lead her to
forget, if possible, her miserable entanglement. Consider a loving
mother's feelings, John. Try to help me in this emergency, and I shall
be forever deeply grateful."

"It's from mother, isn't it?" asked Louise, when he had finished reading
the letter.

"Yes," he answered gruffly, as he crumpled the missive and stuffed it
into his pocket.

"What does she say, Uncle?"

"Nothing but rubbish and nonsense. Eat your soup, my dear; it's getting
cold."

The girl's sweet, low laughter sounded very pleasant, and served to calm
his irritation. From her demure yet amused expression Uncle John guessed
that Louise knew the tenor of her mother's letter as well as if she had
read it over his shoulder, and it comforted him that she could take the
matter so lightly. Perhaps the poor child was not so deeply in love as
her mother had declared.

He was greatly annoyed at the confidence Mrs. Merrick had seen fit to
repose in him, and felt she had no right to burden him with any
knowledge of such an absurd condition of affairs just as he was starting
for a holiday. Whatever might be the truth of the girl's
"entanglement,"--and he judged that it was not all conveyed in Martha
Merrick's subtle letter--Louise would surely be free and unhampered by
either love or maternal diplomacy for some time to come. When she
returned home her mother might conduct the affair to suit herself. He
would have nothing to do with it in any way.

As soon as luncheon was finished they rushed for the deck, and you may
imagine that chubby little Uncle John, with his rosy, smiling face and
kindly eyes, surrounded by three eager and attractive girls of from
fifteen to seventeen years of age, was a sight to compel the attention
of every passenger aboard the ship.

It was found easy to make the acquaintance of the interesting group,
and many took advantage of that fact; for Uncle John chatted brightly
with every man and Patsy required no excuse of a formal introduction to
confide to every woman that John Merrick was taking his three nieces to
Europe to "see the sights and have the time of their lives."

Many of the business men knew well the millionaire's name, and accorded
him great respect because he was so enormously wealthy and successful.
But the little man was so genuinely human and unaffected and so openly
scorned all toadyism that they soon forgot his greatness in the
financial world and accepted him simply as a good fellow and an
invariably cheerful comrade.

The weather was somewhat rough for the latter part of March--they had
sailed the twenty-seventh--but the "Irene" was so staunch and rode the
waves so gracefully that none of the party except Louise was at all
affected by the motion. The eldest cousin, however, claimed to be
indisposed for the first few days out, and so Beth and Patsy and Uncle
John sat in a row in their steamer chairs, with the rugs tucked up to
their waists, and kept themselves and everyone around them merry and
light hearted.

Next to Patsy reclined a dark complexioned man of about thirty-five,
with a long, thin face and intensely black, grave eyes. He was
carelessly dressed and wore a flannel shirt, but there was an odd look
of mingled refinement and barbarity about him that arrested the girl's
attention. He sat very quietly in his chair, reserved both in speech and
in manner; but when she forced him to talk he spoke impetuously and with
almost savage emphasis, in a broken dialect that amused her immensely.

"You can't be American," she said.

"I am Sicilian," was the proud answer.

"That's what I thought; Sicilian or Italian or Spanish; but I'm glad
it's Sicilian, which is the same as Italian. I can't speak your lingo
myself," she continued, "although I am studying it hard; but you manage
the English pretty well, so we shall get along famously together."

He did not answer for a moment, but searched her unconscious face with
his keen eyes. Then he demanded, brusquely:

"Where do you go?"

"Why, to Europe," she replied, as if surprised.

"Europe? Pah! It is no answer at all," he responded, angrily. "Europe is
big. To what part do you journey?"

Patsy hesitated. The magic word "Europe" had seemed to sum up their
destination very effectively, and she had heretofore accepted it as
sufficient, for the time being, at least. Uncle John had bought an
armful of guide books and Baedeckers, but in the hurry of departure she
had never glanced inside them. To go to Europe had been enough to
satisfy her so far, but perhaps she should have more definite knowledge
concerning their trip. So she turned to Uncle John and said:

"Uncle, dear, to what part of Europe are we going?"

"What part?" he answered. "Why, it tells on the ticket, Patsy. I can't
remember the name just now. It's where the ship stops, of course."

"That is Napoli," said the thin faced man, with a scarcely veiled sneer.
"And then?"

"And then?" repeated Patsy, turning to her Uncle.

"Then? Oh, some confounded place or other that I can't think of. I'm not
a time-table, Patsy; but the trip is all arranged, in beautiful style,
by a friend of mine who has always wanted to go abroad, and so has the
whole programme mapped out in his head."

"Is it in his head yet?" enquired Patsy, anxiously.

"No, dear; it's in the left hand pocket of my blue coat, all written
down clearly. So what's the use of bothering? We aren't there yet. By
and bye we'll get to Eu-rope an' do it up brown. Whatever happens, and
wherever we go, it's got to be a spree and a jolly good time; so take it
easy, Patsy dear, and don't worry."

"That's all right, Uncle," she rejoined, with a laugh. "I'm not worrying
the least mite. But when folks ask us where we're going, what shall we
say?"

"Eu-rope."

"And then?" mischievously.

"And then home again, of course. It's as plain as the nose on your face,
Patsy Doyle, and a good bit straighter."

That made her laugh again, and the strange Italian, who was listening,
growled a word in his native language. He wasn't at all a pleasant
companion, but for that very reason Patsy determined to make him talk
and "be sociable." By degrees he seemed to appreciate her attention, and
always brightened when she came to sit beside him.

"You'll have to tell me your name, you know," she said to him; "because
I can't be calling you 'Sir' every minute."

He glanced nervously around. Then he answered, slowly:

"I am called Valdi--Victor Valdi."

"Oh, that's a pretty name, Mr. Valdi--or should I say Signor?"

"You should."

"Do I pronounce it right?"

"No."

"Well, never mind if I don't; you'll know what I mean, and that I
intend to be proper and polite," she responded, sweetly.

Beth, while she made fewer acquaintances than Patsy, seemed to have cast
off her sullen reserve when she boarded the ship. In truth, the girl was
really happy for the first time in her life, and it softened her so
wonderfully and made her so attractive that she soon formed a select
circle around her. A young lady from Cleveland, who had two big
brothers, was impelled to introduce herself to Beth because of the young
men's intense admiration for the girl's beautiful face. When it was
found that they were all from Ohio, they formed a friendly alliance at
once. Marion Horton was so frank and agreeable that she managed to draw
out all that was best in Beth's nature, and the stalwart young Hortons
were so shyly enthusiastic over this, their first trip abroad, that they
inspired the girl with a like ardor, which resulted in the most cordial
relations between them.

And it so happened that several other young men who chanced to be aboard
the "Princess Irene" marked the Hortons' intimacy with Beth and
insisted on being introduced by them, so that by the time Louise had
conquered her _mal-de-mer_ and appeared on deck, she found an admiring
group around her cousin that included most of the desirable young
fellows on the ship. Beth sat enthroned like a queen, listening to her
courtiers and smiling encouragement now and then, but taking little part
in the conversation herself because of her inexperience. Such adoration
was new to the little country girl, and she really enjoyed it. Nor did
the young men resent her silence. All that they wanted her to do, as Tom
Horton tersely expressed it, was to "sit still and look pretty."

As for Uncle John, he was so delighted with Beth's social success that
he adopted all the boys on the spot, and made them a part of what he
called his family circle.

Louise, discovering this state of affairs, gave an amused laugh and
joined the group. She was a little provoked that she had isolated
herself so long in her cabin when there was interesting sport on deck;
but having lost some valuable time she straightway applied herself to
redeem the situation.

In the brilliance of her conversation, in her studied glances, in a
thousand pretty ways that were skillfully rendered effective, she had a
decided advantage over her more beautiful cousin. When Louise really
desired to please she was indeed a charming companion, and young men are
not likely to detect insincerity in a girl who tries to captivate them.

The result was astonishing to Uncle John and somewhat humiliating to
Beth; for a new queen was presently crowned, and Louise by some magnetic
power assembled the court around herself. Only the youngest Horton boy,
in whose susceptible heart Beth's image was firmly enshrined, refused to
change his allegiance; but in truth the girl enjoyed herself more
genuinely in the society of one loyal cavalier than when so many were
clamoring for her favors. The two would walk the deck together for hours
without exchanging a single word, or sit together silently listening to
the band or watching the waves, without the need, as Tom expressed it,
of "jabbering every blessed minute" in order to be happy.

Patsy was indignant at the artfulness of Louise until she noticed that
Beth was quite content; then she laughed softly and watched matters take
their course, feeling a little sorry for the boys because she knew
Louise was only playing with them.

The trip across the Atlantic was all too short. On the fifth of April
they passed the Azores, running close to the islands of Fayal and San
Jorge so that the passengers might admire the zigzag rows of white
houses that reached from the shore far up the steep hillsides. On the
sixth day they sighted Gibraltar and passed between the Moorish and
Spanish lighthouses into the lovely waters of the Mediterranean. The
world-famed rock was now disclosed to their eyes, and when the ship
anchored opposite it Uncle John assisted his nieces aboard the lighter
and took them for a brief excursion ashore.

Of course they rode to the fortress and wandered through its gloomy,
impressive galleries, seeing little of the armament because visitors are
barred from the real fortifications. The fortress did not seem
especially impregnable and was, taken altogether, a distinct
disappointment to them; but the ride through the town in the low basket
phaetons was wholly delightful. The quaint, narrow streets and stone
arches, the beautiful vistas of sea and mountain, the swarthy, dark-eyed
Moors whose presence lent to the town an oriental atmosphere, and the
queer market-places crowded with Spaniards, Frenchmen, Jews and
red-coated English soldiers, altogether made up a panorama that was
fascinating in the extreme.

But their stay was short, and after a rush of sightseeing that almost
bewildered them they returned to the ship breathless but elated at
having "seen an' done," as Uncle John declared, their first foreign
port.

And now through waters so brightly blue and transparent that they
aroused the girls' wonder and admiration, the good ship plowed her way
toward the port of Naples, passing to the east of Sardinia and Corsica,
which they viewed with eager interest because these places had always
seemed so far away to them, and had now suddenly appeared as if by
magic directly before their eyes.

Patsy and the big whiskered captain had become such good friends that he
always welcomed the girl on his own exclusive deck, and this afternoon
she sat beside him and watched the rugged panorama slip by.

"When will we get to Naples?" she asked.

"To-morrow evening, probably," answered the captain. "See, it is over in
that direction, where the gray cloud appears in the sky."

"And what is the gray cloud, Captain?"

"I do not know," said he, gravely. "Perhaps smoke from Vesuvius. At
Gibraltar we heard that the volcano is in an ugly mood, I hope it will
cause you no inconvenience."

"Wouldn't it be fine if we could see an eruption!" exclaimed the girl.

The captain shook his head.

"Interesting, perhaps," he admitted; "but no great calamity that causes
thousands of people to suffer can be called 'fine.'"

"Ah, that is true!" she said, quickly. "I had forgotten the suffering."

Next morning all the sky was thick with smoke, and the sun was hidden.
The waters turned gray, too, and as they approached the Italian coast
the gloom perceptibly increased. A feeling of uneasiness seemed to
pervade the ship, and even the captain had so many things to consider
that he had no time to converse with his little friend.

Signor Valdi forsook his deck chair for the first time and stood at the
rail which overlooked the steerage with his eyes glued to the grim skies
ahead. When Uncle John asked him what he saw he answered, eagerly:

"Death and destruction, and a loss of millions of lira to the bankrupt
government. I know; for I have studied Etna for years, and Vesuvio is a
second cousin to Etna."

"Hm," said Uncle John. "You seem pleased with the idea of an eruption."

The thin faced man threw a shrewd look from his dark eyes and smiled.
Uncle John frowned at the look and stumped away. He was not at all easy
in his own mind. He had brought three nieces for a holiday to this
foreign shore, and here at the outset they were confronted by an
intangible danger that was more fearful because it was not understood.
It was enough to make his round face serious, although he had so strong
an objection to unnecessary worry.

Afternoon tea was served on deck amidst an unusual quiet. People soberly
canvassed the situation and remarked upon the fact that the darkness
increased visibly as they neared the Bay of Naples. Beth couldn't drink
her tea, for tiny black atoms fell through the air and floated upon the
surface of the liquid. Louise retired to her stateroom with a headache,
and found her white serge gown peppered with particles of lava dust
which had fallen from the skies.

The pilot guided the ship cautiously past Capri and into the bay. The
air was now black with volcanic dross and a gloom as of midnight
surrounded them on every side. The shore, the mountain and the water of
the bay itself were alike invisible.




CHAPTER V

VESUVIUS RAMPANT


It was Saturday night, the seventh day of April, nineteen hundred and
six--a night never to be forgotten by those aboard the ship; a night
which has its place in history.

At dinner the captain announced that he had dropped anchor at the
Immacollatella Nuova, but at a safe distance from the shore, and that no
passengers would be landed under any circumstances until the fall of
ashes ceased and he could put his people ashore in a proper manner.

A spirit of unrest fell upon them all. Big Tom Horton whispered to Beth
that he did not intend to leave her side until all danger was over. The
deck was deserted, all the passengers crowding into the smoking room and
saloons to escape the lava dust.

Few kept their rooms or ventured to sleep. At intervals a loud
detonation from the volcano shook the air, and the mystery and awe of
the enveloping gloom were so palpable as almost to be felt.

Toward midnight the wind changed, driving the cloud of ashes to the
southward and sufficiently clearing the atmosphere to allow the angry
glow of the crater to be distinctly seen. Now it shot a pillar of fire
thousands of feet straight into the heavens; then it would darken and
roll skyward great clouds that were illumined by the showers of sparks
accompanying them.

The windows of every cabin facing the volcano were filled with eager
faces, and in the smoking room Uncle John clasped Beth around the waist
with one arm and Patsy with the other and watched the wonderful
exhibition through the window with a grave and anxious face. Tom Horton
had taken a position at one side of them and the dark Italian at the
other. The latter assured Patsy they were in no danger whatever. Tom
secretly hoped they were, and laid brave plans for rescuing Beth or
perishing at her side. Louise chose to lie in her berth and await
events with calm resignation. If they escaped she would not look haggard
and hollow-eyed when morning came. If a catastrophy was pending she
would have no power to prevent it.

It was four o'clock on Sunday morning when Vesuvius finally reached the
climax of her travail. With a deep groan of anguish the mountain burst
asunder, and from its side rolled a great stream of molten lava that
slowly spread down the slope, consuming trees, vineyards and dwellings
in its path and overwhelming the fated city of Bosco-Trecase.

Our friends marked the course of destruction by watching the thread of
fire slowly wander down the mountain slope. They did not know of the
desolation it was causing, but the sight was terrible enough to inspire
awe in every breast.

The volcano was easier after that final outburst, but the black clouds
formed thicker than ever, and soon obscured the sky again.




CHAPTER VI

UNDER A CLOUD


"After all," said Uncle John, next morning, "we may consider ourselves
very lucky. Your parents might have come to Naples a hundred times, my
dears, and your children may come a hundred times more, and yet never
see the sights that have greeted us on our arrival. If the confounded
old hill was bound to spout, it did the fair thing by spouting when we
were around. Eh, Patsy?"

"I quite agree with you," said the girl. "I wouldn't have missed it for
anything--if it really had to behave so."

"But you'll pay for it!" growled Signor Valdi, who had overheard these
remarks. "You will pay for it with a thousand discomforts--and I'm glad
that is so. Vesuvio is hell let loose; and it amuses you. Hundreds are
lying dead and crushed; and you are lucky to be here. Listen," he
dropped his voice to a whisper: "if these Neapolitans could see the
rejoicing in my heart, they would kill me. And you? Pah! you are no
better. You also rejoice--and they will welcome you to Naples. I have
advice. Do not go on shore. It is useless."

They were all startled by this strange speech, and the reproof it
conveyed made them a trifle uncomfortable; but Uncle John whispered that
the man was mad, and to pay no attention to him.

Although ashes still fell softly upon the ship the day had somewhat
lightened the gloom and they could see from deck the dim outlines of the
shore. A crowd of boats presently swarmed around them, their occupants
eagerly clamoring for passengers to go ashore, or offering fruits,
flowers and souvenirs to any who might be induced to purchase. Their
indifference to their own and their city's danger was astonishing. It
was their custom to greet arriving steamers in this way, for by this
means they gained a livelihood. Nothing short of absolute destruction
seemed able to interfere with their established occupations.

A steam tender also came alongside, and after a cordial farewell to the
ship's officers and their travelling acquaintances, Uncle John placed
his nieces and their baggage aboard the tender, which shortly deposited
them safely upon the dock.

Perhaps a lot of passengers more dismal looking never before landed on
the beautiful shores of Naples--beautiful no longer, but presenting an
appearance gray and grewsome. Ashes were ankle deep in the streets--a
fine, flour-like dust that clung to your clothing, filled your eyes and
lungs and seemed to penetrate everywhere. The foliage of the trees and
shrubbery drooped under its load and had turned from green to the
all-pervading gray. The grass was covered; the cornices and balconies of
the houses were banked with ashes.

"Bless me!" said Uncle John. "It's as bad as Pompey, or whatever that
city was called that was buried in the Bible days."

"Oh, not quite, Uncle," answered Patsy, in her cheery voice; "but it may
be, before Vesuvius is satisfied."

"It is certainly bad enough," observed Louise, pouting as she marked the
destruction of her pretty cloak by the grimy deposit that was fast
changing its color and texture.

"Well, let us get under shelter as soon as possible," said Uncle John.

The outlines of a carriage were visible a short distance away. He walked
up to the driver and said:

"We want to go to a hotel."

The man paid no attention.

"Ask him how much he charges, Uncle. You know you mustn't take a cab in
Naples without bargaining."

"Why not?"

"The driver will swindle you."

"I'll risk that," he answered. "Just now we're lucky if we get a
carriage at all." He reached up and prodded the jehu in the ribs with
his cane. "How much to the Hotel Vesuvius?" he demanded, loudly.

The man woke up and flourished his whip, at the same time bursting into
a flood of Italian.

The girls listened carefully. They had been trying to study Italian
from a small book Beth had bought entitled "Italian in Three Weeks
without a Master," but not a word the driver of the carriage said seemed
to have occurred in the vocabulary of the book. He repeated "Vesuvio"
many times, however, with scornful, angry or imploring intonations, and
Louise finally said:

"He thinks you want to go to the volcano, Uncle. The hotel is the
Vesuve, not the Vesuvius."

"What's the difference?"

"I don't know."

"All right; you girls just hop in, and leave the rest to me."

He tumbled them all into the vehicle, bag and baggage, and then said
sternly to the driver:

"Ho-tel Ve-suve--Ve-suve--ho-tel Ve-suve! Drive there darned quick, or
I'll break your confounded neck."

The carriage started. It plowed its way jerkily through the dust-laden
streets and finally stopped at an imposing looking structure. The day
was growing darker, and an electric lamp burned before the entrance.
But no one came out to receive them.

Uncle John climbed out and read the sign. "Hotel du Vesuve." It was the
establishment he had been advised to stop at while in Naples. He
compared the sign with a card which he drew from his pocket, and knew
that he had made no mistake.

Entering the spacious lobby, he found it deserted. In the office a man
was hastily making a package of some books and papers and did not
respond or even look up when spoken to. At the concierge's desk a big,
whiskered man sat staring straight ahead of him with a look of abject
terror in his eyes.

"Good morning," said Uncle John. "Fine day, isn't it?"

"Did you hear it?" whispered the concierge, as a dull boom, like that of
a distant cannon, made the windows rattle in their casements.

"Of course," replied Mr. Merrick, carelessly. "Old Vesuve seems on a
rampage. But never mind that now. We've just come from America, where
the mountains are more polite, and we're going to stop at your hotel."

The concierge's eyes wandered from the man to the three girls who had
entered and grouped themselves behind him. Then they fell upon the
driver of the carriage, who burst into a torrent of vociferous but
wholly unintelligible exclamations which Uncle John declared "must be an
excuse--and a mighty poor one--for talking."

The whiskered man, whose cap was elaborately embroidered in gold with
the words "Hotel du Vesuve," seemed to understand the driver. He sighed
drearily and said to Mr. Merrick:

"You must pay him thirty lira."

"How much is that?"

"Six dollars."

"Not by a jugfull!"

"You made no bargain."

"I couldn't. He can't talk."

"He claims it is you who cannot talk."

"What!"

"And prices are advanced during these awful days. What does it matter?
Your money will do you no good when we are all buried deep in ash and
scoria."

The big man shuddered at this gloomy picture, and added, listlessly:
"You'll have to pay."

Uncle John paid, but the driver wouldn't accept American money. The
disconsolate concierge would, though. He unlocked a drawer, put the six
dollars into one section and drew from another two ten-lira notes. The
driver took them, bowed respectfully to the whiskered man, shot a
broadside of invective Italian at the unconscious Americans, and left
the hotel.

"How about rooms?" asked Uncle John.

"Take any you please," answered the concierge. "All our guests are gone
but two--two mad Americans like yourselves. The servants are also gone;
the chef has gone; the elevator conductors are gone. If you stay you'll
have to walk up."

"Where have they all gone?" asked Uncle John, wonderingly.

"Fled, sir; fled to escape destruction. They remember Pompeii. Only
Signor Floriano, the proprietor, and myself are left. We stick to the
last. We are brave."

"So I see. Now, look here, my manly hero. It's possible we shall all
live through it; I'll bet you a thousand to ten that we do. And then
you'll be glad to realize you've pocketed a little more American money.
Come out of that box and show us some rooms, and I'll help to build up
your fortune."

The concierge obeyed. Even the horrors of the situation could not
eliminate from his carefully trained nature that desire to accumulate
which is the prime qualification of his profession. The Americans walked
up one flight and found spacious rooms on the first floor, of which they
immediately took possession.

"Send for our trunks," said Mr. Merrick; and the man consented to do so
provided he could secure a proper vehicle.

"You will be obliged to pay high for it," he warned; "but that will not
matter. To witness the destruction of our beautiful Naples is an unusual
sight. It will be worth your money."

"We'll settle that in the dim hereafter," replied Uncle John. "You get
the trunks, and I'll take care of the finances."

When the concierge had retired the girls began to stuff newspapers into
the cracks of the windows of their sitting room, where the fine ash was
sifting in and forming little drifts several inches in thickness. Also
the atmosphere of the room was filled with impalpable particles of dust,
which rendered breathing oppressive and unpleasant.

Uncle John watched them for a time, and his brow clouded.

"See here, girls," he exclaimed; "let's hold a council of war. Do you
suppose we are in any real danger?"

They grouped around him with eager interest.

"It's something new to be in danger, and rather exciting, don't you
think?" said Beth. "But perhaps we're as safe as we would be at home."

"Once," said Louise, slowly, "there was a great eruption of Vesuvius
which destroyed the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii. Many of the
inhabitants were buried alive. Perhaps they thought there was no real
danger."

Uncle John scratched his head reflectively.

"I take it," he observed, "that the moral of your story is to light out
while we have the chance."

"Not necessarily," observed the girl, smiling at his perplexity. "It is
likewise true that many other eruptions have occurred, when little
damage was done."

"Forewarned is forearmed," declared Patsy. "Naples isn't buried more
than six inches in ashes, as yet, and it will take days for them to
reach to our windows, provided they're falling at the same rate they do
now. I don't see any use of getting scared before to-morrow, anyhow."

"It's a big hill," said Uncle John, gravely, "and I've no right to take
foolish chances with three girls on my hands."

"I'm not frightened, Uncle John."

"Nor I."

"Nor I, the least bit."

"Everyone has left the hotel but ourselves," said he.

"How sorry they will be, afterward," remarked Beth.

He looked at them admiringly, and kissed each one.

"You stay in this room and don't move a peg till I get back," he
enjoined them; "I'm going out to look over the situation."




CHAPTER VII

A FRIEND IN NEED


Some of Mr. Merrick's business friends in New York, hearing of his
proposed trip, had given him letters of introduction to people in
various European cities. He had accepted them--quite a bunch,
altogether--but had firmly resolved not to use them. Neither he nor the
nieces cared to make superficial acquaintances during their wanderings.
Yet Uncle John chanced to remember that one of these letters was to a
certain Colonel Angeli of the Twelfth Italian Regiment, occupying the
barracks on the Pizzofalcone hill at Naples. This introduction, tendered
by a relative of the Colonel's American wife, was now reposing in Mr.
Merrick's pocket, and he promptly decided to make use of it in order to
obtain expert advice as to the wisdom of remaining in the stricken city.

Enquiring his way from the still dazed concierge, he found that the
Pizzofalcone barracks were just behind the hotel but several hundred
feet above it; so he turned up the Strada St. Lucia and soon came upon
the narrow lane that wound upward to the fortifications. It was a long
and tedious climb in the semi-darkness caused by the steady fall of
ashes, and at intervals the detonations from Vesuvius shook the huge
rock and made its massive bulk seem insecure. But the little man
persevered, and finally with sweating brow arrived at the barracks.

A soldier carried in the letter to his colonel and presently returned to
usher Uncle John through the vast building, up a flight of steps, and so
to a large covered balcony suspended many hundred feet above the Via
Partenope, where the hotel was situated.

Here was seated a group of officers, watching intently the cloud that
marked the location of the volcano. Colonel Angeli, big and bluff, his
uniform gorgeous, his dark, heavy moustaches carefully waxed, his
handsome face as ingenuous and merry as a schoolboy's, greeted the
American with a gracious courtesy that made Uncle John feel quite at
his ease. When he heard of the nieces the Italian made a grimace and
then laughed.

"I am despairing, signore," said he, in English sufficiently
strangulated to be amusing but nevertheless quite comprehensible, "that
you and the sweet signorini are to see our lovely Naples under
tribulations so very great. But yesterday, in all the world is no city
so enchanting, so brilliant, so gay. To-day--look! is it not horrible?
Vesuvio is sick, and Naples mourns until the tyrant is well again."

"But the danger," said Uncle John. "What do you think of the wisdom of
our staying here? Is it safe to keep my girls in Naples during this
eruption?"

"Ah! Why not? This very morning the mountain asunder burst, and we who
love our people dread the news of devastation we shall hear. From the
observatory, where His Majesty's faithful servant still remains, come
telegrams that the great pebbles--what we call scoria--have ruined
Ottajano and San Guiseppe. Perhaps they are overwhelmed. But the beast
has vomited; he will feel better now, and ever become more quiet."

"I suppose," remarked Mr. Merrick, thoughtfully, "that no one knows
exactly what the blamed hill may do next. I don't like to take chances
with three girls on my hands. They are a valuable lot, Colonel, and
worth saving."

The boyish Italian instantly looked grave. Then he led Uncle John away
from the others, although doubtless he was the only officer present able
to speak or understand English, and said to him:

"Where are you living?"

"At the hotel named after your sick mountain--the Vesuve."

"Very good. In the bay, not distant from your hotel, lies a government
launch that is under my command. At my home in the Viala Elena are a
wife and two children, who, should danger that is serious arise, will be
put by my soldiers on the launch, to carry them to safety. Admirable, is
it not?"

"Very good arrangement," said Uncle John.

"It renders me content to know that in any difficulty they cannot be
hurt. I am not scare, myself, but it is pleasant to know I have what you
call the side that is safe. From my American wife I have many of your
excellent speech figures. But now! The launch is big. Remain happy in
Naples--happy as Vesuvio will let you--and watch his vast, his gigantic
exhibition. If danger come, you all enter my launch and be saved. If no
danger, you have a marvelous experience." The serious look glided from
his face, and was replaced by a smile as bright as before.

"Thank you very much," responded Uncle John, gratefully. "I shall go
back to the girls well satisfied."

"Make the signorini stay in to-day," warned the colonel. "It is bad,
just now, and so black one can nothing at all observe. To-morrow it will
be better, and all can go without. I will see you myself, then, and tell
you what to do."

Then he insisted that Uncle John clear his parched throat with a glass
of vermouth--a harmless drink of which all Italians are very fond--and
sent him away much refreshed in body and mind.

He made his way through the ashy rain back to the hotel. People were
holding umbrellas over their heads and plodding through the dust with
seeming unconcern. At one corner a street singer was warbling, stopping
frequently to cough the lava dust from his throat or shake it from his
beloved mandolin. A procession of peasants passed, chanting slowly and
solemnly a religious hymn. At the head of the column was borne aloft a
gilded statuette of the Virgin, and although Uncle John did not know it,
these simple folks were trusting in the sacred image to avert further
disaster from the angry mountain.

On arriving home Mr. Merrick told the girls with great elation of his
new friend, and how they were to be taken aboard the launch in case of
emergency.

"But how will we know when danger threatens?" asked Louise.

While Uncle John tried to think of an answer to this puzzling query
someone knocked upon the door. The concierge was standing in the
passage and beside him was a soldier in uniform, a natty cock's plume
upon his beaver hat and a short carbine over his arm.

"A guard from Colonel Angeli, Signor," said the concierge,
respectfully--the first respectful tone he had yet employed.

The soldier took off his hat with a flourish, and bowed low.

"He is to remain in the hotel, sir, yet will not disturb you in any
way," continued the whiskered one. "But should he approach you at any
time and beckon you to follow him, do so at once, and without
hesitation. It is Colonel Angeli's wish. You are in the charge of this
brave man, who will watch over your welfare."

"That settles it, my dears," said Uncle John, cheerfully, when the
soldier and the concierge had withdrawn. "This Italian friend doesn't do
things by halves, and I take it we are perfectly safe from this time
on."




CHAPTER VIII

ACROSS THE BAY


Tom Horton called an hour later. He was in despair because his party had
decided to leave Naples for Rome, and he feared Beth would be engulfed
by the volcano unless he was present to protect her.

"Mr. Merrick," said the boy, earnestly, "you'll take good care of Miss
De Graf, sir, won't you? We both live in Ohio, you know, and we've just
got acquainted; and--and I'd like to see her again, some time, if she
escapes."

Uncle John's eyes twinkled, but he drew a long face.

"My dear Tom," he said, "don't ask me to take care of anyone--please
don't! I brought these girls along to take care of _me_--three of 'em,
sir--and they've got to do their duty. Don't you worry about the girls;
just you worry about _me_."

That was not much consolation for the poor fellow, but he could do
nothing more than wring their hands--Beth's twice, by mistake--and wish
them good luck before he hurried away to rejoin his family.

"I'm sorry to see him go," said Beth, honestly. "Tom is a nice boy."

"Quite right," agreed Uncle John. "I hope we shall meet no worse fellows
than Tom Horton."

At noon they were served a modest luncheon in their rooms, for Signor
Floriano, having sent his important papers to a place of safety, had
resolved to stick to his hotel and do his duty by any guests that chose
to remain with him in defiance of the existent conditions. He had
succeeded in retaining a few servants who had more courage than those
that had stampeded at the first alarm, and while the hotel service for
the next few days was very inadequate, no one was liable to suffer any
great privation.

During the afternoon the gloom grew denser than before, while thicker
than ever fell the rain of ashes. This was the worst day Naples
experienced during the great eruption, and Uncle John and his nieces
were content to keep their rooms and live in the glare of electric
lights. Owing to their wise precautions to keep out the heavily laden
air they breathed as little lava dust into their lungs as any people,
perhaps, in the city; but to escape all was impossible. Their eyes and
throats became more or less inflamed by the floating atoms, and the
girls declared they felt as if they were sealed up in a tomb.

"Well, my chickens, how do you like being abroad, and actually in
Europe?" enquired Uncle John, cheerfully.

Beth and Patsy smiled at him, but Louise looked up from the Baedecker
she was studying and replied:

"It's simply delightful, Uncle, and I'm glad we happened here during
this splendid eruption of Vesuvius. Only--only--"

"Only what, my dear?"

"Only it is such hard work to keep clean," answered his dainty niece.
"Even the water is full of lava, and I'm sure my face looks like a
chimney-sweep's."

"And you, Beth?"

"I don't like it, Uncle. I'm sure I'd prefer Naples in sunshine,
although this is an experience we can brag about when we get home."

"That is the idea, exactly," said Louise, "and the only thing that
reconciles me to the discomforts. Thousands see Naples in sunshine, but
few can boast seeing Vesuvius in eruption. It will give us considerable
prestige when we return home."

"Ah, that is why I selected this time to bring you here," declared Uncle
John, with a comical wink. "I ordered the eruption before I left home,
and I must say they've been very prompt about it, and done the thing up
brown. Eh, Patsy?"

"Right you are, Uncle. But you might tell 'em to turn off the eruption
now, because we've had enough."

"Don't like Eu-rope, eh?"

"Why, if I thought all Europe was surrounded by volcanoes, I'd go home
at once, if I had to walk. But the geographies don't mention many of
these spouters, so we may as well stick out our present experience and
hope the rest of the continent will behave better. The Major'll be
worried to death when he hears of this."

"I've sent him a cable," said Uncle John.

"What did you say?" asked Patsy, eagerly.

"'All safe and well and enjoying the fireworks.'"

"I'm glad you did that," replied the girl, deeply grateful at this
evidence of thoughtfulness. "It's bad enough for the Major to have me
away, without making him worry, into the bargain."

"Well, no one is likely to worry about me," said Beth, philosophically.

"Mother seldom reads the papers, except to get the society news,"
remarked Louise. "I doubt if she'll hear of the eruption, unless the
Major happens to tell her."

"I've cabled them all," said Uncle John. "They're entitled to know that
their kidiwinkles are in good shape."

The evening was a tedious one, although they tried to enliven it with a
game of bridge, in which Uncle John and Louise were quite proficient
and the others dreadfully incompetent. Once in a while the volcano
thundered a deep detonation that caused the windows to shiver, but the
Americans were getting used to the sound and paid little heed to it.

In the morning the wind had shifted, and although the air was still full
of dust all near-by objects were clearly visible and even the outline of
Vesuvius could be seen sending skyward its pillar of black smoke.

Colonel Angeli appeared soon after breakfast, his uniform fresh and
bright and his boyish face beaming as pleasantly as ever.

"Vesuvio is better," said he, "but the rascal has badly acted and done
much harm to our poor people. Like Herculaneum, our Boscatrecase is
covered with lava; like Pompeii our Ottajano is buried in ashes. Let me
advise you. To-day go to Sorrento, and there stay for a time, until we
can the dust brush from our streets and prepare to welcome you with the
comfort more serene. I must myself ride to the villages that are
suffering. My men are already gone, with the Red-Cross corps, to succor
whom they can. I will send to you word when you may return. Just now,
should you stay, you will be able to see nothing at all."

"I believe that is wise counsel," replied Uncle John.

"Sorrento has no ashes," continued the Colonel, "and from there you may
watch the volcano better than from Naples. To-day come the Duke and
Duchess d'Aosta to render assistance to the homeless and hungry;
to-morrow His Majesty the King will be here to discover what damage has
been caused. Alas! we have no sackcloth, but we are in ashes. I trust
you will pardon my poor Naples for her present inhospitality."

"Sure thing," said Uncle John. "The city may be under a cloud, but her
people are the right stuff, and we are greatly obliged to you for all
your kindness to us."

"But that is so little!" said the colonel, deprecatingly.

They decided to leave their heavy baggage at the Hotel du Vesuve, and
carried only their suit-cases and light luggage aboard the little
steamer that was bound across the bay for Sorrento. The decks were
thronged with people as eager to get away from the stricken city as were
our friends, and Uncle John was only enabled to secure seats for his
girls by bribing a steward so heavily that even that modern brigand was
amazed at his good fortune.

The ride was short but very interesting, for they passed under the
shadow of the smoking mountain and came into a fresh, sweet atmosphere
that was guiltless of a speck of the disagreeable lava dust that had so
long annoyed them. The high bluffs of Sorrento, with their picturesque
villas and big hotels, seemed traced in burnished silver by the strong
sunshine, and every member of Uncle John's party was glad that Colonel
Angeli had suggested this pleasant change of condition.

Small boats took them ashore and an elevator carried them swiftly to the
top of the cliff and deposited them on the terrace of the Victoria, a
beautiful inn that nestled in a garden brilliant with splendid flowers
and shrubbery. Here they speedily established themselves, preparing to
enjoy their first real experience of "Sunny Italy."




CHAPTER IX

COUNT FERRALTI


At dinner it was announced that the famous Tarantella would be danced in
the lower hall of the hotel at nine o'clock, and the girls told Uncle
John that they must not miss this famous sight, which is one of the most
unique in Sorrento, or indeed in all Italy.

As they entered the pretty, circular hall devoted to the dance Louise
gave a start of surprise. A goodly audience had already assembled in the
room, and among them the girl seemed to recognize an acquaintance, for
after a brief hesitation she advanced and placed her hand in that of a
gentleman who had risen on her entrance and hastened toward her.

He was a nice looking young fellow, Beth thought, and had a foreign and
quite distinguished air.

Presently Louise turned with cheeks somewhat flushed and brought the
gentleman to her party, introducing him to Uncle John and her cousins as
Count Ferralti, whom she had once met in New York while he was on a
visit to America.

The Count twirled his small and slender moustaches in a way that Patsy
thought affected, and said in excellent English:

"It delights me to meet Mr. Merrick and the young ladies. May I express
a hope that you are pleased with my beautiful country?"

"Are you Italian?" asked Uncle John, regarding the young man critically.

"Surely, Mr. Merrick. But I have resided much in New York, and may well
claim to be an adopted son of your great city."

"New York adopts a good many," said Uncle John, drily. "It has even been
thoughtless enough to adopt me."

The dancers entered at that moment and the Americans were forced to seat
themselves hastily so as not to obstruct the view of others. Count
Ferralti found a place beside Louise, but seemed to have little to say
to her during the course of the entertainment.

The dances were unique and graceful, being executed by a troup of
laughing peasants dressed in native costume, who seemed very proud of
their accomplishment and anxious to please the throng of tourists
present. The Tarantella originated in Ischia, but Sorrento and Capri
have the best dancers.

Afterward Uncle John and his nieces stood upon the terrace and watched
the volcano rolling its dense clouds, mingled with sparks of red-hot
scoria, toward the sky. The Count clung to Louise's side, but also tried
to make himself agreeable to her cousins. In their rooms that night
Patsy told Beth that the young foreigner was "too highfalutin' to suit
her," and Beth replied that his manners were so like those of their
Cousin Louise that the two ought to get along nicely together.

Uncle John liked his nieces to make friends, and encouraged young men
generally to meet them; but there was something in the appearance of
this callow Italian nobleman that stamped his character as artificial
and insincere. He resolved to find out something about his antecedents
before he permitted the young fellow to establish friendly relations
with his girls.

Next morning after breakfast he wandered through the lobby and paused at
the little office, where he discovered that the proprietor of this hotel
was a brother of that Floriano who managed the Hotel du Vesuve. That
gave him an excuse to talk with the man, who spoke very good English and
was exceedingly courteous to his guests--especially when they were
American.

"I see you have Count Ferralti with you," remarked Uncle John.

"Whom, sir?"

"Ferralti--Count Ferralti. The young man standing by the window,
yonder."

"I--I did not know," he said, hesitatingly. "The gentleman arrived last
evening, and I had not yet learned his name. Let me see," he turned to
his list of guests, who register by card and not in a book, and
continued: "Ah, yes; he has given his name as Ferralti, but added no
title. A count, did you say?"

"Yes," replied Uncle John.

The proprietor looked curiously toward the young man, whose back only
was visible. Then he remarked that the eruption of Vesuvius was waning
and the trouble nearly over for this time.

"Are the Ferraltis a good family?" asked Uncle John, abruptly.

"That I cannot tell you, Signor Merrick."

"Oh. Perhaps you know little about the nobility of your country."

"I! I know little of the nobility!" answered Floriano, indignantly. "My
dear signor, there is no man better posted as to our nobility in all
Italy."

"Yet you say you don't know the Ferralti family."

The proprietor reached for a book that lay above his desk.

"Observe, signor. Here is our record of nobility. It is the same as the
'Blue Book' or the 'Peerage' of England. Either fortunately or
unfortunately--I cannot say--you have no need of such a book in
America."

He turned the pages and ran his finger down the line of "Fs."

"Find me, if you can, a Count Ferralti in the list."

Uncle John looked. He put on his glasses and looked again. The name of
Ferralti was no place in the record.

"Then there is no such count, Signor Floriano."

"And no such noble family, Signor Merrick."

Uncle John whistled softly and walked away to the window. The young man
greeted him with a smile and a bow.

"I misunderstood your name last evening," he said. "I thought you were
Count Ferralti."

"And that is right, sir," was the prompt reply. "Allow me to offer you
my card."

Uncle John took the card and read:

     "CONTE LEONARDI FERRALTI,
                     Milano, Italia."

He carefully placed the card in his pocket-book.

"Thank you," said he. "It's a fine morning, Count."

"Charming, Mr. Merrick."

Uncle John walked away. He was glad that he had not suspected the young
man unjustly. When an imposture is unmasked it is no longer dangerous.

He joined his nieces, who were all busily engaged in writing letters
home, and remarked, casually:

"You've been deceived in your Italian friend, Louise. He is neither a
count nor of noble family, although I suppose when you met him in New
York he had an object in posing as a titled aristocrat."

The girl paused, examining the point of her pen thoughtfully.

"Are you sure, Uncle John?"

"Quite sure, my dear. I've just been through the list of Italian counts,
and his name is not there. Floriano, the proprietor, who knows every
aristocrat in Italy, has never before heard of him."

"How singular!" exclaimed Louise. "I wonder why he has tried to deceive
us."

"Oh, the world is full of impostors; but when you are on to their game
they are quite harmless. Of course we won't encourage this young man in
any way. It will be better to avoid him."

"He--he seems very nice and gentlemanly," said Louise with hesitation.

The other girls exchanged glances, but made no remark. Uncle John hardly
knew what to say further. He felt he was in an awkward position, for
Louise was the most experienced in worldly ways of his three nieces and
he had no desire to pose as a stern guardian or to deprive his girls of
any passing pleasure they might enjoy. Moreover, Louise being in love
with that young Weldon her mother so strongly objected to, she would not
be likely to care much for this Italian fellow, and Mrs. Merrick had
enjoined him to keep her daughter's mind from dwelling on her
"entanglement."

"Oh, well, my dear," he said to her, "you must act as you see fit. I do
not imagine we shall see much of this young man, in any event, and now
that you are well aware of the fact that he is sailing under false
colors, you will know how to handle him better than I can advise you."

"I shall be very careful," said Louise slowly, as she resumed her
writing.

"Well then, girls, what do you say to a stroll around the village?"
asked their uncle. "I'm told it's a proper place to buy silk stockings
and inlaid wood-work. They come assorted, I suppose."

Beth and Patsy jumped up with alacrity, but Louise pleaded that she had
several more letters to write; so the others left her and passed the
rest of the forenoon in rummaging among the quaint shops of Sorrento,
staring at the statue of Tasso, and enjoying the street scenes so
vividly opposed to those of America. It was almost their first glimpse
of foreign manners and customs. In Naples they had as yet seen nothing
but darkness and falling ashes.




CHAPTER X

THE ROAD TO AMALFI


The Hotel Victoria faces the bay of Naples. Back of it are the famous
gardens, and as you emerge from these you find yourself upon the narrow
main street of Sorrento, not far from the Square of Tasso.

As our little party entered this street they were immediately espied by
the vetturini, or cabmen, who rushed toward them with loud cries while
they waved their whips frantically to attract attention. One tall fellow
was dressed in a most imposing uniform of blue and gold, with a high hat
bearing a cockade _a la Inglese_ and shiny top boots. His long legs
enabled him to outstrip the others, and in an almost breathless voice he
begged Uncle John to choose his carriage: "the besta carrozza ina town!"

"We don't want to ride," was the answer.

The cabman implored. Certainly they must make the Amalfi drive, or to
Massa Lubrense or Saint' Agata or at least Il Deserto! The others stood
by to listen silently to the discussion, yielding first place to the
victor in the race.

Uncle John was obdurate.

"All we want to-day is to see the town," he declared, "We're not going
to ride, but walk."

"Ah, but the Amalfi road, signore! Surely you will see that."

"To-morrow, perhaps; not now."

"To-morrow, signore! It is good. At what hour, to-morrow,
illustrissimo?"

"Oh, don't bother me."

"We may as well drive to Amalfi to-morrow," suggested Beth. "It is the
proper thing to do, Uncle."

"All right; we'll go, then."

"You take my carrozza, signore?" begged the cabman. "It is besta ina
town."

"Let us see it."

Instantly the crowd scampered back to the square, followed more
leisurely by Uncle John and the girls. There the uniformed vetturio
stood beside the one modern carriage in the group. It was new; it was
glossy; it had beautiful, carefully brushed cushions; it was drawn by a
pair of splendid looking horses.

"Is not bellissima, signore?" asked the man, proudly.

"All right," announced Uncle John, nodding approval. "Be ready to start
at nine o'clock to-morrow morning."

The man promised, whereat his confreres lost all interest in the matter
and the strangers were allowed to proceed without further interruption.

They found out all about the Amalfi drive that evening, and were glad
indeed they had decided to go. Even Louise was pleased at the
arrangement and as eager as the others to make the trip. It is one of
the most famous drives in the world, along a road built upon the rocky
cliff that overhangs the sea and continually winds in and out as it
follows the outlines of the crags.

They had an early breakfast and were ready at nine o'clock; but when
they came to the gate of the garden they found only a dilapidated
carriage standing before it.

"Do you know where my rig is?" Uncle John asked the driver, at the same
time peering up and down the road.

"It is me, sir signore. I am engage by you. Is it not so?"

Mr. Merrick looked at the driver carefully. It was long-legs, sure
enough, but shorn of his beautiful regalia.

"Where's your uniform?" he asked.

"Ah, I have leave it home. The road is dusty, very; I must not ruin a
nice dress when I work," answered the man, smiling unabashed.

"But the carriage. What has become of the fine carriage and the good
horses, sir?"

"Ah, it is dreadful; it is horrible, signore. I find me the carrozza is
not easy; it is not perfect; it do not remain good for a long ride. So I
leave him home, for I am kind. I do not wish the signorini bella to tire
and weep. But see the fine vetture you now have! Is he not easy like
feathers, an' strong, an' molto buena?"

"It may be a bird, but it don't look it," said Uncle John, doubtfully.
"I rented the best looking rig in town, and you bring me the worst."

"Only try, signore! Others may look; it is only you who must ride. You
will be much please when we return."

"Well, I suppose we may as well take it," said the little man, in a
resigned tone. "Hop in, my dears."

They entered the crazy looking vehicle and found the seats ample and
comfortable despite the appearance of dilapidation everywhere prevalent.
The driver mounted the box, cracked his whip, and the lean nags ambled
away at a fair pace.

They passed near to the square, where the first thing that attracted
Uncle John's attention was the beautiful turnout he had hired yesterday.
It was standing just as it had before, and beside it was another man
dressed in the splendid uniform his driver had claimed that he had left
at home.

"Here--stop! Stop, I say!" he yelled at the man, angrily. But the fellow
seemed suddenly deaf, and paid no heed. He cracked his whip and rattled
away through the streets without a glance behind him. The girls laughed
and Uncle John stopped waving his arms and settled into his seat with a
groan.

"We've been swindled, my dears," he said; "swindled most beautifully.
But I suppose we may as well make the best of it."

"Better," agreed Patsy. "This rig is all right, Uncle. It may not be as
pretty as the other, but I expect that one is only kept to make
engagements with. When it comes to actual use, we don't get it."

"That's true enough," he returned. "But I'll get even with this rascal
before I've done with him, never fear."

It was a cold, raw morning, but the portiere at the Victoria had told
them the sun would be out presently and the day become more genial.
Indeed, the sun did come out, but only to give a discouraged look at the
landscape and retire again. During this one day in which they rode to
Amalfi and back, Uncle John afterward declared that they experienced
seven different kinds of weather. They had sunshine, rain, hail, snow
and a tornado; and then rain again and more sunshine. "Sunny Italy"
seemed a misnomer that day, as indeed it does many days in winter and
spring, when the climate is little better than that prevailing in the
eastern and central portions of the United States. And perhaps one
suffers more in Italy than in America, owing to the general lack of
means to keep warm on cold days. The Italian, shivering and blue, will
tell you it is not cold at all, for he will permit no reproach to lie on
his beloved land; but the traveller frequently becomes discouraged, and
the American contingent, especially, blames those misleading English
writers who, finding relief from their own bleak island in Italian
climes, exaggerated the conditions by apostrophizing the country as
"Sunny Italy" and for more than a century uttered such rhapsodies in its
praise that the whole world credited them--until it acquired personal
experience of the matter.

Italy is beautiful; it is charming and delightful; but seldom is this
true in winter or early spring.

The horses went along at a spanking pace that was astonishing. They
passed through the picturesque lanes of Sorrento, climbed the further
slope, and brought the carriage to the other side of the peninsula,
where the girls obtained their first view of the Gulf of Salerno, with
the lovely Isles of the Sirens lying just beneath them.

And now they were on the great road that skirts the coast as far as
Salerno, and has no duplicate in all the known world. For it is cut from
the solid rock of precipitous cliffs rising straight from the sea, which
the highway overhangs at an average height of five hundred feet, the
traveller being protected only by a low stone parapet from the vast gulf
that yawns beneath. And on the other side of the road the cliffs
continue to ascend a like distance toward the sky, their irregular
surfaces dotted with wonderful houses that cling to the slopes, and
vineyards that look as though they might slip down at any moment upon
the heads of timorous pilgrims.

When it rained they put up the carriage top, which afforded but partial
shelter. The shower was brief, but was shortly followed by hail as big
as peas, which threatened to dash in the frail roof of their _carrozza_.
While they shrank huddled beneath the blankets, the sun came out
suddenly, and the driver shed his leathern apron, cracked his whip, and
began singing merrily as the vehicle rolled over the smooth road.

Our travellers breathed again, and prepared to enjoy once more the
wonderful vistas that were unfolded at every turn of the winding way.
Sometimes they skirted a little cove where, hundreds of feet below, the
fishermen sat before their tiny huts busily mending their nets. From
that distance the boats drawn upon the sheltered beach seemed like mere
toys. Then they would span a chasm on a narrow stone bridge, or plunge
through an arch dividing the solid mountain. But ever the road returned
in a brief space to the edge of the sea-cliff, and everywhere it was
solid as the hills themselves, and seemingly as secure.

They had just sighted the ancient town of Positano and were circling a
gigantic point of rock, when the great adventure of the day overtook
them. Without warning the wind came whistling around them in a great
gale, which speedily increased in fury until it drove the blinded horses
reeling against the low parapet and pushed upon the carriage as if
determined to dash it over the precipice.

As it collided against the stone wall the vehicle tipped dangerously,
hurling the driver from his seat to dive headforemost into the space
beneath. But the man clung to the reins desperately, and they arrested
his fall, leaving him dangling at the end of them while the maddened
horses, jerked at the bits by the weight of the man, reared and plunged
as if they would in any instant tumble themselves and the carriage over
the cliff.

At this critical moment a mounted horseman, who unobserved had been
following the party, dashed to their rescue. The rider caught the
plunging steeds by their heads and tried to restrain their terror, at
his own eminent peril, while the carriage lay wedged against the wall
and the driver screamed pitifully from his dangerous position midway
between sea and sky.

Then Beth slipped from her seat to the flat top of the parapet, stepped
boldly to where the reins were pulling upon the terrified horses, and
seized them in her strong grasp.

"Hold fast," she called calmly to the driver, and began dragging him
upward, inch by inch.

He understood instantly the task she had undertaken, and in a moment his
courage returned and he managed to get his foot in a crack of the rock
and assist her by relieving her of part of his weight. Just above was a
slight ledge; he could reach it now; and then she had him by the arm, so
that another instant found him clinging to the parapet and drawing
himself into a position of safety.

The wind had died away as suddenly as it came upon them. The horses, as
soon as the strain upon their bits was relaxed, were easily quieted.
Before those in the carriage had quite realized what had occurred the
adventure was accomplished, the peril was past, and all was well again.

Uncle John leaped from the carriage, followed by Louise and Patsy. The
young horseman who had come to their assistance so opportunely was none
other than Count Ferralti, whom they had such good reason to distrust.
He was sitting upon his horse and staring with amazement at Beth, at
whose feet the driver was grovelling while tears flowed down his bronzed
cheeks and he protested in an absurd mixture of English and Italian, by
every saint in the calendar, that the girl had saved him from a
frightful death and he would devote his future life to her service.

"It is wonderful!" murmured Ferralti. "However could such a slip of a
girl do so great a deed?"

"Why, it's nothing at all," returned Beth, flushing; "we're trained to
do such things in the gymnasium at Cloverton, and I'm much stronger than
I appear to be."

"'Twas her head, mostly," said Patsy, giving her cousin an admiring hug;
"she kept her wits while the rest of us were scared to death."

Uncle John had been observing the Count. One of the young man's hands
hung limp and helpless.

"Are you hurt, sir?" he asked.

Ferralti smiled, and his eyes rested upon Louise.

"A little, perhaps, Mr. Merrick; but it is unimportant. The horses were
frantic at the time and wrenched my wrist viciously as I tried to hold
them. I felt something snap; a small bone, perhaps. But I am sure it is
nothing of moment."

"We'd better get back to Sorrento," said Uncle John, abruptly.

"Not on my account, I beg of you," returned Ferralti, quickly. "We are
half way to Amalfi now, and you may as well go on. For my part, if the
wrist troubles me, I will see a surgeon at Amalfi--that is, if you
permit me to accompany you."

He said this with a defferent bow and a glance of inquiry.

Uncle John could not well refuse. The young fellow might be a sham
count, but the manliness and courage he had displayed in their grave
emergency surely entitled him to their grateful consideration.

"You are quite welcome to join us," said Uncle John.

The driver had by now repaired a broken strap and found his equippage
otherwise uninjured.

The horses stood meekly quiescent, as if they had never known a moment's
fear in their lives. So the girls and their uncle climbed into the
vehicle again and the driver mounted the box and cracked his whip with
his usual vigor.

The wind had subsided as suddenly as it had arisen, and as they passed
through Positano--which is four hundred feet high, the houses all up and
down the side of a cliff like swallows' nests--big flakes of snow were
gently falling around them.

Count Ferralti rode at the side of the carriage but did not attempt much
conversation. His lips were tight set and the girls, slyly observing his
face, were sure his wrist was hurting him much more than he cared to
acknowledge.

Circling around the cliff beyond Positano the sun greeted them, shining
from out a blue sky, and they wondered what had become of the bad
weather they had so lately experienced.

From now on, past Prajano and into Amalfi, the day was brilliant and the
temperature delightful. It was full noon by the time they alighted at
the little gate-house of the ancient Cappuccini-Convento, now a hotel
much favored by the tourist. Count Ferralti promised to join them later
and rode on to the town to find a surgeon to look after his injured
hand, while the others slowly mounted the long inclines leading in a
zigzag fashion up to the old monastery, which was founded in the year
1212.

From the arbored veranda of this charming retreat is obtained one of the
finest views in Europe, and while the girls sat enjoying it Uncle John
arranged with a pleasant faced woman (who had once lived in America) for
their luncheon.

An hour later, and just as they were sitting down to the meal, Count
Ferralti rejoined them. His hand was bandaged and supported by a sling,
and in answer to Louise's gentle inquiries he said, simply:

"It was as I had feared: a small bone snapped. But my surgeon is
skillful, and says time will mend the wrist as good as new."

In spite of his courage he could eat no luncheon, but merely sipped a
glass of wine; so Uncle John, alarmed at his pallor, insisted that he
take a seat in the carriage on the return journey. Beth wanted to ride
the Count's horse home, but there was no side saddle to be had, so they
led the animal by a halter fastened behind the ricketty carriage, and
Beth mounted the box and rode beside her friend the driver.

The pleasant weather lasted until they neared Sorrento, when another
shower of rain came up. They reached their hotel damp and bedraggled,
but enthusiastic over their wonderful trip and the interesting adventure
it had incidentally developed.




CHAPTER XI

THE EAGLE SCREAMS


Despite the glories of the Amalfi road our tourists decided it was more
pleasant to loiter around Sorrento for a time than to undertake further
excursions. The mornings and evenings were chill, but during the middle
of the day the air was warm and delicious; so the girls carried their
books and fancy-work into the beautiful gardens or wandered lazily
through the high-walled lanes that shut in the villas and orange groves.
Sometimes they found a gate open, and were welcomed to the orchards and
permitted to pluck freely the fragrant and rich flavored fruit, which is
excelled in no other section of the south country. Also Uncle John, with
Beth and Patsy, frequented the shops of the wood-workers and watched
their delicate and busy fingers inlaying the various colored woods; but
Louise mostly kept to the garden, where Count Ferralti, being a
semi-invalid, was content to sit by her side and amuse her.

In spite of her uncle's discovery of the false position assumed by this
young man, Louise seemed to like his attentions and to approve his
evident admiration for her. His ways might be affected and effeminate
and his conversational powers indifferent; but his bandaged wrist was a
constant reminder to all the nieces that he possessed courage and ready
wit, and it was but natural that he became more interesting to them
because just now he was to an extent helpless, and his crippled hand had
been acquired in their service.

Uncle John watched the young fellow shrewdly, but could discover little
harm in him except his attempt to deceive them in regard to his name and
position. Yet in his mature eyes there was not much about Ferralti to
arouse admiration, and the little man considered his girls too sensible
to be greatly impressed by this youthful Italian's personality. So he
allowed him to sit with his nieces in the gardens as much as he
pleased, believing it would be ungrateful to deprive the count of that
harmless recreation.

"A reg'lar chaperone might think differently," he reflected; "but thank
goodness there are no dragons swimming in our cup of happiness."

One day they devoted to Capri and the Blue Grotto, and afterward they
lunched at the Quisisana and passed the afternoon in the town. But the
charms of Sorrento were too great for Capri to win their allegiance, and
they were glad to get back to their quaint town and delightful gardens
again.

The week passed all too swiftly, and then came a letter from Colonel
Angeli telling them to return to Naples and witness the results of the
eruption. This they decided to do, and bidding good-bye to Signor
Floriano and his excellent hotel they steamed across the bay and found
the "Vesuve" a vastly different hostelry from the dismal place they had
left in their flight from Naples. It was now teeming with life, for, all
danger being past, the tourists had flocked to the city in droves. The
town was still covered with ashes, but under the brilliant sunshine it
did not look as gloomy as one might imagine, and already thousands of
carts were busily gathering the dust from the streets and dumping it in
the waters of the bay. It would require months of hard work, though,
before Naples could regain a semblance of its former beauty.

Their friend the Colonel personally accompanied them to the towns that
had suffered the most from the eruption. At Boscatrecasa they walked
over the great beds of lava that had demolished the town--banks of
cinders looking like lumps of pumice stone and massed from twenty to
thirty feet in thickness throughout the valley. The lava was still so
hot that it was liable to blister the soles of their feet unless they
kept constantly moving. It would be many more days before the interior
of the mass became cold.

Through the forlorn, dust-covered vineyards they drove to San Guiseppe,
where a church roof had fallen in and killed one hundred and forty
people, maiming many more. The Red-Cross tents were pitched in the
streets and the whole town was one vast hospital. Ottajano, a little
nearer to the volcano, had been buried in scoria, and nine-tenths of
the roofs had fallen in, rendering the dwellings untenable.

From here a clear view of Mt. Vesuvius could be obtained. The shape of
the mountain had greatly altered and the cone had lost sixty-five feet
of its altitude. But when one gazed upon the enormous bulk of volcanic
deposit that littered the country for miles around, it seemed to equal a
dozen mountains the size of Vesuvius. The marvel was that so much ashes
and cinders could come from a single crater in so short a period.

Naples was cleaning house, but slowly and listlessly. The people seemed
as cheerful and light-hearted as ever. The volcano was one of their
crosses, and they bore it patiently. The theatres would remain closed
for some weeks to come, but the great Museo Nationale was open, and
Uncle John and his nieces were much interested in the bronze and marble
statuary that here form the greatest single collection in all the world.

It was at the Museum that Mr. Merrick was arrested for the first time
in his life, an experience he never afterward forgot.

Bad money is so common in Naples that Uncle John never accepted any
change from anyone, but obtained all his silver coins and notes directly
from the Banca Commerciale Italiana, a government institution. One
morning he drove with the girls to the museum and paid the cabman a
lira, but before he could ascend the steps the man was after him and
holding out a leaden coin, claiming that his fare had given him bad
money and must exchange it for good. This is so common a method of
swindling that Uncle John paid no heed to the demands of the cabman
until one of the Guard Municipale, in his uniform of dark blue with
yellow buttons and cap, placed a restraining hand upon the American's
shoulder.

Uncle John angrily shook him off, but the man persisted, and an
interpreter employed by the museum stepped forward and explained that
unless the cabman was given a good coin in exchange for the bad one the
guarde would be obliged to take him before a commissionaire, or
magistrate.

"But I gave him a good coin--a lira direct from the bank," declared
Uncle John.

"He exhibits a bad one," returned the interpreter, calmly.

"He's a swindler!"

"He is a citizen of Naples, and entitled to a just payment," said the
other, shrugging his shoulders.

"You are all leagued together," said Uncle John, indignantly. "But you
will get no more money out of me, I promise you."

The result was that the stubborn American was placed under arrest.
Leaving the girls at the museum in charge of Ferralti, who had made no
attempt to interfere in the dispute but implored Uncle John to pay and
avoid trouble, the angry prisoner was placed in the same cab he had
arrived in and, with the officer seated beside him, was publicly driven
to the office of the magistrate.

This official understood no English, but he glowered and frowned
fiercely when the American was brought before him. The guarde and the
cabman stood with bared bowed heads and in low tones preferred the
charge against the prisoner; but Uncle John swaggered up to the desk and
pounded his clinched fist upon it while he roared a defiance of Italian
injustice and threatened to "bring over a few war-ships and blow Naples
into kingdom come!"

The magistrate was startled, and ordered the prisoner searched for
concealed weapons. Uncle John doubled his fists and dared the guarde to
touch him.

Then the cabman was dispatched for someone who could speak English, and
when an interpreter arrived the American told him to send for the United
States consul and also to inform the magistrate that nothing but war
between America and Italy could wipe out the affront that had been
thrust upon him.

The magistrate was disturbed, and preferred not to send for the consul.
He offered to release Uncle John if he would give the cabman a good lira
in exchange for the bad one. The official fee would be five lira--or say
three lira--or even two. Uncle John flatly refused to pay anything to
anybody. Only war could settle this international complication--bloody
and bitter war. The consul must cable at once for war-ships and troops.
He would insist upon it. All compromise was now impossible!

The magistrate was frightened. The guarde's eyes bulged with horror and
he trembled visibly. It was evident they had made a grave mistake in
arresting this mad American, who was evidently a personage of great
importance and able to declare war at a moment's notice. The cabman, the
magistrate, the guarde and the interpreter put their heads together and
chattered voluble Italian--all speaking at once in excited tones--while
Uncle John continued to warn them at the top of his lungs that their
country was doomed to sudden annihilation and they were the culprits
responsible for the coming calamity.

As a result they bundled the irate American into the carriage again and
drove him poste haste back to the museum, where they deposited him upon
the steps. Then in a flash the guarde and the cabman disappeared from
sight and were seen no more.

The victor smiled proudly as his nieces rushed toward him.

"Did you have to pay another lira, Uncle?" asked Patsy, anxiously.

"Not on your life, my dear," mopping his brow vigorously. "They're a lot
of cutthroats and assassins--policemen, magistrates and all--but when
the eagle screams they're wise enough to duck."

The girls laughed.

"And did the eagle scream, then?" Patsy enquired.

"Just a little, my dear; but if it whispered it would sound mighty loud
in this mummified old world. But we've lost enough time for one day.
Come; let's go see 'Narcissus' and the 'Dancing Faun.'"




CHAPTER XII

MOVING ON


"Here's a letter from my dear old friend Silas Watson," said Uncle John,
delightedly. "It's from Palermo, where he has been staying with his
ward--and your friend, girls--Kenneth Forbes, and he wants me to lug you
all over to Sicily at once."

"That's jolly," said Patsy, with a bright smile. "I'd like to see
Kenneth again."

"I suppose he is a great artist, by this time," said Beth, musingly.

"How singular!" exclaimed Louise. "Count Ferralti told me only this
morning that he had decided to go to Palermo."

"Really?" said Uncle John.

"Yes, Uncle. Isn't it a coincidence?"

"Why, as for that," he answered, slowly, "I'm afraid it will prevent our
seeing the dear count--or whatever he is--again, at least for some
time. For Mr. Watson and Kenneth are just leaving Palermo, and he asks
us to meet him in another place altogether, a town called--called--let
me see; Tormenti, or Terminal, or something."

"Give me the letter, dear," said Patsy. "I don't believe it's Terminal
at all. Of course not," consulting the pages, "it's Taormina."

"Is that in Sicily?" he asked.

"Yes. Listen to what Mr. Watson says: 'I'm told it is the most beautiful
spot in the world, which is the same thing you hear about most beautiful
places. It is eight hundred feet above the Mediterranean and nestles
peacefully in the shadow of Mount Etna.'"

"Etna!" cried Uncle John, with a start. "Isn't that another volcano?"

"To be sure," said Beth, the geographer. "Etna is the biggest volcano in
the world."

"Does it spout?" he asked, anxiously.

"All the time, they say. But it is not usually dangerous."

"The proper thing, when you go to Eu-rope," declared Uncle John,
positively, "is to do Venice, where the turpentine comes from, and
Switzerland, where they make chocolate and goat's milk, and Paris and
Monte Carlo, where they kick high and melt pearls in champagne.
Everybody knows that. That's what goin' to Eu-rope really means. But
Sicily isn't on the programme, that I ever heard of. So we'll just tell
Silas Watson that we'll see him later--which means when we get home
again."

"But Sicily is beautiful," protested Patsy. "I'd as soon go there as
anywhere."

"It's a very romantic place," added Louise, reflectively.

"Everybody goes to France and Switzerland," remarked Beth. "But it's
because they don't know any better. Let's be original, Uncle, and keep
out of the beaten track of travel."

"But the volcano!" exclaimed Mr. Merrick. "Is it necessary to stick to
volcanoes to be original?"

"Etna won't hurt us, I'm sure," said Patsy.

"Isn't there a Greek theatre at Taormina?" asked Louise.

"I've never heard of it; but I suppose the Greeks have, if it's there,"
he replied. "But why not wait till we get home, and then go to Kieth's
or Hammerstein's?"

"You don't understand, dear. This theatre is very ancient."

"Playing minstrel shows in it yet, I suppose. Well, girls, if you say
Sicily, Sicily it is. All I'm after is to give you a good time, and if
you get the volcano habit it isn't my fault."

"It is possible the Count said Taormina, instead of Palermo," remarked
Louise, plaintively. "I wasn't paying much attention at the time. I'll
ask him."

The others ignored this suggestion. Said Patsy to her uncle:

"When do we go, sir?"

"Whenever you like, my dears."

"Then I vote to move on at once," decided the girl. "We've got the best
out of Naples, and it's pretty grimey here yet."

The other nieces agreed with her, so Uncle John went out to enquire the
best way to get to Sicily, and to make their arrangements.

The steamer "Victor Emmanuel" of the Navigazione General Italiana line
was due to leave Naples for Messina the next evening, arriving at its
destination the following morning. Uncle John promptly booked places.
The intervening day was spent in packing and preparing for the journey,
and like all travellers the girls were full of eager excitement at the
prospect of seeing something new.

"I'm told Sicily is an island," grumbled Uncle John. "Here we are, on a
trip to Eu-rope, and emigrating to an island the first thing we do."

"Sicily is Europe, all right, Uncle," answered Patsy. "At least, it
isn't Asia or Africa."

That assertion seemed to console him a little, and he grew cheerful
again.

The evening was beautiful as they embarked, but soon after leaving the
bay the little, tub-shaped steamer began to tumble and toss vigorously,
so that all the passengers aboard speedily sought their berths.

Uncle John found himself in a stuffy little cabin that smelled of tar
and various other flavors that were too mixed to be recognizable. As a
result he passed one of the most miserable nights of his life.

Toward morning he rolled out and dressed himself, preferring the deck to
his bed, and the first breath of salt air did much to restore him. Day
was just breaking, and to the right he could see a tongue of fire
flaming against the dark sky.

"What is that, sir?" he enquired of an officer who passed.

"That is Stromboli, signor, the great volcano of Lipari. It is always in
eruption."

Uncle John groaned.

"Volcanoes to right of us, volcanoes to left of us volleyed and
thundered," he muttered dismally, as he fell back in his chair.

The sky brightened, and the breath of the breeze changed and came to him
laden with delicious fragrance.

"See, signore!" called the officer, passing again; "before us is mighty
Etna--you can see it clearly from the bow."

"Volcanoes in front of us, volcanoes behind us!" wailed the little man.
But he walked to the bow and saw the shores of Sicily looming in
advance, with the outline of the stately mountain rising above and
dominating it.

Then the sun burst forth, flooding all with a golden radiance that was
magical in its gorgeous effects. Patsy came on deck and stood beside her
uncle, lost in rapturous admiration. Beth soon followed her.

Before long they entered the Straits of Messina and passed between the
classic rock of Scylla on the Calabrian coast, and the whirlpool of
Charybdis at the point of the promontory of Faro, which forms the end of
the famous "Golden Sickle" enclosing the Bay of Messina.

"If this is really Eu-rope, I'm glad we came," said Uncle John, drawing
a long breath as the ship came to anchor opposite the Palazzo
Municipale. "I don't remember seeing anything prettier since we left New
York."

Presently they had loaded their trunks and hand baggage, and
incidentally themselves, into the boat of the Hotel Trinacria which came
alongside in charge of a sleepy porter. After a brief examination at the
custom-house, where Uncle John denied having either sugar, tobacco or
perfumery, they followed on foot the truck laden with their worldly
possessions, and soon reached the hotel.

A pleasant breakfast followed, which they ate before a window
overlooking the busy marina, and then they drove about the town for a
time to see in a casual way the "sights." In the afternoon they took the
train for Taormina. Messina seemed a delightful place, but if they were
going to settle in Taormina for a time it would not pay them to unpack
or linger on the way.

So they rolled along the coast for a couple of hours in a quaint,
old-fashioned railway carriage, and were then deposited upon the
platform of the little station at Giardini.

"I'm afraid there has been a mistake," said the little man, gazing
around him anxiously. "There's no town here, and I told the guard to put
us off at Taormina--not this forlorn place."

Just then Beth discovered a line of carriages drawn up back of the
station. The drivers were mostly asleep inside them, although several
stood in a group arguing in fluent Italian the grave question as to
whether Signora Gani's cow had a black patch over its left shoulder, or
not.

Some of the carriages bore signs: "Hotel Timeo;" "Grand Hotel San
Domenico;" "Hotel Castello-a-Mare;" "Grand Hotel Metropole," and so
forth. In that of the Castello-a-Mare the man was awakening and rubbing
his eyes. Uncle John said to him:

"Good morning. Had a nice rest?"

"I thank you, signore, I am well refreshed," was the reply.

"By the way, can you tell us where the town of Taormina is? I hate to
trouble you; but we'd like to know."

The man waved an arm upward, and following the motion with their eyes
they saw a line of precipitous cliffs that seemed impossible to scale.

"Do you desire to go to the Grand Hotel Castello-a-Mare?" enquired the
driver, politely.

"Is it in Taormina?"

"Most certainly, signore."

"And you will take us?"

"With pleasure, signore."

"Oh; I didn't know. I supposed you were going to sleep again."

The man looked at him reproachfully.

"It is my business, signore. I am very attentive to my duties. If you
permit me to drive you to our splendide--our magnifico hotel--you will
confer a favor."

"How about the baggage?"

"The trunks, signor, we will send for later. There is really no hurry
about them. The small baggage will accompany us. You will remark how
excellent is my English. I am Frascatti Vietri; perhaps you have heard
of me in America?"

"If I have it has escaped my memory," said Uncle John, gravely.

"Have you been to America?" asked Beth.

"Surely, signorina. I lived in Chicago, which, as you are aware, is
America. My uncle had a fruit shop in South Water, a via which is
Chicago. Is it not so? You will find few in Taormina who can the English
speak, and none at all who can so perfectly speak it as Frascatti
Vietri."

"You are wonderful," said Patsy, delighted with him. But Uncle John
grew impatient to be off.

"I hate to interrupt you, Mr. Vietri," he hinted; "but if you can spare
the time we may as well make a start."

The driver consented. He gracefully swung the suit-cases and travelling
bags to the top of the vehicle and held the door open while his fares
entered. Then he mounted to his seat, took the reins, and spoke to the
horses. Some of the other drivers nodded at him cheerfully, but more as
if they were sorry he must exert himself than with any resentment at his
success in getting the only tourists who had alighted from the train.

As they moved away Uncle John said: "Observe the difference between the
cab-drivers here and those at home. In America they fight like beasts to
get a job; here they seem anxious to avoid earning an honest penny. If
there could be a happy medium somewhere, I'd like it."

"Are we going to the best hotel?" asked Louise, who had seemed a trifle
disconsolate because she had not seen Count Ferralti since leaving
Naples.

"I don't know, my dear. It wasn't a question of choice, but of
necessity. No other hotel seemed willing to receive us."

They were now winding upward over a wonderful road cut in the solid
rock. It was broad and smooth and protected by a parapet of dressed
limestone. Now and then they passed pleasant villas set in orchards of
golden oranges or groves of olives and almonds; but there was no sign of
life on any side.

The road was zigzag, making a long ascent across the face of the cape,
then turning abruptly to wind back again, but always creeping upward
until an open space showed the station far below and a rambling stone
building at the edge of the cliff far above.

"Behold!" cried Frascatti, pointing up, "the Grand Hotel
Castello-a-Mare; is it not the excellenza location?"

"Has it a roof?" asked Uncle John, critically.

"Of a certainty, signore! But it does not show from below," was the
grave reply.

At times Frascatti stopped his horses to allow them to rest, and then he
would turn in his seat to address his passengers in the open victoria
and descant upon the beauties of the panorama each turn unfolded.

"This road is new," said he, "because we are very progressive and the
old road was most difficulty. Then it was three hours from the bottom to
the top. Now it is but a short hour, for our energy climbs the three
miles in that brief time. Shall I stop here for the sunset, or will your
excellenzi hasten on?"

"If your energy approves, we will hasten," returned Uncle John. "We love
a sunset, because it's bound to set anyway, and we may as well make the
best of it; but we have likewise an objection to being out after dark.
Any brigands around here?"

"Brigands! Ah; the signor is merry. Never, since the days of Naxos, have
brigands infested our fair country."

"When were the days of Naxos?"

"Some centuries before Christ, signor," bowing his head and making the
sign of the cross.

"Very good. The brigands of those days must, of course, be dead by this
time. Now, sir, when you have leisure, let us hasten."

The horses started and crept slowly upward again. None of the party was
in a hurry. Such beautiful glimpses of scenery were constantly visible
from the bends of the road that the girls were enraptured, and could
have ridden for hours in this glorious fairyland.

But suddenly the horses broke into a trot and dragged the carriage
rapidly forward over the last incline. A moment later they dashed into
the court of the hotel and the driver with a loud cry of "Oo-ah!" and a
crack of his whip drew up before the entrance.

The portiere and the padrone, or landlord--the latter being also the
proprietaire--came out to greet them, extending to their guests a
courteous welcome. The house was very full. All of the cheaper rooms
were taken; but of course the Signor Americain would wish only the best
and be glad to pay.

Uncle John requested them to rob him as modestly as possible without
conflicting with their sense of duty, and they assured him they would do
so.

The rooms were adorable. They faced the sea and had little balconies
that gave one a view of the blue Mediterranean far beneath, with lovely
Isola Bella and the Capo San Andrea nestling on its bosom. To the right
towered the majestic peak of Etna, its crest just now golden red in the
dying sunset.

The girls drew in deep breaths and stood silent in a very ecstacy of
delight. At their feet was a terraced garden, running downward two
hundred feet to where the crag fell sheer to the sea. It was glorious
with blooming flowers of every sort that grows, and the people on the
balconies imagined at the moment they had been transferred to an earthly
paradise too fair and sweet for ordinary mortals. And then the glow of
the sun faded softly and twilight took its place. Far down the winding
road could be seen the train of carriages returning from the station,
the vetturini singing their native songs as the horses slowly ascended
the slope. An unseen organ somewhere in the distance ground out a
Neapolitan folk song, and fresh and youthful voices sang a clear, high
toned accompaniment.

Even practical Uncle John stood absorbed and admiring until the soft
voice of the facchino called to ask if he wanted hot water in which to
bathe before dinner.

"It's no use," said Patsy, smiling at him from the next balcony with
tears in her eyes; "There's not another Taormina on earth. Here we are,
and here we stay until we have to go home again."

"But, my dear, think of Paris, of Venice, of--"

"I'll think of nothing but this, Uncle John. Unless you settle down with
us here I'll turn milkmaid and live all my days in Sicily!"

Beth laughed, and drew her into their room.

"Don't be silly, Patsy dear," she said, calmly, although almost as
greatly affected as her cousin. "There are no cows here, so you can't be
a milkmaid."

"Can't I milk the goats, then?"

"Why, the men seem to do that, dear. But cheer up. We've only seen the
romance of Taormina yet; doubtless it will be commonplace enough
to-morrow."




CHAPTER XIII

IL DUCA


Beth's prediction, however, did not come true. The morning discovered
nothing commonplace about Taormina. Their hotel was outside the walls,
but a brief walk took them to the Messina Gate, a quaint archway through
which they passed into the narrow streets of one of the oldest towns in
Sicily. Doorways and windows of Saracen or Norman construction faced
them on every side, and every inch of the ancient buildings was
picturesque and charming.

Some of the houses had been turned into shops, mostly for the sale of
curios. Uncle John and his nieces had scarcely passed a hundred yards
into the town when one of these shops arrested their attention. It was
full of antique jewelry, antique furniture, antique laces and antique
pottery--all of the most fascinating description. The jewelry was
tarnished and broken, the lace had holes in it and the furniture was
decrepit and unsteady; but the proprietor cared nothing for such
defects. All was very old, and he knew the tourist was eager to buy. So
he scattered his wares inside and outside his salesroom, much as the
spider spreads his web for the unwary, and waited for the inevitable
tourist with a desire to acquire something ancient and useless.

The girls could not be induced to pass the shop. They entered the
square, low room and flooded the shopman with eager questions.
Notwithstanding Frascatti's assertion that few in Taormina could speak
English, this man was quite intelligible and fixed his prices according
to the impression his wares made upon the artistic sense of the young
American ladies.

It was while they were intently inspecting some laces that the
proprietor suddenly paused in his chatter, removed his hat and bowed
almost to the floor, his face assuming at the same time a serious and
most humble expression.

Turning around they saw standing outside the door a man whom they
recognized at once as their fellow passenger aboard the "Princess
Irene."

"Oh, Signor Valdi!" cried Patsy, running toward him, "how strange to
find you again in this out-of-the-way place."

The Italian frowned, but in a dignified manner took the hand of all
three girls in turn and then bowed a greeting to Mr. Merrick.

Uncle John thought the fellow had improved in appearance. Instead of the
flannel shirt and Prince Albert coat he had affected on shipboard he now
wore a native costume of faded velvet, while a cloak of thin but
voluminous cloth swung from his shoulders, and a soft felt hat shaded
his dark eyes.

His appearance was entirely in keeping with the place, and the American
noticed that the villagers who passed doffed their hats most
respectfully to this seemingly well-known individual. But mingled with
their polite deference was a shyness half fearful, and none stopped to
speak but hurried silently on.

"And how do we happen to find you here, Signor Valdi?" Patsy was
saying. "Do you live in Taormina?"

"I am of this district, but not of Taormina," he replied. "It is chance
that you see me here. Eh, Signor Bruggi, is it not so?" casting one of
his characteristic fierce glances at the shopkeeper.

"It is so, your excellency."

"But I am glad you have come to the shadow of Etna," he continued,
addressing the Americans with slow deliberation. "Here the grandeur of
the world centers, and life keeps time with Nature. You will like it?
You will stay?"

"Oh, for a time, anyway," said Patsy.

"We expect to meet some friends here," explained Uncle John. "They are
coming down from Palermo, but must have been delayed somewhere on the
way."

"Who are they?" asked Valdi, brusquely.

"Americans, of course; Silas Watson and Kenneth Forbes. Do you know of
them?"

"No," said the other. He cast an uneasy glance up and down the street.
"I will meet you again, signorini," he added. "Which is your hotel?"

"The Castello-a-Mare. It is delightful," said Beth.

He nodded, as if pleased. Then, folding his cloak about him, he murmured
"adios!" and stalked away without another word or look.

"Queer fellow," remarked Uncle John.

The shopkeeper drew a long breath and seemed relieved.

"Il Duca is unusual, signore," he replied.

"Duke!" cried the girls, in one voice.

The man seemed startled.

"I--I thought you knew him; you seemed friends," he stammered.

"We met Signor Valdi on shipboard," said Uncle John.

"Valdi? Ah, yes; of course; the duke has been to America."

"Isn't his name Valdi?" asked Beth, looking the man straight in the
eyes. "Has he another name here, where he lives?"

The shopman hesitated.

"Who knows?" was the evasive reply. "Il Duca has many names, but we do
not speak them. When it is necessary to mention him we use his
title--the duke."

"Why?" asked the girl.

"Why, signorina? Why? Perhaps because he does not like to be talked
about. Yes; that is it, I am sure."

"Where does he live?" asked Patsy.

The man seemed uneasy under so much questioning.

"Somewhere in the mountains," he said, briefly. "His estates are there.
He is said to be very rich and powerful. I know nothing more,
signorini."

Realizing that little additional information could be gleaned from this
source they soon left the shop and wandered into the Piazzo Vittorio
Emanuele, and from thence by the narrow lane to the famous Teatro Greco.

For a time they admired this fascinating ruin, which has the best
preserved stage of any Greek theatre now in existence. From the top of
the hill is one of the most magnificent views in Sicily, and here our
travellers sat in contemplative awe until Uncle John declared it was
time to return to their hotel for luncheon.

As they passed the portiere's desk Mr. Merrick paused to ask that
important official:

"Tell me, if you please, who is Signor Victor Valdi?"

"Valdi, signore?"

"Yes; the Duke di Valdi, I suppose you call him."

"I have never heard of him," replied the man.

"But every one seems to know him in Taormina."

"Is it so? We have but one duke near to us, and he--. But never mind. I
do not know this Valdi."

"A thin faced man, with black eyes. We met him on the steamer coming
from America."

The portiere dropped his eyes and turned toward his desk.

"Luncheon is served, signore," he remarked. "Also, here is a letter for
you, which arrived this morning."

Uncle John took the letter and walked on to rejoin the girls.

"It seems hard work to find out anything about this Valdi," he said.
"Either the folks here do not know him, or they won't acknowledge his
acquaintance. We may as well follow suit, and avoid him."

"I don't like his looks a bit," observed Beth. "He seems afraid and
defiant at the same time, and his temper is dreadful. It was only with
great difficulty he could bring himself to be polite to us."

"Oh, I always got along with him all right," said Patsy. "I'm sure
Signor Valdi isn't as bad as he appears. And he's a duke, too, girls--a
real duke!"

"So it seems," Uncle John rejoined; "yet there is something queer about
the fellow, I agree with Beth; I don't like him."

"Did Mr. Watson say when he would join us here?" enquired Louise, when
they were seated at the little round table.

"No; but here's a letter from him. I'd quite forgotten it."

He tore open the envelope and carefully read the enclosure.

"Too bad," said he. "We might have stayed a few days in Messina. Watson
says he and Kenneth have stopped at Girgenti--wherever that is--to study
the temples. Wonder if they're Solomon's? They won't get to Taormina
before Saturday."

"It won't matter," declared Patsy, "so long as they arrive then. And I'd
a good deal rather be here than in Messina, or any other place. Of
course we'll all be glad to see Kenneth."

"Mr. Watson wants us to be very careful while we are in Sicily,"
continued Uncle John, referring to the letter. "Listen to this: 'Don't
let the girls wear jewelry in public places, or display their watches
openly; and take care, all of you, not to show much money. If you buy
anything, have it sent to your hotel to be paid for by the hall porter.
And it is wise not to let anyone know who you are or how long you intend
to remain in any one place. This may strike you as an absurd precaution;
but you must remember that you are not in America, but in an isolated
Italian province, where government control is inefficient. The truth is
that the terrible Mafia is still all powerful on this island, and
brigandage is by no means confined to the neighborhood of
Castrogiovanni, as the guide books would have you believe. The people
seem simple and harmless enough, but Kenneth and I always keep our
revolvers handy, and believe it is a reasonable precaution. I don't want
to frighten you, John; merely to warn you. Sicily is full of tourists,
and few are ever molested; but if you are aware of the conditions
underlying the public serenity you are not so liable to run yourself and
your nieces into needless dangers.' How's that for a hair-curler,
girls?"

"It sounds very romantic," said Louise, smiling. "Mr. Watson is such a
cautious man!"

"But it's all rubbish about there being danger in Taormina," declared
Patsy, indignantly. "Mr. Watson has been in the wilds of the interior,
which Baedecker admits is infested with brigands. Here everyone smiles
at us in the friendliest way possible."

"Except the duke," added Beth, with a laugh.

"Oh, the duke is sour by nature," Patsy answered; "but if there really
was danger, I'm sure he'd protect us, for he lives here and knows the
country."

"You are sure of a lot of things, dear," said her cousin, smiling. "But
it will do no harm to heed the advice, and be careful."

They all agreed to that, and Uncle John was glad to remember he had two
brand new revolvers in the bottom of his trunk, which he could use in an
emergency if he could manage to find the cartridges to load them with.

He got them out next morning, and warned his nieces not to touch the
dangerous things when they entered his room. But Patsy laughed at him,
saying:

"You are behind the times, Uncle. Beth has carried a revolver ever since
we started."

"Beth!" he cried, horrified.

"Just as a precaution," said that young lady, demurely.

"But you're only a child!"

"Even so, Uncle, I have been taught to shoot in Cloverton, as a part of
my education. Once I won a medal--think of that! So I brought my pet
revolver along, although I may never have need to use it."

Uncle John looked thoughtful.

"It doesn't seem like a girlish accomplishment, exactly," he mused.
"When I was young and went into the West, the times were a bit
unsettled, and I used to carry a popgun myself. But I never shot at a
human being in my life. There were women in the camps that could shoot,
too; but the safest place was always in front of them. If Beth has won a
medal, though, she might hit something."

"Don't try, Beth," said Louise; "you ought to make a hit without
shooting."

"Thank you, dear."

As they left their hotel for a walk they came upon Count Ferralti, who
was standing in the court calmly smoking a cigarette. His right hand was
still in a sling.

No one was greatly surprised at his appearance, but Uncle John uttered
an exclamation of impatience. It annoyed him that this fellow, whose
antecedents were decidedly cloudy, should be "chasing around" after one
of his nieces, Beth and Patsy smiled at each other significantly as the
young man was discovered, but Louise, with a slight blush, advanced to
greet Ferralti in her usual pleasant and cordial way.

There was no use resenting the intrusion. They owed a certain
consideration to this boyish Italian for his assistance on the Amalfi
road. But Uncle John almost wished he had left them to escape as best
they might, for the obligation was getting to be decidedly onerous.

While Ferralti was expressing his astonishment at so "unexpectedly"
meeting again his American friends, Uncle John discovered their English
speaking cocchiere, Frascatti Vietri, lolling half asleep on the box of
his victoria.

"Would your energy like to drive us this morning?" he asked.

"It is my duty, signore, if you wish to go," was the reply.

"Then you are engaged. Come, girls; hop in, if you want to ride."

The three nieces and Uncle John just filled the victoria. The count was
disconsolate at being so cleverly dropped from the party, but could
only flourish his hat and wish them a pleasant drive.

They descended the winding road to the coast, where Frascatti took the
highway to Sant' Alessio, a charming drive leading to the Taormina Pass.

"By the way," Uncle John asked the driver, "do you know of a duke that
lives in this neighborhood?"

The laughing face of the Sicilian suddenly turned grave.

"No, signore. There is the Prince di Scaletta; but no duke on this side
the town."

"But on the other side?"

"Oh; in the mountains? To be sure there are noblemen there; old estates
almost forgotten in our great civilization of to-day. We are very
progressive in Taormina, signore. There will be a fountain of the ice
cream soda established next summer. Quite metropolitan, _ne c'e_?"

"Quite. But, tell me, Frascatti, have you a duke in the mountains back
of Taormina?"

"Signore, I beg you to pay no attention to the foolish stories you may
hear from our peasants. There has been no brigandage here for
centuries. I assure you the country is perfectionly safe--especial if
you stay within the town or take me on your drives. They know me,
signore, and even Il Duca dares not trifle with my friends."

"Why should he, Frascatti, if there is no brigandage? Is it the Mafia?"

"Ah, I have heard that Mafia spoken of, but mostly when I lived in
America, which is Chicago. Here we do not know of the Mafia."

"But you advise us to be careful?"

"Everywhere, illustrissimo signore, it is well to be what you call the
circumspection. I remember that in the State street of Chicago, which is
America, peaceful citizens were often killed by bandits. Eh, is it not
so?"

"Quite probable," said Uncle John, soberly.

"Then, what will you? Are we worse than Americans, that you fear us?
Never mind Il Duca, or the tales they foolishly whisper of him. Here you
may be as safe and happy as in Chicago--which is America."

He turned to his horses and urged them up a slope. The girls and Uncle
John eyed one another enquiringly.

"Our duke seems to bear no good reputation," said Beth, in a tone so low
that Frascatti could not overhear. "Everyone fears to speak of him."

"Singular," said Uncle John, "that Patsy's friend turns out to be a
mystery, even in his own home. I wonder if he is a leader of the Mafia,
or just a common brigand?"

"In either case," said Patsy, "he will not care to injure us, I am sure.
We all treated him very nicely, and I just made him talk and be
sociable, whether he wanted to or not. That ought to count for something
in our favor. But my opinion is that he's just a gruff old nobleman who
lives in the hills and makes few friends."

"And hasn't a name, any more than Louise's count has. Is it customary,
my dear, for all Italian noblemen to conceal their identity?"

"I do not know, Uncle," answered Louise, casting down her eyes.




CHAPTER XIV

UNCLE JOHN DISAPPEARS


Uncle John grew to love Taormina. Its wildness and ruggedness somehow
reminded him of the Rockies in the old pioneer days, and he wandered
through all the lanes of the quaint old town until he knew every cornice
and cobblestone familiarly, and the women who sat weaving or mending
before their squalid but picturesque hovels all nodded a greeting to the
cheery little American as he passed by.

He climbed Malo, too, a high peak crowned by a ruined castle; and also
Mt. Venere, on the plateau of which an ancient city had once stood. His
walking tours did him good, and frequently while the girls lay stretched
upon the grass that lined the theatre enclosure, to idle the time or
read or write enthusiastic letters home, Uncle John, scorning such
laziness, would take his stick and climb mountains, or follow the rough
paths that diverged from the highway just beyond the Catania Gate.

The tax gatherer whose tiny office was just inside the gate came to know
the little gentleman very well, and although he could speak no English
he would bob his grizzled head and murmur: "_Buon giorno, signore!_" as
the stranger passed out on his daily stroll.

One afternoon Mr. Merrick went down the hill path leading from the
Castello-a-Mare to Capo di San Andrea, and as he passed around a narrow
ledge of rock came full upon two men seated upon a flat stone. One was
Valdi and the other Ferralti, and they seemed engaged in earnest
conversation when he interrupted them. The Count smiled frankly and
doffed his hat; the Duke frowned grimly, but also nodded.

Uncle John passed on. The path was wild and little frequented. He felt
in his side pocket and grasped the handle of his revolver; but there was
no attempt to follow or molest him. Nevertheless, when he returned from
the beach he came up the longer winding roadway and was glad of the
company of a ragged goatherd who, having no English, entertained "Il
Signore" by singing ditties as he drove his goats before him.

The misgivings Uncle John had originally conceived concerning Count
Ferralti returned in full force with this incident; but he resolved to
say nothing of it to his nieces. Silas Watson would be with them in a
couple of days more and he would consult the shrewd lawyer before he
took any decisive action.

Next morning after breakfast he left his nieces in the garden and said
he would take a walk through the town and along the highway west, toward
Kaggi.

"I'll be back in an hour or so," he remarked, "for I have some letters
to write and I want them to catch the noon mail."

So the girls sat on the terrace overlooking the sea and Etna, and
breathed the sweet air and enjoyed the caressing sunshine, until they
noticed the portiere coming hastily toward them.

"Pardon, signorini," he said, breathlessly, "but it will be to oblige me
greatly if you will tell me where Signor Ferralti is."

"He is not of our party," answered Patsy, promptly; but Louise looked up
as if startled, and said: "I have been expecting him to join us here."

"Then you do not know?" exclaimed the portiere, in an anxious tone.

"Know what, sir?" asked the girl.

"That Signor Ferralti is gone. He has not been seen by any after last
evening. He did not occupy his room. But worse, far worse, will I break
you the news gently--his baggage is gone with him!"

"His baggage gone!" echoed Louise, greatly disturbed. "And he did not
tell you? You did not see him go?"

"Alas, no, signorina. His bill is still unsettled. He possessed two
large travelling cases, which must have been carried out at the side
entrance with stealth most deplorable. The padrone is worried. Signor
Ferralti is American, and Americans seldom treat us wrongfully."

"Signor Ferralti is Italian," answered Louise, stiffly.

"The name is Italian, perhaps; but he speaks only the English," declared
the portiere.

"He is not a rogue, however. Assure your master of that fact. When Mr.
Merrick returns he will settle Count Ferralti's bill."

"Oh, Louise!" gasped Patsy.

"I don't understand it in the least," continued Louise, looking at her
cousins as if she were really bewildered. "I left him in the courtyard
last evening to finish his cigar, and he said he would meet us in the
garden after breakfast. I am sure he had no intention of going away. And
for the honor of American travellers his account here must be taken care
of."

"One thing is singular," observed Beth, calmly. "There has been no train
since last you saw him. If Count Ferralti has left the hotel, where
could he be?"

The portiere brightened.

"_Gia s'intende!_" he exclaimed, "he must still be in
Taormina--doubtless at some other hotel."

"Will you send and find out?" asked Louise.

"I will go myself, and at once," he answered. "And thank you,
signorina, for the kind assurance regarding the account. It will relieve
the padrone very much."

He hurried away again, and an uneasy silence fell upon the nieces.

"Do you care for this young man. Louise?" asked Beth, pointedly, after
the pause had become awkward.

"He is very attentive and gentlemanly, and I feel you have all wronged
him by your unjust suspicions," she replied, with spirit.

"That does not answer my question, dear," persisted her cousin. "Are you
especially fond of him?"

"What right have you to question me in this way, Beth?"

"No right at all, dear. I am only trying to figure out our doubtful
position in regard to this young man--a stranger to all of us but you."

"It is really none of our business," observed Patsy, quickly. "We're
just a lot of gossips to be figuring on Count Ferralti at all. And
although this sudden disappearance looks queer, on the face of it, the
gentleman may simply have changed his boarding place."

"I do not think so," said Louise. "He liked this hotel very much."

"And he may have liked some of its guests," added Patsy, smiling. "Well,
Uncle John will soon be back, and then we will talk it over with him."

Uncle John was late. The portiere returned first. He had been to every
hotel in the little town, but none of them had received a guest since
the afternoon train of yesterday. Count Ferralti had disappeared as if
by magic, and no one could account for it.

Noon arrived, but no Uncle John. The girls became dispirited and
anxious, for the little man was usually very prompt in keeping his
engagements, and always had returned at the set time.

They waited until the last moment and then entered the _salle a manger_
and ate their luncheon in gloomy silence, hoping every moment to hear
the sound of their uncle's familiar tread.

After luncheon they held a hurried consultation and decided to go into
town and search for him. So away they trooped, asking eager questions
in their uncertain Italian but receiving no satisfactory reply until
they reached the little office of the tax gatherer at the Catania Gate.

"_Ah, si, signorini mia_," he answered, cheerfully, "_il poco signore
passato da stamattini._"

But he had not returned?

Not yet.

They looked at one another blankly.

"See here," said Patsy; "Uncle John must have lost his way or met with
an accident. You go back to the hotel, Louise, and wait there in case he
returns home another way. Beth and I will follow some of these paths and
see if we can find him."

"He may have sprained an ankle, and be unable to walk," suggested Beth.
"I think Patsy's advice is good."

So Louise returned through the town and the other girls began exploring
the paths that led into the mountains from every turn of the highway.
But although they searched eagerly and followed each path a mile or more
of its length, no sign of life did they encounter--much less a sight of
their missing uncle. The paths were wild and unfrequented, only on the
Catania road itself a peasant now and then being found patiently
trudging along or driving before him a donkey laden with panniers of
oranges or lemons for the markets of Taormina.

On some of the solitary rocky paths they called to Uncle John by name,
hoping that their voices might reach him; but only the echoes replied.
Finally they grew discouraged.

"It will be sunset before we get back, even if we start this minute,"
said Beth, finally. "Let us return, and get some one to help us."

Patsy burst into tears.

"Oh, I'm sure he's lost, or murdered, or kidnapped!" she wailed. "Dear,
dear Uncle John! Whatever shall we do, Beth?"

"Why, he may be at home, waiting for us to get back. Don't give way,
Patsy; it will do no good, you know."

They were thoroughly tired when, just at sunset, they reached the hotel.
Louise came to meet them, and by the question in her eyes they knew
their uncle had not returned.

"Something must be done, and at once," said Beth, decidedly. She was the
younger of the three girls, but in this emergency took the lead because
of her calm and unruffled disposition and native good sense. "Is
Frascatti in the courtyard?"

Patsy ran to see, and soon brought the vetturino into their sitting
room. He could speak English and knew the neighborhood thoroughly. He
ought to be able to advise them.

Frascatti listened intently to their story. He was very evidently
impressed.

"Tell me, then, signorini," he said, thoughtfully; "is Senor Merreek
very rich?"

"Why do you ask?" returned Beth, suspiciously. She remembered the
warning conveyed in Mr. Watson's letter.

"Of course, I know that all the Americans who travel are rich,"
continued Frascatti. "I have myself been in Chicago, which is America.
But is Signor Merreek a very rich and well acquainted man in his own
country? Believe me, it is well that you answer truly."

"I think he is."

The man looked cautiously around, and then came nearer and dropped his
voice to a whisper.

"Are you aware that Il Duca knows this?" he asked.

Beth thought a moment.

"We met the man you call Il Duca, but who told us he was Signor Victor
Valdi, on board the ship, where many of the passengers knew my uncle
well. If he listened to their conversation he would soon know all about
John Merrick, of course."

Frascatti wagged his head solemnly.

"Then, signorina," he said, still speaking very softly, "I assure you
there is no need to worry over your uncle's safety."

"What do you mean?" demanded Beth.

"People do not lose their way in our mountains," he replied. "The paths
are straight, and lead all to the highways. And there is little danger
of falling or of being injured. But--I regret to say it, signorini--it
is a reflection upon our advanced civilization and the good name of our
people--but sometimes a man who is rich disappears for a time, and no
one knows how it is, or where he may be. He always returns; but then he
is not so rich."

"I understand. My uncle is captured by brigands, you think."

"There are no brigands, signorina."

"Or the Mafia, then."

"I do not know the Mafia. All I know is that the very rich should keep
their riches secret when they travel. In Chicago, which is America, they
will knock you upon the head for a few miserable dollars; here my
countrymen scorn to attack or to rob the common people. But when a man
is so very rich that he does not need all of his money, there are, I
regret to say, some lawless ones in Sicily who insist that he divide
with them. But the prisoner is always well treated, and when he pays he
is sent away very happy."

"Suppose he does not pay?"

"Ah, signorina, will not a drowning man clutch the raft that floats by?
And the lawless ones do not take his all--merely a part."

The girls looked at one another helplessly.

"What must we do, Frascatti?" asked Patsy.

"Wait. In a day--two days, perhaps--you will hear from your uncle. He
will tell you how to send money to the lawless ones. You will follow his
instructions, and he will come home with smiles and singing. I know. It
is very regrettable, but it is so."

"It will not be so in this case," said Beth, indignantly. "I will see
the American consul--"

"I am sorry, but there is none here."

"I will telegraph to Messina for the military. They will search the
mountains, and bring your brigands to justice."

Frascatti smiled sadly.

"Oh, yes; perhaps they will come. But the military is Italian--not
Sicilian--and has no experience in these parts. The search will find
nothing, except perhaps a dead body thrown upon the rocks to defy
justice. It is very regrettable, signorina; but it is so."

Patsy was wringing her hands, frantic with terror. Louise was white and
staring. Beth puckered her pretty brow in a frown and tried to think.

"Ferralti is also gone," murmured Louise, in a hoarse voice. "They will
rob or murder him with Uncle John!"

"I am quite convinced," said Beth, coldly, "that your false count is a
fellow conspirator of the brigand called Il Duca. He has been following
us around to get a chance to ensnare Uncle John."

"Oh, no, no, Beth! It is not so! I know better than that."

"He would lie to you, of course," returned the girl bitterly. "As soon
as the trap was set he disappeared, bag and baggage, and left the simple
girl he had fooled to her own devices."

"You do not know what you are saying," retorted Louise, turning her back
to Beth and walking to a window. From where they stood they could hear
her sobbing miserably.

"Whether Frascatti is right or not," said Patsy, drying her eyes and
trying to be brave, "we ought to search for Uncle John at once."

"I think so, too," agreed Beth. Then, turning to the Sicilian, she said:
"Will you get together as many men as possible and search the hills,
with lanterns, for my uncle? You shall be well paid for all you do."

"Most certainly, signorina, if it will please you," he replied. "How
long do you wish us to search?"

"Until you find him."

"Then must we grow old in your service. _Non fa niente!_ It is
regrettable, but--"

"Will you go at once?" stamping her foot angrily.

"Most certainly, signorina."

"Then lose no time. I will go with you and see you start."

She followed the man out, and kept at his side until he had secured
several servants with lanterns for the search. The promise of high
_caparra_ or earnest money made all eager to join the band, but the
padrone could only allow a half dozen to leave their stations at the
hotel. In the town, however, whither Beth accompanied them, a score of
sleepy looking fellows were speedily secured, and under the command of
Frascatti, who had resolved to earn his money by energy and good will
because there was no chance of success, they marched out of the Catania
Gate and scattered along the mountain paths.

"If you find Uncle John before morning I will give you a thousand lira
additional," promised Beth.

"We will search faithfully," replied her captain, "but the signorina
must not be disappointed if the lawless ones evade us. They have a way
of hiding close in the caves, where none may find them. It is
regrettable, very; but it is so."

Then he followed his men to the mountains, and as the last glimmer from
his lantern died away the girl sighed heavily and returned alone through
the deserted streets to the hotel.

Clouds hid the moon and the night was black and forbidding; but it did
not occur to her to be afraid.




CHAPTER XV

DAYS OF ANXIETY


Uncle John's nieces passed a miserable night. Patsy stole into his room
and prayed fervently beside his bed that her dear uncle might be
preserved and restored to them in health and safety. Beth, meantime,
paced the room she shared with Patsy with knitted brows and flashing
eyes, the flush in her cheeks growing deeper as her anger increased. An
ungovernable temper was the girl's worst failing; the abductors of her
uncle were arousing in her the most violent passions of which she was
capable, and might lead her to adopt desperate measures. She was only a
country girl, and little experienced in life, yet Beth might be expected
to undertake extraordinary things if, as she expressed it, if she "got
good and mad!"

No sound was heard during the night from the room occupied by Louise,
but the morning disclosed a white, drawn face and reddened eyelids as
proof that she had rested as little as her cousins.

Yet, singularly enough, Louise was the most composed of the three when
they gathered in the little sitting room at daybreak, and tried
earnestly to cheer the spirits of her cousins. Louise never conveyed the
impression of being especially sincere, but the pleasant words and
manners she habitually assumed rendered her an agreeable companion, and
this faculty of masking her real feelings now stood her in good stead
and served to relieve the weight of anxiety that oppressed them all.

Frascatti came limping back with his tired followers in the early dawn,
and reported that no trace of the missing man had been observed. There
were no brigands and no Mafia; on that point all his fellow townsmen
agreed with him fully. But it was barely possible some lawless ones who
were all unknown to the honest Taorminians had made the rich American a
prisoner.

Il Duca? Oh, no, signorini! A thousand times, no. Il Duca was queer and
unsociable, but not lawless. He was of noble family and a native of the
district. It would be very wrong and foolish to question Il Duca's
integrity.

With this assertion Frascatti went to bed. He had not shirked the
search, because he was paid for it, and he and his men had tramped the
mountains faithfully all night, well knowing it would result in nothing
but earning their money.

On the morning train from Catania arrived Silas Watson and his young
ward Kenneth Forbes, the boy who had so unexpectedly inherited Aunt
Jane's fine estate of Elmhurst on her death. The discovery of a will
which gave to Kenneth all the property their aunt had intended for her
nieces had not caused the slightest estrangement between the young
folks, then or afterward. On the contrary, the girls were all glad that
the gloomy, neglected boy, with his artistic, high-strung temperament,
would be so well provided for. Without the inheritance he would have
been an outcast; now he was able to travel with his guardian, the kindly
old Elmhurst lawyer, and fit himself for his future important position
in the world. More than all this, however, Kenneth had resolved to be a
great landscape painter, and Italy and Sicily had done much, in the past
year, to prepare him for this career.

The boy greeted his old friends with eager delight, not noticing for the
moment their anxious faces and perturbed demeanor. But the lawyer's
sharp eyes saw at once that something was wrong.

"Where is John Merrick?" he asked.

"Oh, I'm so glad you've come!" cried Patsy, clinging to his hand.

"We are in sore straits, indeed, Mr. Watson," said Louise.

"Uncle John is lost," explained Beth, "and we're afraid he is in the
hands of brigands."

Then she related as calmly as she could all that had happened. The
relation was clear and concise. She told of their meeting with Valdi on
the ship, of Count Ferralti's persistence in attaching himself to their
party, and of Uncle John's discovery that the young man was posing under
an assumed name. She did not fail to mention Ferralti's timely
assistance on the Amalfi drive, or his subsequent devoted attentions to
Louise; but the latter Beth considered merely as an excuse for following
them around.

"In my opinion," said she, "we have been watched ever since we left
America, by these two spies, who had resolved to get Uncle John into
some unfrequented place and then rob him. If they succeed in their vile
plot, Mr. Watson, we shall be humiliated and disgraced forever."

"Tut-tut," said he; "don't think of that. Let us consider John Merrick,
and nothing else."

Louise protested that Beth had not been fair in her conclusions. The
Count was an honorable man; she would vouch for his character herself.

But Mr. Watson did not heed this defense. The matter was very
serious--how serious he alone realized--and his face was grave indeed as
he listened to the descriptions of that terrible Il Duca whom the
natives all shrank from and refused to discuss.

When he had learned all the nieces had to tell he hastened into the town
and telegraphed the American consul at Messina. Then he found the
questura, or police office, and was assured by the officer in attendance
that the disappearance of Mr. Merrick was already known to the
authorities and every effort was being made to find him.

"Do you think he has been abducted by brigands?" asked the lawyer.

"Brigands, signore?" was the astonished reply. "There are no brigands in
this district at all. We drove them out many years ago."

"How about Il Duca?"

"And who is that, signore?"

"Don't you know?"

"I assure you we have no official knowledge of such a person. There are
dukes in Sicily, to be sure; but 'Il Duca' means nothing. Perhaps you
can tell me to whom you refer?"

"See here," said the lawyer, brusquely; "I know your methods, _questore
mia_, but they won't prove effective in this case. If you think an
American is helpless in this country you are very much mistaken. But, to
save time, I am willing to submit to your official requirements. I will
pay you well for the rescue of my friend."

"All shall be done that is possible."

"But if you do not find him at once, and return him to us unharmed, I
will have a regiment of soldiers in Taormina to search your mountains
and break up the bands of brigands that infest them. When I prove that
brigands are here and that you were not aware of them, you will be
disgraced and deposed from your office."

The official shrugged his shoulders, a gesture in which the Sicilian is
as expert as the Frenchman.

"I will welcome the soldiery," said he; "but you will be able to prove
nothing. The offer of a reward may accomplish more--if it is great
enough to be interesting."

"How great is that?"

"Can I value your friend? You must name the reward yourself. But even
then I can promise nothing. In the course of our duty every effort is
now being made to find the missing American. But we work in the dark, as
you know. Your friend may be a suicide; he may have lost his mind and
wandered into the wilderness; he may have committed some crime and
absconded. How do I know? You say he is missing, but that is no reason
the brigands have him, even did brigands exist, which I doubt. Rest
assured, signore, that rigid search will be made. It is my boast that I
leave no duty unfulfilled."

Mr. Watson walked back to the telegraph office and found an answer to
his message. The American consul was ill and had gone to Naples for
treatment. When he returned, his clerk stated, the matter of the
disappearance of John Merrick would immediately be investigated.

Feeling extremely helpless and more fearful for his friend than before,
the lawyer returned to the hotel for a conference with the nieces.

"How much of a reward shall I offer?" he asked. "That seems to be the
only thing that can be depended upon to secure results."

"Give them a million--Uncle John won't mind," cried Patsy, earnestly.

"Don't give them a penny, sir," said Beth. "If they are holding him for
a ransom Uncle is in no personal danger, and we have no right to assist
in robbing him."

"But you don't understand, my dear," asserted the lawyer. "These
brigands never let a victim go free unless they are well paid. That is
why they are so often successful. If John Merrick is not ransomed he
will never again be heard of."

"But this is not a ransom, sir. You propose to offer a reward to the
police."

"Let me explain. The ways of the Italian police are very intricate. They
know of no brigandage here, and cannot find a brigand. But if the reward
is great enough to divide, they know where to offer a share of it, in
lieu of a ransom, and will force the brigands to accept it. In that way
the police gets the glory of a rescue and a share of the spoils. If we
offer no reward, or an insignificant one, the brigands will be allowed
to act as they please."

"That is outrageous!" exclaimed Beth.

"Yes. The Italian government deplores it. It is trying hard to break up
a system that has existed for centuries, but has not yet succeeded."

"Then I'd prefer to deal directly with the brigands."

"So would I, if--"

"If what, sir?"

"If we were sure your uncle is in their hands. Do you think the party
you sent out last night searched thoroughly?"

"I hope so."

"I will send out more men at once. They shall search the hills in every
direction. Should they find nothing our worst fears will be confirmed,
and then--"

"Well, Mr. Watson?"

"Then we must wait for the brigands to dictate the terms of a ransom,
and make the best bargain we can."

"That seems sensible," said Kenneth, and both Patsy and Louise agreed
with him, although it would be tedious waiting.

But Beth only bit her lip and frowned.

Mr. Watson's searching party was maintained all day--for two days, and
three; but without result. Then they waited for the brigands to act.
But a week dragged painfully by and no word of John Merrick's
whereabouts reached the ears of the weary watchers.




CHAPTER XVI

TATO


When Uncle John passed through the west gate for a tramp along the
mountain paths he was feeling in an especially happy and contented mood.
The day was bright and balmy, the air bracing, the scenery unfolded step
by step magnificent and appealing. To be in this little corner of the
old world, amid ruins antedating the Christian era, and able to wholly
forget those awful stock and market reports of Wall street, was a
privilege the old gentleman greatly appreciated.

So away he trudged, exploring this path or that leading amongst the
rugged cliffs, until finally he began to take note of his erratic
wanderings and wonder where he was. Climbing an elevated rock near the
path he poised himself upon its peak and studied the landscape spread
out beneath him.

There was a patch of sea, with the dim Calabrian coast standing sentry
behind it. The nearer coast was hidden from view, but away at the left
was a dull white streak marking the old wall of Taormina, and above this
the ruined citadel and the ancient castle of Mola--each on its separate
peak.

"I must be getting back," he thought, and sliding down the surface of
the rock he presently returned to the path from whence he had climbed.

To his surprise he found a boy standing there and looking at him with
soft brown eyes that were both beautiful and intelligent. Uncle John was
as short as he was stout, but the boy scarcely reached to his shoulder.
He was slender and agile, and clothed in a grey corduroy suit that was
better in texture than the American had seen other Sicilian youths wear.
As a rule the apparel of the children in this country seemed sadly
neglected.

Yet the most attractive thing about this child was his face, which was
delicate of contour, richly tinted to harmonize with his magnificent
brown eyes, and so sensitive and expressive that it seemed able to
convey the most subtle shades of emotion. He seemed ten or twelve years
of age, but might have been much older.

As soon as the American had returned to the path the boy came toward him
in an eager, excited way, and exclaimed:

"Is it not Signor Merrick?"

The English was fluent, and only rendered softer by the foreign
intonation.

"It is," said Uncle John, cheerfully. "Where did you drop from, my lad?
I thought these hills were deserted, until now."

"I am sent by a friend," answered the boy, speaking rapidly and
regarding the man with appealing glances. "He is in much trouble,
signore, and asks your aid."

"A friend? Who is it?"

"The name he gave me is Ferralti, signore. He is near to this place, in
the hills yonder, and unable to return to the town without assistance."

"Ferralti. H-m-m. Is he hurt?"

"Badly, signore; from a fall on the rocks."

"And he sent for me?"

"Yes, signore. I know you by sight--who does not?--and as I hurried
along I saw you standing on the rock. It is most fortunate. Will you
hasten to your friend, then? I will lead you to him."

Uncle John hesitated. He ought to be getting home, instead of
penetrating still farther into these rocky fastnesses. And Ferralti was
no especial friend, to claim his assistance. But then the thought
occurred that this young Italian had befriended both him and his nieces
in an extremity, and was therefore entitled to consideration when
trouble in turn overtook himself. The natural impulse of this thought
was to go to his assistance.

"All right, my lad," said he. "Lead on, and I'll see what can be done
for Ferralti. Is it far?"

"Not far, signore."

With nervous, impatient steps the child started up the narrow path and
Uncle John followed--not slowly, but scarcely fast enough to satisfy his
zealous guide.

"What is your name, little one?"

"Tato, signore."

"Where do you live?"

"Near by, signore."

"And how did you happen to find Ferralti?"

"By chance, signore."

Uncle John saved his remaining breath for the climb. He could ask
questions afterward.

The path was in a crevasse where the rocks seemed once to have split. It
was narrow and steep, and before long ended in a _cul de sac_. The
little man thought they had reached their destination, then; but without
hesitation the boy climbed over a boulder and dropped into another path
on the opposite side, holding out a hand to assist the American.

Uncle John laughed at the necessity, but promptly slid his stout body
over the boulder and then paused to mop his brow.

"Much farther, Tato?"

"Just a step, signore."

"It is lucky you found Ferralti, or he might have died in these wilds
without a soul knowing he was here."

"That is true, signore."

"Well, is this the path?"

"Yes, signore. Follow me, please."

The cliffs were precipitous on both sides of them. It was another
crevasse, but not a long one. Presently the child came to a halt because
the way ended and they could proceed no farther. He leaned against the
rock and in a high-pitched, sweet voice sang part of a Sicilian ditty,
neither starting the verse nor ending it, but merely trilling out a
fragment.

Uncle John regarded him wonderingly; and then, with a sudden suspicion,
he demanded:

"You are not playing me false, Tato?"

"I, signore?" smiling frankly into the man's eyes; "you need never fear
Tato, signore. To be your friend, and Signor Ferralti's friend, makes me
very proud."

The rock he leaned against fell inward, noiselessly, and disclosed a
passage. It was short, for there was light at the other end.

The strange child darted in at once.

"This way, signore. He is here!"

Uncle John drew back. He had forgotten until now that these mountains
are dangerous. And something strange in the present proceedings, the
loneliness of the place and the elfish character of his guide, suddenly
warned him to be cautious.

"See here, my lad," he called: "I'll go no farther."

Instantly Tato was at his side again, grasping the man's hand in his
tiny brown one and searching his face with pleading eyes.

"Ah, signore, you will not fail your friend, when he is so near you and
in such great trouble? See! I who am a stranger and not even his
countryman, even I weep for the poor young man, and long to comfort him.
Do you, his friend, refuse him aid because you have fear of the wild
mountains and a poor peasant boy?"

Tears really stood in the beautiful brown eyes. They rolled down his
cheeks, as with both hands he pressed that of Uncle John and urged him
gently forward.

"Oh, well; lead on, Tato. I'll see the other side of your tunnel,
anyhow. But if you play me tricks, my lad--"

He paused, for a wonderful vision had opened before him. Coming through
the short passage hewn in the rocks the American stood upon a ledge
facing a most beautiful valley, that was hemmed in by precipitous cliffs
on every side. From these stern barriers of the outside world the ground
sloped gradually toward the center, where a pretty brook flowed, its
waters sparkling like diamonds in the sunlight as it tumbled over its
rocky bed. Groves of oranges and of olive, lemon and almond trees
occupied much of the vale, and on a higher point at the right, its back
to the wall of rock that towered behind it, stood a substantial yet
picturesque mansion of stone, with several outbuildings scattered on
either side.

The valley seemed, indeed, a toy kingdom sequestered from the great
outside world, yet so rich and productive within itself that it was
independent of all else.

Uncle John gazed with amazement. Who could have guessed this delightful
spot was hidden safe within the heart of the bleak, bare mountain
surrounding it? But suddenly he bethought himself.

"What place is this, Tato?" he asked; "and where is our friend
Ferralti, who needs me?"

There was no reply.

He turned around to find the boy had disappeared. Moreover, the passage
had disappeared. Only a wall of rock was behind him, and although his
eyes anxiously searched the rifts and cracks of its rough surface, no
indication of the opening through which he had passed could be
discovered.




CHAPTER XVII

THE HIDDEN VALLEY


Uncle John's first inspiration was to sit down upon a stone to think. He
drew out his pipe and lighted it, to assist his meditations.

These were none too pleasant. That he had been cleverly entrapped, and
that by a child scarcely in its teens, was too evident to need
reflection. And what a secure trap it was! The mountains ranged all
around the valley were impossible to scale, even by an Alpine climber,
and to one who was not informed of its location the existence of the
valley itself was unimaginable.

"I had not believed Ferralti was so shrewd," he muttered, wonderingly.
"That something was wrong about the fellow I knew, of course; but I had
not suspected such a thing as this. Now, then, first of all let me mark
this spot, so that I will remember it. Just back of where I now stand is
the entrance or outlet to the tunnel through the wall. It is closed, I
suppose, by a swinging stone, like the one on the opposite side. I saw
that one opened--opened by some person concealed from view, as soon as
the boy sang his bit of song which was the signal agreed upon. And I was
fool enough, after that warning, to walk straight through the tunnel!
You're getting old, John Merrick; that's the only way I can account for
your folly. But Ferralti hasn't won the odd trick yet, and if I keep my
wits about me he isn't likely to win."

Thus ruminating, Uncle John searched the rocky wall carefully and
believed he would know the place again, although which of the rough
stones of its surface formed the doorway to the tunnel he could not
guess.

A ledge of rock served as a path leading to right and left around this
end of the valley, or "pocket" in the mountain, as it could more
properly be called. Uncle John turned to the right, striding along with
his usual deliberation, smoking his pipe and swinging his cane as he
approached the stone dwelling that formed the center of the little
settlement. As yet no sign of human life had he observed since Tato had
disappeared, although a few cows were standing in a green meadow and
some goats scrambled among the loose rocks at the further end of the
enclosure.

Around the house the grounds had been laid out in gardens, with flowers
and shrubbery, hedges and shade trees scattered about. Chickens clucked
and strutted along the paths and an air of restfulness and peace brooded
over all.

Uncle John was plainly mystified until he drew quite close to the
dwelling, which had many verandas and balconies and bore every evidence
of habitation. Then, to his astonishment, he beheld the form of a man
stretched lazily in a wicker chair beside the entrance, and while he
paused, hesitating, the man sat up and bowed politely to him.

"Good morning, Signor Merreek."

It was Victor Valdi, or, ignoring the fictitious name, the mysterious
personage known as "Il Duca."

"Behold my delight, Signor Merreek, to receive you in my poor home,"
continued the man. "Will you not be seated, _caro amico_?"

The words were soft and fair, but the dark eyes gleamed with triumph and
a sneer curled the thin lips.

"Thank you," said Uncle John; "I believe I will."

He stepped upon the veranda and sat down opposite his host.

"I came to see Count Ferralti, who is hurt, I understand," he continued.

"It is true, signore, but not badly. The poor count is injured mostly in
his mind. Presently you shall see him."

"No hurry," observed Uncle John. "Pleasant place you have here, Duke."

"It is very good of you to praise it, signore. It is my most ancient
patrimony, and quite retired and exclusive."

"So I see."

"The house you have honored by your presence, signore, was erected some
three hundred and thirty years ago, by an ancestor who loved
retirement. It has been in my family ever since. We all love
retirement."

"Very desirable spot for a brigand, I'm sure," remarked the American,
puffing his pipe composedly.

"Brigand? Ah, it pleases you to have humor, signore, mia. Brigand! But I
will be frank. It is no dishonor to admit that my great ancestors of
past centuries were truly brigands, and from this quiet haven sallied
forth to do mighty deeds. They were quite famous, I am told, those olden
Dukes d'Alcanta."

"I do not question it."

"Our legends tell of how my great ancestors demanded tribute of the rich
who passed through their domain--for all this end of Sicily was given to
us by Peter of Aragon, and remained in our possession until the second
Ferdinand robbed us of it. Those times were somewhat wild and barbarous,
signore, and a gentleman who protected his estates and asked tribute of
strangers was termed a brigand, and became highly respected. But now it
is different. We are civilized and meek, and ruled most lovingly by
Italy. They will tell you there is no brigandage in all Sicily."

"So I understand."

"To-day I am nobody. My very name is forgotten. Those around this
mountain know nothing of my little estate, and I am content. I desire
not glory: I desire not prominence; to live my life in seclusion, with
the occasional visit of a friend like yourself, is enough to satisfy
me."

"You seem well known in Taormina."

"Quite a mistake, signore."

"And the natives must have climbed these peaks at times and looked down
into your secluded kingdom."

"If so, they have forgotten it."

"I see."

"I give to the churches and the poor, but in secret. If I have an enemy,
he disappears--I do not know how; no one knows."

"Of course not. You are an improvement on your ancestors, Duke. Instead
of being a brigand you belong to the Mafia, and perform your robberies
and murders in security. Very clever, indeed."

"But again you are wrong, signore," replied the Duke, with a frown. "I
have never known of this Mafia, of which you speak, nor do I believe it
exists. For myself, I am no robber, but a peaceful merchant."

"A merchant?" returned Uncle John, surprised by the statement.

"To be sure. I have some ancient and very valuable relics in my
possession, treasured most carefully from the medival days. These I
sell to my friends--who are fortunately all foreigners like yourself and
can appreciate such treasures--and so obtain for myself and my family a
modest livelihood."

"And you expect to sell something to me?" asked Uncle John,
understanding very well the Sicilian's meaning.

"It is my earnest hope, signore."

The American fell silent, thinking upon the situation. The fierce
looking brigand beside him was absurd enough, in his way, but doubtless
a dangerous man to deal with. Uncle John was greatly interested in the
adventure. It was such a sharp contrast to the hum-drum, unromantic
American life he had latterly known that he derived a certain enjoyment
from the novel experience. If the girls did not worry over his absence
he would not much regret his visit to Il Duca's secluded valley.

It was already midday, and his nieces would be expecting him to
luncheon. When he did not appear they would make enquiries, and try to
find him. It occurred to him how futile all such attempts must prove.
Even to one acquainted with the mountain paths the entrance to the
duke's domain was doubtless a secret, and the brigand had plainly hinted
that the native Sicilians were too cautious to spy upon him or molest
him in any way.

So far, the only person he had seen was Il Duca himself. The child who
had decoyed him was, of course, somewhere about, and so also was
Ferralti. How many servants or followers the brigand might have was as
yet a mystery to the new arrival.

In the side pocket of Uncle John's loose coat lay a loaded revolver,
which he had carried ever since he had received Mr. Watson's warning
letter. He had never imagined a condition of danger where he could not
use this weapon to defend himself, and as long as it remained by him he
had feared nothing. But he had been made a prisoner in so deft a manner
that he had no opportunity to expostulate or offer any sort of
resistance. Later there might be a chance to fight for his liberty, and
the only sensible action was to wait and bide his time.

"For example," the Duke was saying, in his labored, broken English, "I
have here a priceless treasure--very antique, very beautiful. It was in
one time owned by Robert the Norman, who presented it to my greatest
ancestor."

He drew an odd-shaped ring from his pocket and handed it to the
American. It was of dull gold and set with a half dozen flat-cut
garnets. Perhaps antique; perhaps not; but of little intrinsic value.

"This ring I have decided to sell, and it shall be yours, Signor
Merreek, at a price far less than is represented by its historic worth.
I am sure you will be glad to buy it."

"For how much?" asked Uncle John, curiously.

"A trifle; a mere hundred thousand lira."

"Twenty thousand dollars!"

"The ring of King Roger. How cheap! But, nevertheless, you shall have it
for that sum."

Uncle John smiled.

"My dear Duke," he replied, "you have made a sad mistake. I am a
comparatively poor man. My fortune is very modest."

The brigand lay back in his chair and lighted a fresh cigarette.

"I fear you undervalue yourself, my dear guest," he said. "Recently have
I returned from America, where I was told much of the wealth of Signor
John Merreek, who is many times a millionaire. See," drawing a paper
from his pocket, "here is a list of the stocks and securities you own.
Also of government and railway bonds, of real estate and of manufactures
controlled by your money. I will read, and you will correct me if an
error occurs."

Uncle John listened and was amazed. The schedule was complete, and its
total was many millions. It was a better list of holdings than Uncle
John possessed himself.

"You foreigners make queer mistakes, Duke," said he, taking another
tack. "This property belongs to another John Merrick. It is a common
name, and that is doubtless why you mistook me for the rich John
Merrick."

"I have noticed," returned the Duke, coldly, "that this strange delusion
of mind is apt to overtake my guests. But do not be alarmed; it will
pass away presently, and then you will realize that you are yourself.
Remember that I crossed the Atlantic on your steamship, signore. Many
people there on board spoke of you and pointed you out to me as the
great man of finance. Your own niece that is called Patsy, she also told
me much about you, and of your kindness to her and the other young
signorini. Before I left New York a banker of much dignity informed me
you would sail on the ship 'Princess Irene.' If a mistake has been made,
signore, it is yours, and not mine. Is your memory clearer now?"

Uncle John laughed frankly. The rascal was too clever for him to dispute
with.

"Whoever I am," said he, "I will not buy your ring."

"I am pained," replied the brigand, lightly. "But there is ample time
for you to reflect upon the matter. Do not decide hastily, I implore
you. I may have been too liberal in making my offer, and time may assist
me in fixing a just price for the relic. But we have had enough of
business just now. It is time for our midday collation. Oblige me by
joining us, signore."

He blew a shrill whistle, and a man stepped out of a doorway. He was an
enormous Sicilian, tall, sinewy and with a countenance as dark and
fierce as his master's. In his belt was a long knife, such as is known
as a stilleto.

"Tommaso," said the Duke, "kindly show Signor Merreek to his room, and
ask Guido if luncheon is ready to be served."

"_Va bene, padrone_," growled the man, and turned obediently to escort
the American.

Uncle John entered the house, traversed a broad and cool passage,
mounted to the second floor and found himself in a pleasant room with a
balcony overlooking the valley. It was comfortably furnished, and with
a bow that was not without a certain grim respect the man left him alone
and tramped down the stairs again. There had been no attempt to restrain
his liberty or molest him in any way, yet he was not slow to recognize
the fact that he was a prisoner. Not in the house, perhaps, but in the
valley. There was no need to confine him more closely. He could not
escape.

He bathed his hands and face, dried them on a fresh towel, and found his
toilet table well supplied with conveniences. In the next room some one
was pacing the floor like a caged beast, growling and muttering angrily
at every step.

Uncle John listened. "The brigand seems to have more than one guest," he
thought, and smiled at the other's foolish outbursts.

Then he caught a word or two of English that made him start. He went to
the door between the two rooms and threw it open, finding himself face
to face with Count Ferralti.




CHAPTER XVIII

GUESTS OF THE BRIGAND


"Good morning, Count," said Uncle John, cheerfully.

The other stared at him astonished.

"Good heavens! Have they got you, too?" he exclaimed.

"Why, I'm visiting his excellency, Il Duca, if that's what you mean,"
replied Mr. Merrick. "But whether he's got me, or I've got him, I
haven't yet decided."

The young man's jaw was tied in a bandage and one of his eyes was black
and discolored. He looked agitated and miserable.

"Sir, you are in grave danger; we are both in grave danger," he
announced, "unless we choose to submit to being robbed by this rascally
brigand."

"Then," observed Uncle John, "let's submit."

"Never! Not in a thousand years!" cried Ferralti, wildly. And then this
singular young man sank into a chair and burst into tears.

Uncle John was puzzled. The slender youth--for he was but a youth in
spite of his thin moustaches--exhibited a queer combination of courage
and weakness; but somehow Uncle John liked him better at that moment
than he ever had before. Perhaps because he now realized he had unjustly
suspected him.

"You seem to have been hurt, Count," he remarked.

"Why, I was foolish enough to struggle, and that brute Tommaso pounded
me," was the reply. "You were wise to offer no resistance, sir."

"As for that, I hadn't a choice," said Uncle John, smiling. "When did
they get you, Ferralti?"

"Last evening. I walked in the garden of the hotel and they threw a sack
over my head. I resisted and tried to cry out. They beat me until I was
insensible and then brought me here, together with my travelling cases,
which they removed from my room to convey the impression that I had gone
away voluntarily. When I awakened from my swoon I was in this room,
with the doctor bending over me."

"The doctor?"

"Oh, they have a doctor in this accursed den, as well as a priest and a
lawyer. The Duke entreated my pardon. He will punish his men for abusing
me. But he holds me a safe prisoner, just the same."

"Why?"

"He wants a ransom. He will force me to purchase an ancient brass
candlestick for fifty thousand lira."

Uncle John looked at his companion thoughtfully.

"Tell me, Count Ferralti," he said, "who you really are. I had believed
you were Il Duca's accomplice, until now. But if he has trapped you, and
demands a ransom, it is because you are a person of some consequence,
and able to pay. May I not know as much about your position in life as
does this brigand duke?"

The young man hesitated. Then he spread out his hands with an appealing
gesture and said:

"Not yet, Mr. Merrick! Do not press me now, I implore you. Perhaps I
have done wrong to try to deceive you, but in good time I will explain
everything, and then you will understand me better."

"You are no count."

"That is true, Mr. Merrick."

"You are not even an Italian."

"That is but partly true, sir."

"You have seen fit to deceive us by--"

Tommaso threw wide the door.

"_Il dejun  servito_," he said gruffly.

"What does that mean?" asked Uncle John.

"Luncheon is ready. Shall we go down?"

"Yes; I'm hungry."

They followed the man to the lower floor, where he ushered them into a
low, cool room where a long table was set. The walls were whitewashed
and bore some religious prints, gaudily colored. A white cloth covered
the table, which was well furnished with modern crockery and glass, and
antique silverware.

At the head of the table were two throne-like chairs, one slightly
larger and more elevated than the other. In the more important seat was
a withered old woman with a face like that of a mummy, except that it
was supplied with two small but piercing jet eyes that seemed very much
alive as they turned shrewdly upon the strangers. She was the only one
of the company they found seated. The Duke stood behind the smaller
chair beside her, and motioned the Americans to occupy two places at the
side of the table next him. Opposite them, in the places adjoining the
elevated dais, were two remarkable individuals whom Uncle John saw for
the first time. One was a Cappuccin monk, with shaven crown and coarse
cassock fastened at the waist by a cord. He was blind in one eye and the
lid of the other drooped so as to expose only a thin slit. Fat, awkward
and unkempt, he stood holding to the back of his chair and swaying
slightly from side to side. Next to him was a dandified appearing man
who was very slight and thin of form but affected the dress and manners
of extreme youth. Ferralti whispered to Uncle John that this was the
doctor.

The table dropped a step in heighth from these places, and the balance
of its length was occupied by several stalwart Sicilians, clothed in
ordinary peasant costume, and a few silent, heavy-featured women. Tato
was not present.

"Signori," said the Duke to the Americans, "allow me to present you to
my mother, the head of our illustrious family; one who is known, admired
and feared throughout Sicily as her Excellenza la Duchessa d'Alcanta."

With the words the Duke bowed low to the old woman. Uncle John and
Ferralti also bowed low. The lines of servitors humbly bent themselves
double. But the Duchessa made no acknowledgment. Her bead like eyes
searched the faces of the "guests" with disconcerting boldness, and then
dropped to her plate.

At this signal the fat priest mumbled a blessing upon the food, the Duke
waved his hand, and all the company became seated.

Uncle John felt as if he were taking part in a comic opera, and enjoyed
the scene immensely. But now his attention was distracted by the
stewards bringing in steaming platters of macaroni and stewed mutton,
from which they first served the Duchessa, and then the Duke, and
afterward the guests. The servants waited hungry-eyed until these
formalities were completed, and then swept the platters clean and ate
ravenously.

Uncle John plied his knife and fork busily and found the food
excellently prepared. Ferralti seemed to have little appetite. Some of
his teeth had been knocked out and his broken wrist, which had but
partially healed, had been wrenched in the scrimmage of the night before
so that it caused him considerable pain.

The Duke attempted little conversation, doubtless through deference to
the aged Duchessa, who remained absolutely silent and unresponsive to
her surroundings. He praised his wine, however, which he said was from
their own vineyards, and pressed the Americans to drink freely.

When she had finished her meal the Duchessa raised a hand, and at the
signal the whole company arose and stood at their places while two of
the women assisted her to retire. She leaned upon their shoulders, being
taller than her son, but displayed surprising vigor for one so advanced
in years.

When she had gone the others finished at their leisure, and the
conversation became general, the servants babbling in their voluble
Italian without any restraint whatever.

Then the Duke led his prisoners to the veranda and offered them cigars.
These were brought by Tato, who then sat in the duke's lap and curled up
affectionately in his embrace, while the brigand's expression softened
and he stroked the boy's head with a tender motion.

Uncle John watched the little scene approvingly. It was the first time
he had seen Tato since the child had lured him through the tunnel.

"Your son, Duke?" he asked.

"Yes, signore; my only child. The heir to my modest estate."

"And a very good brigand, already, for his years," added Mr. Merrick.
"Ah, Tato, Tato," shaking his head at the child, "how could you be so
cruel as to fool an innocent old chap like me?"

Tato laughed.

"I did not deceive you, signore. You but misunderstood me. I said
Signor Ferralti was hurt, and so he was."

"But you said he needed my assistance."

"Does he not, signore?"

"How do you speak such good English?"

"Father Antoine taught me."

"The monk?"

"Yes, signore."

"My child is a linguist," remarked the Duke, complacently. "Sh--he has
been taught English, German and French, even from the days of infancy.
It is very good for me, for now Tato can entertain my guests."

"Have you no Italian guests, then?" asked Uncle John.

"No, since Italy owns Sicily, and I am a loyal subject. Neither have I
many Germans or Frenchmen, although a few wander my way, now and then.
But the Americans I love, and often they visit me. There were three last
year, and now here are two more to honor me with their presence."

"The Americans make easier victims, I suppose."

"Oh, the Americans are very rich, and they purchase my wares liberally.
By the way, Signor Ferralti," turning to the young man, "have you
decided yet the little matter of your own purchase?"

"I will not buy your candlestick, if that is what you refer to," was the
response.

"No?"

"By no means. Fifty thousand lira, for a miserable bit of brass!"

"But I forgot to tell you, signore; the candlestick is no longer for
sale," observed the Duke, with an evil smile. "Instead, I offer you a
magnificent bracelet which is a hundred years old."

"Thank you. What's the price?"

"A hundred thousand lira, signore."

Ferralti started. Then in turn he smiled at his captor.

"That is absurd," said he. "I have no wealth at all, sir, but live on a
small allowance that barely supplies my needs. I cannot pay."

"I will take that risk, signore," said the brigand, coolly. "You have
but to draw me an order on Mr. Edward Leighton, of New York, for one
hundred thousand lira--or say twenty thousand dollars--and the bracelet
is yours."

"Edward Leighton! My father's attorney! How did you know of him, sir?"

"I have an agent in New York," answered the Duke, "and lately I have
been in your city myself."

"Then, if you know so much, you scoundrelly thief, you know that my
father will not honor a draft for such a sum as you demand. I doubt if
my father would pay a single dollar to save me from assassination."

"We will not discuss that, signore, for I regret to say that your father
is no longer able to honor drafts. However, your attorney can do so, and
will, without question."

Ferralti stared at him blankly.

"What do you mean by that?" he demanded.

The Duke shook the ashes from his cigar and examined the glowing end
with interest.

"Your father," was the deliberate reply, "was killed in a railway
accident, four days ago. I have just been notified of the fact by a
cable from America."

Ferralti sat trembling and regarding the man with silent horror.

"Is this true, sir?" asked Uncle John, quickly; "or is it only a part of
your cursed game?"

"It is quite true, signore, I regret being obliged to break the ill news
so abruptly; but this gentleman thought himself too poor to purchase my
little bracelet, and it was necessary to inform him that he is suddenly
made wealthy--not yet so great a Croesus as yourself, Signor Merreek,
but still a very rich man."

Ferralti ceased trembling, but the horror still clung to his eyes.

"A railway wreck!" he muttered, hoarsely. "Where was it, sir? Tell me, I
beseech you! And are you sure my father is dead?"

"Very sure, signore. My informant is absolutely reliable. But the
details of the wreck I do not know. I am only informed of the fact of
your father's death, and that his will leaves you his entire fortune."

Ferralti arose and staggered away to his room, and Uncle John watched
him go pityingly, but knew no way to comfort him. When he had gone he
asked gently:

"His father was an American, Duke?"

"Yes, signore."

"And wealthy, you say?"

"Exceedingly wealthy, signore."

"What was his name?"

"Ah; about that ring, my dear guest. Do you think a hundred and fifty
thousand lira too much for it?"

"You said a hundred thousand."

"That was this morning, signore. The ring has increased in value since.
To-morrow, without doubt, it will be worth two hundred thousand."

Tato laughed at the rueful expression on the victim's face, and, a
moment after, Uncle John joined in his laughter.

"Very good, duke," he said. "I don't wish to rob you. Let us wait until
to-morrow."

The brigand seemed puzzled.

"May I ask why, Signor Merreek--since you are warned?" he enquired.

"Why, it's this way, Duke. I'm just a simple, common-place American,
and have lived a rather stupid existence for some time. We have no
brigands at home, nor any hidden valleys or protected criminals like
yourself. The romance of my surroundings interests me; your methods are
unique and worth studying; if I am so rich as you think me a few extra
hundred thousand lira will be a cheap price to pay for this experience.
Is it not so?"

The Duke frowned.

"Do you play with me?" he asked, menacingly.

"By no means. I'm just the spectator. I expect you to make the
entertainment. I'm sure it will be a good show, although the price is
rather high."

Il Duca glared, but made no reply at the moment. Instead, he sat
stroking Tato's hair and glowering evilly at the American.

The child whispered something in Italian, and the man nodded.

"Very well, signore," he said, more quietly. "To-morrow, then, if it so
pleases you."

Then, taking Tato's hand, he slowly arose and left the veranda.

For a moment the American looked after them with a puzzled expression.
Then he said to himself, with a smile: "Ah, I have solved one mystery,
at any rate. Tato is a girl!"




CHAPTER XIX

A DIFFICULT POSITION


And now Uncle John, finding himself left alone, took his walkingstick
and started out to explore the valley.

He felt very sorry for young Ferralti, but believed his sympathy could
in no way lighten the blow caused by the abrupt news of his parent's
death. He would wish to be alone with his grief for a time. By and by
Mr. Merrick intended to question his fellow prisoner and try to find out
something of his history.

The dale was very beautiful as it lay basking in the afternoon sun. Near
the house was a large vegetable garden, which, being now shaded by the
overhanging cliffs, was being tended by a sour-visaged Sicilian. Uncle
John watched him for a time, but the fellow paid no heed to him. Every
servant connected with the duke's establishment seemed surly and morose,
and this was the more remarkable because the country folk and villagers
Uncle John had met were usually merry and light-hearted.

Down by the brook were green meadows and groves of fruit trees. The
little gentleman followed the stream for some distance, and finally came
upon a man seated on the bank above a broad pool, intently engaged in
fishing. It proved to be the dandified old doctor, who wore gloves to
protect his hands and a broad-rimmed straw hat to shade his face.

Uncle John stood beside the motionless figure for a moment, watching the
line. Then, forgetting he was in a foreign country, he asked carelessly:

"Any luck?"

"Not yet," was the quiet reply, in clear English. "It is too early to
interest the fishes. An hour later they will bite."

"Then why did you come so soon?"

"To escape that hell-hole yonder," nodding his head toward the house.

Uncle John was surprised.

"But you are not a prisoner, doctor," he ventured to say.

"Except through the necessity of earning a livelihood. Il Duca pays
well--or rather the Duchessa does, for she is the head of this
household. I am skillful, and worth my price, and they know it."

"You say the Duchessa is the head of the house?"

"Assuredly, signore. Il Duca is her slave. She plans and directs
everything, and her son but obeys her will."

"Did she send him to America?"

"I think so. But do not misunderstand me. The Duke is clever on his own
account, and almost as wicked as his old mother. And between them they
are training the child to be as bad as they are. It is dreadful."

"Have you been here long?"

"For seven years, signore."

"But you can resign whenever you please?"

"Why not? But the doubt makes me uneasy, sometimes. In another year I
would like to go to Venice, and retire from professional life. I am a
Venetian, you observe; no dastardly brigand of a Sicilian. And in
another year I shall have sufficient means to retire and end my days in
peace. Here I save every centessimo I make, for I can spend nothing."

Uncle John sat down upon the bank beside the confiding Venetian.

"Doctor," said he, "I am somewhat puzzled by this man you call Il Duca,
as well as by my audacious capture and the methods employed to rob me.
I'd like your advice. What shall I do?"

"The only possible thing, signore. Submit."

"Why is it the only possible thing?"

"Have you not yet discovered? Unless you pay, your friends will never
hear from you again. Il Duca, by his mother's favor, is king here. He
will murder you if you oppose his demands."

"Really?"

"It is quite certain, signore. He has murdered several obstinate people
since I have been here, and the outside world will never know their
fate. It is folly to oppose the king. Were you not rich you would not be
here. Il Duca knows the exact wealth of every American who travels
abroad and is likely to visit Sicily. Many escape him, but a few wander
into his toils, for he is wonderfully sagacious. Mark you: he does not
demand your all; he merely takes tribute, leaving his victims sufficient
to render life desirable to them. If he required their all, many would
as soon forfeit life as make the payment; but a tithe they will spare
for the privilege of living. That is why he is so successful. And that
is why he remains undisturbed. For an American, being robbed so simply,
never tells of his humiliating experience. He goes home, and avoids
Sicily ever after."

"H-m-m. I understand."

"But if you do not pay, you are not permitted to leave this place. You
are killed at once, and the incident is over. Il Duca does not love to
murder, but he takes no chances."

"I see. But suppose I pay, and then make complaint to the Italian
government?"

"It has been done, signore. But the government is very blind. It does
not know Il Duca d' Alcanta. Its officials are convinced he does not
exist. They investigate carefully, and declare the tale is all a myth."

"Then there is no way of escape?"

"Absolutely none. Such a condition is almost inconceivable, is it not?
and in this enlightened age? But it exists, and is only harmful when its
victims are stubborn and rebellious. To be cheerful and pay promptly is
the only sensible way out of your difficulty."

"Thank you," said Uncle John. "I shall probably pay promptly. But tell
me, to satisfy my curiosity, how does your duke murder his victims?"

"He does not call it murder, as I do; he says they are suicides, or the
victims of accident. They walk along a path and fall into a pit. It is
deep, and they are killed. The pit is also their tomb. They are
forgotten, and the trap is already set for their successors."

"Rather a gloomy picture, doctor."

"Yes. I tell you this because my nature is kind. I abhor all crime, and
much prefer that you should live. But, if you die, my _salario_
continues. I am employed to guard the health of the Duke's
family--especially the old Duchessa--and have no part in this detestable
business."

"Isn't that a bite?"

"No, signore. It is the current. It is not time for the fish to bite."

Uncle John arose.

"Good afternoon, doctor."

"Good afternoon, signore."

He left the old fellow sitting there and walked on. The valley was about
a half mile long and from a quarter to a third of a mile in width. It
resembled a huge amphitheatre in shape.

The American tramped the length of the brook, which disappeared into the
rocky wall at the far end. Then he returned through the orchards to the
house.

The place was silent and seemed deserted. There was a languor in the
atmosphere that invited sleep. Uncle John sought his room and lay down
for an afternoon nap, soon falling into a sound slumber.

When he awoke he found Ferralti seated beside his bed. The young man was
pale, but composed.

"Mr. Merrick," said he, "what have you decided to do?"

Uncle John rubbed his eyes and sat up.

"I'm going to purchase that ring," he answered, "at the best price the
Duke will make me."

"I am disappointed," returned Ferralti, stiffly. "I do not intend to
allow myself to be robbed in this way."

"Then write a farewell letter, and I'll take it to your friends."

"It may not be necessary, sir."

Uncle John regarded him thoughtfully.

"What can you do?" he asked.

Ferralti leaned forward and whispered, softly: "I have a stout
pocket-knife, with a very long blade. I shall try to kill the Duke. Once
he is dead his people will not dare to oppose us, but will fly in
terror. It is only Il Duca's audacity and genius that enables this
robber's den to exist."

"You would rather attempt this than pay?"

"Sir, I could not bear the infamy of letting this scoundrel triumph over
me."

"Well, Ferralti, you are attempting a delicate and dangerous task, but
so far as I can, I will help you."

He took the revolver from his pocket and handed it to his companion.

"It's loaded in every chamber," he whispered. "Perhaps it will serve
your purpose better than a knife."

Ferralti's eyes sparkled.

"Good!" he exclaimed, concealing the weapon. "I shall watch for my
opportunity, so as to make no mistake. Meantime, do you bargain with the
Duke, but postpone any agreement to pay."

"All right, my lad. I'll wait to see what happens. It may add a good
deal to the cost of that ring, if you fail; but I'll take the chances of
that for the sake of the game."

He paused a moment, and then added:

"Is your father really dead, Count?"

"Yes; the Duke has sent me the cablegram he received from his agent. I
cannot doubt his authority. My father and I have not been friendly, of
late years. He was a severe man, cold and unsympathetic, but I am sorry
we could not have been reconciled before this awful fate overtook him.
However, it is now too late for vain regrets. I tried not to disobey or
antagonize my one parent, but he did not understand my nature, and
perhaps I failed to understand his."

He sighed, and rising from his chair walked to the window to conceal his
emotion.

Uncle John remained silent, and presently Tommaso entered to notify them
that dinner would be served in a half hour, and the Duke expected them
to join him at the table.

The next morning Mr. Merrick bargained pleasantly with his jailer, who
seemed not averse to discussing the matter at length; but no conclusion
was reached. Ferralti took no part in the conversation, but remained
sullen and silent, and the Duke did not press him.

The day after, however, he insisted that he had dallied long enough,
although after much argument on the part of his enforced guests he
agreed to give them three days to decide, with the understanding that
each day they delayed would add a goodly sum to their ransom. If at the
end of the three days the Americans remained obdurate, he would invite
them to take a little walk, and the affair would be terminated.

Ferralti hugged his revolver and awaited his opportunity. It seemed to
Uncle John that he might have had a hundred chances to shoot the
brigand, who merited no better fate than assassination at their hands;
but although Ferralti was resolved upon the deed he constantly hesitated
to accomplish it in cold blood, and the fact that he had three days
grace induced him to put off the matter as long as possible.

He came to regret most bitterly his indecision; for something in the
young man's eyes must have put the brigand on his guard. When they awoke
on the third morning, which was the fifth since their imprisonment, some
one had searched their rooms thoroughly. The revolver and the knife were
both gone, and the loss rendered them absolutely helpless.




CHAPTER XX

UNCLE JOHN PLAYS EAVESDROPPER


It now seemed to Uncle John that further resistance to the demands of Il
Duca was as useless as it was dangerous. He resented the necessity of
paying a ransom as much as any man could; but imprisoned as he was in a
veritable "robbers' den," without means of communicating with the
authorities or the outside world, and powerless to protect his life from
the vengeance of the unprincipled scoundrel who held him, the only safe
and sane mode of procedure was to give in as gracefully as possible.

He formed this conclusion during a long walk around the valley, during
which he once more noted the absolute seclusion of the place and the
impossibility of escape by scaling the cliffs. The doctor was fishing
again by the brook, but paid no heed when Uncle John tramped by. The
sight of the dapper little man gave Mr. Merrick a thought, and
presently he turned back and sat down beside the fisherman.

"I want to get out of this," he said, bluntly. "It was fun, at first,
and rather interesting; but I've had enough of it."

The physician kept his eye on the line and made no reply.

"I want you to tell me how to escape," continued Uncle John. "It's no
use saying that it can't be done, for nothing is impossible to a clever
man, such as I believe you to be."

Still no reply.

"You spoke, the other day, of earning enough money to go home and live
in peace for the rest of your days. Here, sir, is your opportunity to
improve upon that ambition. The brigand is trying to exact a large
ransom from me; I'll give it to you willingly--every penny--if you'll
show me how to escape."

"Why should you do that?" enquired the doctor, still intent upon his
line. "Does it matter to you who gets your money?"

"Of course," was the prompt reply. "In one case I pay it for a service
rendered, and do it gladly. On the other hand, I am robbed, and that
goes against the grain. Il Duca has finally decided to demand fifty
thousand dollars. It shall be yours, instead, if you give me your
assistance."

"Signore," said the other, calmly, "I would like this money, and I
regret that it is impossible for me to earn it. But there is no means of
escape from this place except by the passage through the rocks, which
passage only three people know the secret of opening--Il Duca himself,
the child Tato, and the old Duchessa. Perhaps Tommaso also knows; I am
not certain; but he will not admit he has such knowledge. You see,
signore, I am as much a prisoner as yourself."

"There ought to be some way to climb these cliffs; some secret path or
underground tunnel," remarked Uncle John, musingly.

"It is more than a hundred years since this valley was made secure by a
brigand ancestor of our Duchessa," was the reply. "It may be two or
three centuries ago, for all I know. And ever since it has been used for
just this purpose: to hold a prisoner until he was ransomed--and no
such man has ever left the place alive unless he paid the price."

"Then you cannot help me?" asked Uncle John, who was weary of hearing
these pessimistic declarations.

"I cannot even help myself; for I may not resign my position here unless
the Duke is willing I should go."

"Good morning, doctor."

The prisoner returned slowly toward the dwelling, with its group of
outhouses. By chance he found a path leading to the rear of these which
he had not traversed before, and followed it until he came to a hedge of
thickly set trees of some variety of cactus, which seemed to have been
planted to form an enclosure. Cautiously pushing aside the branches
bordering a small gap in this hedge, Uncle John discovered a charming
garden lying beyond, so he quickly squeezed himself through the opening
and entered.

The garden was rudely but not badly kept. There was even some attempt at
ornamentation, and many of the shrubs and flowers were rare and
beautiful. Narrow walks traversed the masses of foliage, and several
leafy bowers invited one to escape the heat of the midday sun in their
shelter. It was not a large place, and struck one as being overcrowded
because so many of the plants were taller than a man's head.

Uncle John turned down one path which, after several curves and turns,
came to an abrupt ending beneath the spreading branches of an acacia
tree which had been converted into a bower by a thick, climbing vine,
whose matted leaves and purple blossoms effectually screened off the
garden beyond.

While he stood gazing around him to find a way out without retracing his
steps, a clear voice within a few feet of him caused him to start. The
voice spoke in vehement Italian, and came from the other side of the
screen of vines. It was sharp and garrulous in tone, and although Uncle
John did not understand the words he recognized their dominating accent.

The Duke replied, slowly and sullenly, and whatever he said had the
effect of rousing the first speaker to fierce anger.

The American became curious. He found a place where the leaves were
thinner than elsewhere, and carefully pressing them apart looked through
the opening. Beyond was a clear space, well shaded and furnished with
comfortable settles, tables and chairs. It adjoined a wing of the
dwelling, which stood but a few paces away and was evidently occupied by
the women of the household. The old Duchessa, her face still like a
death mask but her eyes glittering with the brightness of a serpent's,
sat enthroned within a large chair in the center of a family group. It
was her sharp voice that had first aroused the American's attention.
Opposite her sat the Duke, his thin face wearing an expression of gloom
and dissatisfaction. The child Tato occupied a stool at her father's
feet, and in the background were three serving women, sewing or
embroidering. Near the Duke stood the tall brigand known as Pietro.

Answering the old woman's fierce tirade, Tato said:

"It is foolish to quarrel in Italian. The servants are listening."

"Let us then speak in English," returned the Duchessa. "These are
matters the servants should not gossip about."

The Duke nodded assent. Both Tato and her grandmother spoke easily the
foreign tongue; the Duke was more uncertain in his English, but
understood it perfectly.

"I am still the head of this family," resumed the Duchessa, in a more
moderate tone. "I insist that my will be obeyed."

"Your dignity I have the respect for," replied the Duke, laboredly; "but
you grow old and foolish."

"Foolish! I?"

"Yes; you are absurd. You live in past centuries. You think to-day we
must do all that your ancestors did."

"Can you do better?"

"Yes; the world has change. It has progress. With it I advance, but you
do not. You would murder, rob, torture to-day as the great Duke, your
grandfather, did. You think we still are of the world independent. You
think we are powerful and great. Bah! we are nothing--we are as a speck
of dust. But still we are the outlaws and the outcasts of Sicily, and
some day Italy will crush us and we will be forgotten."

"I dare them to molest us!"

"Because you are imbecile. The world you do not know. I have travel; I
see many countries; and I am wise."

"But you are still my vassal, my slave; and I alone rule here. Always
have you rebelled and wanted to escape. Only my iron will has kept you
here and made you do your duty."

"Since you my brother Ridolfo killed, I have little stomach for the
trade of brigand. It is true. But no longer is this trade necessary. We
are rich. Had I a son to inherit your business, a different thought
might prevail; but I have only Tato, and a girl cannot be a successful
brigand."

"Why not?" cried the old Duchessa, contemptuously. "It is the
girl--always the girl--you make excuses for. But have I not ruled our
domain--I, who am a woman?"

Tato herself answered, in a quiet voice.

"And what have you become, nonna, more than an outcast?" she enquired.
"What use to you is money, or a power that the world would sneer at, did
the world even suspect that you exist? You are a failure in life, my
nonna, and I will not be like you."

The Duchessa screamed an epithet and glared at the child as if she would
annihilate her; but no fitting words to reply could she find.

Uncle John smiled delightedly. He felt no sense of humiliation or revolt
at eavesdropping in this den of thieves, and to be able to gain so fair
a revelation of the inner life of this remarkable family was a diversion
not lightly to be foregone.

"So far, we have managed to escape the law," resumed the Duke. "But
always it may not be our fortune to do this, if we continue this life.
It is now a good time to stop. Of one American we will gain a quarter of
a million lira--a fortune--and of the other one hundred and fifty
thousand lira. With what we already have it is enough and more. Quietly
we will disband our men and go away. In another land we live the
respectable life, in peace with all, and Tato shall be the fine lady,
and forget she once was a brigand's daughter."

The child sprang up in glee, and clasping her father's neck with both
arms kissed him with passionate earnestness.

Silently the Duchessa watched the scene. Her face was as pallid and
immobile as ever; even the eyes seemed to have lost expression. But the
next words showed that she was still unconquered.

"You shall take the money of the fat pig of an American; it is well to
do so. But the youth who boldly calls himself Ferralti shall make no
tribute to this family. He shall die as I have declared."

"I will not take the risk," asserted the Duke, sourly.

"Have the others who lie in the pit told tales?" she demanded.

"No; but they died alone. Here are two Americans our prisoners, and
they have many and powerful friends, both at Taormina and at Naples. The
man Merrick, when he goes, will tell that Ferralti is here. To obtain
his person, alive or dead, the soldiers will come here and destroy us
all. It is folly, and shows you are old and imbecile."

"Then go!" she cried, fiercely. "Go, you and Tato; take your money and
escape. And leave me my valley, and the youth Ferralti, and my revenge.
Then, if I die, if the soldiers destroy me, it is my own doing."

"In this new world, of which you know nothing, escape is not possible,"
replied the duke, after a moment's thought. "Ferralti must be accounted
for, and because I captured him they would accuse me of his death, and
even Tato might be made to suffer. No, madame. Both the Americans must
be killed, or both set free for ransom."

Uncle John gave a start of dismay. Here was a development he had not
expected.

"Then," said the old woman, positively, "let them both die."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Tato. "Not that, grandmother!"

"Certainly not so," agreed the Duke. "We want their money."

"You are already rich," said the Duchessa. "You have yourself said so,
and I know it is truth."

"This new world," explained the Duke, "contains of luxuries many that
you have no understanding of. To be rich to-day requires more money than
in your days, madre mia. With these ransoms, which already we have won,
we shall have enough. Without this money my Tato would lack much that I
desire for her. So of new murders I will take no risk, for the bambina's
sake."

"And my revenge?"

"Bah, of what use is it? Because the boy's father married my sister
Bianca, and ill-treated her, must we kill their offspring?"

"He is his father's son. The father, you say, is dead, and so also is my
child Bianca. Then my hatred falls upon the son Arturo, and he must die
to avenge the wrong to our race."

"More proof that you are imbecile," said the Duke, calmly. "He shall not
die. He is nothing to us except a mine from whence to get gold."

"He is my grandson. I have a right to kill him."

"He is my nephew. He shall live."

"Do you defy me?"

"With certainty. I defy you. The new world permits no crazy nonna to
rule a family. That is my privilege. If you persist, it is you who shall
go to the pit. If you have reason, you shall remain in your garden in
peace. Come, Tato; we will retire."

He arose and took the child's hand. The old woman sat staring at them in
silence, but with an evil glint in her glistening eyes.

Uncle John turned around and softly made his retreat from the garden.
His face wore a startled and horrified expression and on his forehead
stood great beads of sweat that the sultriness of the day did not
account for.

But he thought better of Il Duca.




CHAPTER XXI

THE PIT


They met an hour later at luncheon, all but the Duchessa, who sulked in
her garden. Tato was bright and smiling, filled with a suppressed joy
which bubbled up in spite of the little one's effort to be dignified and
sedate. When her hand stole under the table to find and press that of
her father, Uncle John beamed upon her approvingly; for he knew what had
occurred and could sympathize with her delight.

The Duke, however, was more sombre than usual. He had defied his mother,
successfully, so far; but he feared the terrible old woman more than did
Tato, because he knew more of her history and of the bold and wicked
deeds she had perpetrated in years gone by. Only once had a proposed
victim escaped her, and that was when her own daughter Bianca had fallen
in love with an American held for ransom and spirited him away from the
valley through knowledge of the secret passage. It was well Bianca had
fled with her lover; otherwise her mother would surely have killed her.
But afterward, when the girl returned to die in the old home, all was
forgiven, and only the hatred of her foreign husband, whose cruelty had
driven her back to Sicily, remained to rankle in the old Duchessa's
wicked heart.

No one knew her evil nature better than her son. He entertained a
suspicion that he had not conquered her by his recent opposition to her
will. Indeed, he would never have dared to brave her anger except for
Tato's sake. Tato was his idol, and in her defense the cowardly brigand
had for the moment become bold.

Tato laughed and chatted with Uncle John all through the meal, even
trying at times to cheer the doleful Ferralti, who was nearly as glum
and unsociable as her father. The servants and brigands at the lower end
of the table looked upon the little one admiringly. It was evident she
was a general favorite.

On the porch, after luncheon, the Duke broached the subject of the
ransoms again, still maintaining the fable of selling his antique
jewelry.

"Sir," said Uncle John, "I'm going to submit gracefully, but upon one
condition."

The Duke scowled.

"I allow no conditions," he said.

"You'd better allow this one," Uncle John replied, "because it will make
it easier for all of us. Of my own free will and accord I will make a
present to Tato of fifty thousand dollars, and she shall have it for her
dowry when she marries."

Tato clapped her hands.

"How did you know I am a girl, when I wear boys' clothes?" she asked.

Even the duke smiled, at that, but the next moment he shook his head
solemnly.

"It will not do, signore," he declared, answering Uncle John's
proposition. "This is a business affair altogether. You must purchase
the ring, and at once."

The little American sighed. It had been his last hope.

"Very well," he said; "have your own way."

"You will send to your friends for the money?"

"Whenever you say, Duke. You've got me in a hole, and I must wiggle out
the best way I can."

The brigand turned to Ferralti.

"And you, signore?" he asked.

"I do not know whether I can get the money you demand."

"But you will make the attempt, as I shall direct?"

"Yes."

"Then, signori, it is all finished. In a brief time you will leave my
hospitable roof."

"The sooner the better," declared Ferralti.

They sat for a time in silence, each busy with his thoughts.

"Go to your grandmother, Tato," said the Duke, "and try to make your
peace with her. If she is too angry, do not remain. To-morrow you must
go into town with letters from these gentlemen to their friends."

The child kissed him and went obediently to do his will. Then the
brigand spoke to Tommaso, who brought writing material from the house
and placed it upon a small table.

Uncle John, without further demur, sat down to write. The Duke dictated
what he should say, although he was allowed to express the words in his
own characteristic style, and he followed his instructions implicitly,
secretly admiring the shrewdness of the brigand's methods.

It was now Ferralti's turn. He had just seated himself at the table and
taken the pen when they were startled by a shrill scream from the rear
of the house. It was followed by another, and another, in quick
succession.

It was Tato's voice, and the duke gave an answering cry and sprang from
the veranda to dart quickly around the corner of the house. Uncle John
followed him, nearly as fearful as the child's father.

Tommaso seized a short rifle that stood near and ran around the house in
the other direction, when Ferralti, who for a moment had seemed dazed by
the interruption, followed Tommaso rather than the others.

As they came to the rear they were amazed to see the old Duchessa, whom
they had known to be feeble and dependent upon her women, rush through
the garden hedge with the agility of a man, bearing in her arms the
struggling form of little Tato.

The child screamed pitifully, but the woman glared upon Tommaso and
Ferralti, as she passed them, with the ferocity of a tiger.

"She is mad!" cried Ferralti. "Quick, Tommaso; let us follow her."

The brigand bounded forward, with the young man scarce a pace behind
him. The woman, running with wonderful speed in spite of her burden,
began to ascend a narrow path leading up the face of a rugged cliff.

A yell of anguish from behind for a moment arrested Ferralti's rapid
pursuit. Glancing back he saw the Duke running frantically toward them,
at the same time waving his arms high above his head.

"The pit!" he shouted. "She is making for the pit. Stop her, for the
love of God!"

Ferralti understood, and dashed forward again at full speed. Tommaso
also understood, for his face was white and he muttered terrible oaths
as he pressed on. Yet run as they might, the mad duchessa was inspired
with a strength so superhuman that she kept well in advance.

But the narrow path ended half way up the cliff. It ended at a deep
chasm in the rocks, the edge of which was protected by a large flat
stone, like the curb of a well.

With a final leap the old woman gained this stone, and while the
dreadful pit yawned at her feet she turned, and with a demoniacal laugh
faced her pursuers, hugging the child close to her breast.

Tommaso and Ferralti, who were nearest, paused instinctively. It was now
impossible for them to prevent the tragedy about to be enacted. The
Duke, spurred on by fear, was yet twenty paces in their rear, and in a
moment he also stopped, clasping his hands in a gesture of vain
entreaty.

"Listen, Lugui!" his mother called to him, in a dear, high voice. "This
is the child that has come between us and turned you from a man into a
coward. Here alone is the cause of our troubles. Behold! I will remove
it forever from our path."

With the words she lifted Tato high above her head and turned toward the
pit--that terrible cleft in the rocks which was believed to have no
bottom.

At her first movement Tommaso had raised his gun, and the Duke,
perceiving this, called to him in an agonized voice to fire. But either
the brigand wavered between his loyalty to the Duke or the Duchessa, or
he feared to injure Tato, for he hesitated to obey and the moments were
precious.

The child's fate hung in the balance when Ferralti snatched the weapon
from the brigand's hands and fired it so hastily that he scarcely seemed
to take aim.

A wild cry echoed the shot. The woman collapsed and fell, dropping Tato
at her feet, where they both tottered at the edge of the pit. The child,
however, clung desperately to the outer edge of the flat stone, while
the Duchessa's inert form seemed to hesitate for an instant and then
disappeared from view.

Tommaso ran forward and caught up the child, returning slowly along the
path to place it in the father's arms. Ferralti was looking vaguely from
the weapon he held to the pit, and then back again, as if not fully
understanding what he had done.

"Thank you, signore," said the Duke, brokenly, "for saving my precious
child."

"But I have slain your mother!" cried the young man, horrified.

"The obligation is even," replied the duke. "She was also your
grandmother."

Ferralti stood motionless, his face working convulsively, his tongue
refusing to utter a sound.

"But he did not shoot my grandmother at all," said Tato, who was sobbing
against her father's breast; "for I heard the bullet strike the rock
beside us. My grandmother's strength gave way, and she fainted. It was
that that saved me, padre mia."




CHAPTER XXII

NEWS AT LAST


Kenneth Forbes had always been an unusual boy. He had grown up in an
unfriendly atmosphere, unloved and uncared for, and resented this
neglect with all the force of his impetuous nature. He had hated Aunt
Jane, and regarded her as cruel and selfish--a fair estimate of her
character--until Aunt Jane's nieces taught him to be more considerate
and forgiving. Patricia, especially, had exercised a gentler influence
upon the arbitrary youth, and as a consequence they had become staunch
friends.

When the unexpected inheritance of a fortune changed the boy's condition
from one of dependence to one of importance he found he had no longer
any wrongs to resent; therefore his surly and brusque moods gradually
disappeared, and he became a pleasant companion to those he cared for.
With strangers he still remained reserved and suspicious, and
occasionally the old sullen fits would seize him and it was well to
avoid his society while they lasted.

On his arrival at Taormina, Kenneth had entered earnestly into the
search for Uncle John, whom he regarded most affectionately; and, having
passed the day tramping over the mountains, he would fill the evening
with discussions and arguments with the nieces concerning the fate of
their missing uncle.

But as the days dragged wearily away the search slackened and was
finally abandoned. Kenneth set up his easel in the garden and began to
paint old Etna, with its wreath of snow and the soft gray cloud of vapor
that perpetually hovered over it.

"Anyone with half a soul could paint that!" said Patsy; and as a proof
of her assertion the boy did very well indeed, except that his
uneasiness on Mr. Merrick's account served to distract him more or less.

Nor was Kenneth the only uneasy one. Mr. Watson, hard-headed man of
resource as he was, grew more and more dejected as he realized the
impossibility of interesting the authorities in the case. The Sicilian
officials were silent and uncommunicative; the Italians wholly
indifferent. If strangers came to Taormina and got into difficulties,
the government was in no way to blame. It was their duty to tolerate
tourists, but those all too energetic foreigners must take care of
themselves.

Probably Mr. Watson would have cabled the State Department at Washington
for assistance had he not expected each day to put him in communication
with his friend, and in the end he congratulated himself upon his
patience. The close of the week brought a sudden and startling change in
the situation.

The girls sat on the shaded terrace one afternoon, watching the picture
of Etna grow under Kenneth's deft touches, when they observed a child
approaching them with shy diffidence. It was a beautiful Sicilian boy,
with wonderful brown eyes and a delicate profile. After assuring himself
that the party of young Americans was quite separate from any straggling
guest of the hotel, the child came near enough to say, in a low tone:

"I have a message from Signor Merrick."

They crowded around him eagerly then, raining questions from every side;
but the boy shrank away and said, warningly:

"If we are overheard, signorini mia, it will be very bad. No one must
suspect that I am here."

"Is my uncle well?" asked Patsy, imploringly.

"Quite well, mees."

"And have you also news of Count Ferralti?" anxiously enquired Louise.

"Oh, Ferralti? He is better. Some teeth are knocked out, but he eats
very well without them," replied the child, with an amused laugh.

"Where are our friends, my lad?" Kenneth asked.

"I cannot describe the place, signore; but here are letters to explain
all." The child produced a bulky package, and after a glance at each, in
turn, placed it in Patsy's hands. "Read very secretly, signorini, and
decide your course of action. To-morrow I will come for your answer. In
the meantime, confide in no one but yourselves. If you are indiscreet,
you alone will become the murderers of Signor Merrick and the sad young
Ferralti."

"Who are you?" asked Beth, examining the child closely.

"I am called Tato, signorina mia."

"Where do you live?"

"It is all explained in the letters, believe me."

Beth glanced at Patricia, who was examining the package, and now all
crowded around for a glimpse of Uncle John's well-known handwriting. The
wrapper was inscribed:

     _"To Miss Doyle, Miss De Graf and Miss Merrick,_
                                 _Hotel Castello-a-Mare, Taormina._
       _By the safe hands of Tato."_

Inside were two letters, one addressed to Louise personally. She seized
this and ran a little distance away, while Beth took Uncle John's letter
from Patsy's trembling hands, and having opened it read aloud in a
clear and composed voice the following:

     "My dear Nieces: (and also my dear friends, Silas Watson and
     Kenneth Forbes, if they are with you) Greeting! You have
     perhaps been wondering at my absence, which I will explain
     by saying that I am visiting a noble acquaintance in a very
     cozy and comfortable retreat which I am sure would look
     better from a distance. My spirits and health are A No. 1
     and it is my intention to return to you as soon as you have
     executed a little commission for me, which I want you to do
     exactly as I hereby instruct you. In other words, if you
     don't execute the commission you will probably execute me.

     "I have decided to purchase a valuable antique ring from my
     host, at a price of fifty thousand dollars, which trifling
     sum I must have at once to complete the transaction, for
     until full payment is made I cannot rejoin you. Therefore
     you must hasten to raise the dough. Here's the programme, my
     dear girls: One of you must go by first train to Messina and
     cable Isham, Marvin & Co. to deposit with the New York
     correspondents of the Banca Commerciale Italiana fifty
     thousand dollars, and have instructions cabled to the
     Messina branch of that bank to pay the sum to the written
     order of John Merrick. This should all be accomplished
     within twenty-four hours. Present the enclosed order,
     together with my letter of credit and passport, which will
     identify my signature, and draw the money in cash. Return
     with it to Taormina and give it secretly to the boy Tato,
     who will bring it to me. I will rejoin you within three
     hours after I have paid for the ring.

     "This may seem a strange proceeding to you, my dears, but
     you must not hesitate to accomplish it--if you love me.
     Should my old friend Silas Watson be now with you, as I
     expect him to be, he will assist you to do my bidding, for
     he will be able to realize, better than I can now explain,
     how important it is to me.

     "Also I beg you to do a like service for Count Ferralti, who
     is entrusting his personal commission, to Louise. He also
     must conclude an important purchase before he can return to
     Taormina.

     "More than this I am not permitted to say in this letter.
     Confide in no stranger, or official of any sort, and act as
     secretly and quietly as possible. I hope soon to be with
     you.

     "Very affectionately,         UNCLE JOHN."

"What does it all mean?" asked Patsy, bewildered, when Beth had finished
reading.

"Why, it is clear enough, I'm sure," said Kenneth. "Uncle John is
imprisoned by brigands, and the money he requires is his ransom. We must
get it as soon as possible, you know, and luckily he is so rich that he
won't miss this little draft at all."

Beth sat silent, angrily staring at the letter.

"I suppose," said Patsy, hesitating, "the robbers will do the dear uncle
some mischief, if he doesn't pay."

"Just knock him on the head, that's all," said the boy. "But there's no
need to worry. We can get the money easily."

Suddenly Beth jumped up.

"Where's that girl?" she demanded, sharply.

"What girl?"

"Tato."

"Tato, my dear coz, is a boy," answered Kenneth; "and he disappeared
ages ago."

"You must be blind," said Beth, scornfully, "not to recognize a girl
when you see one. A boy, indeed!"

"Why, he dressed like a boy," replied Kenneth, hesitatingly.

"So much the more disgraceful," sniffed Beth. "She belongs to those
brigands, I suppose."

"Looks something like Victor Valdi," said Patsy, thoughtfully.

"Il Duca? Of course! I see it myself, now. Patricia, it is that wicked
duke who has captured Uncle John."

"I had guessed that," declared Patsy, smiling.

"He must be a handsome rascal," observed Kenneth, "for the child is
pretty as a picture."

"He isn't handsome at all," replied Beth; "but there is a look about the
child's eyes that reminds me of him."

"That's it, exactly," agreed Patsy.

Louise now approached them with a white, frightened face.

"Isn't it dreadful!" she moaned. "They are going to kill Ferralti unless
he gives them thirty thousand dollars."

"And I don't believe he can raise thirty cents," said Patsy, calmly.

"Oh, yes, he can," answered Louise, beginning to cry. "Hi--his--father
is d--dead, and has left him--a--fortune."

"Don't blubber, Lou," said the boy, chidingly; "in that case your dago
friend is as well off as need be. But I suppose you're afraid the
no-account Count won't figure his life is worth thirty thousand dollars.
It does seem like an awful price to pay for a foreigner."

"It isn't that," said Louise, striving to control her emotion. "He says
he hates to be robbed. He wouldn't pay a penny if he could help it."

"Good for the Count! I don't blame him a bit," exclaimed Beth. "It is a
beastly shame that free born Americans should be enslaved by a crew of
thieving Sicilians, and obliged to purchase their freedom!"

"True for you," said Kenneth, nodding. "But what are we going to do
about it?"

"Pay, of course," decided Patsy, promptly. "Our Uncle John is too
precious to be sacrificed for all the money in the world. Come; let's go
and find Mr. Watson. We ought not to lose a moment's time."

The lawyer read Uncle John's letter carefully, as well as the one from
Count Ferralti, which Louise confided to him with the request that he
keep the young man's identity a secret for a time, until he could reveal
it to her cousins in person.

"The only thing to be done," announced Mr. Watson, "is to carry out
these instructions faithfully. We can send the cable messages from here,
and in the morning Louise and I will take the train for Messina and
remain there until we get the money."

"It's an outrage!" cried Beth.

"Of course, my dear. But it can't be helped. And your uncle is wise to
take the matter so cheerfully. After all, it is little enough to pay
for one's life and liberty, and our friend is so wealthy that he will
never feel the loss at all."

"It isn't that; it's the principle of the thing that I object to," said
the girl. "It's downright disgraceful to be robbed so easily."

"To be sure; but the disgrace is Italy's, not ours. Object all you want
to, Beth, dear," continued the old lawyer, smiling at her; "but
nevertheless we'll pay as soon as possible, and have done with it. What
we want now is your Uncle John, and we want him mighty badly."

"Really, the pirates didn't charge enough for him," added Patsy.

So Mr. Watson sent the cables to John Merrick's bankers and Count
Ferralti's attorney, and the next morning went with Louise to Messina.

Frascatti drove all the party down the road to the station at Giardini,
and as the train pulled out, Beth, who had remained seated in the
victoria with Patricia and Kenneth, suddenly stood up to pull the
_vetturino's_ sleeve.

"Tell me, Frascatti," she whispered, "isn't that Il Duca's child?
Look--that little one standing in the corner?"

"Why, yes; it is really Tato," answered the man, before he thought to
deny it.

"Very well; you may now drive us home," returned Beth, a shade of
triumph in her voice.




CHAPTER XXIII

BETH BEGINS TO PLOT


Once back in their sitting-room behind closed doors, Beth, Patsy and
Kenneth got their three heads together and began eagerly to discuss a
plot which Beth had hinted of on the way home and now unfolded in
detail. And while they still whispered together a knock at the door
startled them and made them look rather guilty until the boy answered
the call and admitted little Tato.

The child's beautiful face wore a smile of demure satisfaction as Tato
bowed respectfully to the young Americans.

Kenneth winked at Beth from behind the visitor's back.

"As you have a guest," he remarked, with a yawn that was somewhat rude,
"I shall now go and take my nap."

"What, do you sleep so early in the day, you lazy-bones?" asked Patsy,
brightly.

"Any time, my dear, is good enough for an overworked artist," he
replied. "Au revoir, my cousins. See you at luncheon."

With this he strolled away, and when he had gone Beth said to Tato:

"Won't you sit down, signorina?"

"Do you mean me?" asked the child, as if surprised.

"Yes; I can see plainly that you are a girl."

"And a pretty one, too, my dear," added Patsy.

Tato blushed as if embarrassed, but in a moment smiled upon the American
girls.

"Do you think me immodest, then?" she asked, anxiously.

"By no means, my dear," Beth assured her. "I suppose you have an
excellent reason for wearing boys' clothes."

"So I have, signorina. I live in the mountains, where dresses catch in
the crags, and bother a girl. And my father has always been heart-broken
because he had no son, and likes to see me in this attire. He has many
errands for me, too, where a boy may go unnoticed, yet a girl would
attract too much attention. This is one of the errands, signorini. But
now tell me, if you please, how have you decided to answer the letters
of Signor Merrick and Signor Ferralti?"

"Oh, there was but one way to answer them, Tato," replied Beth,
composedly. "We have sent Mr. Watson and our cousin Louise Merrick to
Messina to get the money. If our friends in America act promptly Mr.
Watson and Louise will return by to-morrow afternoon's train, and be
prepared to make the payment."

"That is well, signorina," responded Tato.

"We are to give the money to you, I suppose?" said Patsy.

"Yes; I will return for it to-morrow afternoon," answered the child,
with business-like gravity. Then she looked earnestly from one to the
other of the two girls. "You must act discreetly, in the meantime, you
know. You must not talk to anyone, or do anything to imperil your
uncle's safety."

"Of course not, Tato."

"I beg you not, signorini. The uncle is a good man, and brave. I do not
wish him to be injured."

"Nor do we, Tato."

"And the young man is not a coward, either. He has been kind to me. But
he is sad, and not so pleasant to talk with as the uncle."

"True enough, Tato," said Beth.

Patsy had been examining the child with curious intentness. The little
one was so lovely and graceful, and her voice sounded so soft and
womanly, that Patsy longed to take her in her arms and hug her.

"How old are you, dear?" she asked.

Tato saw the friendly look, and answered with a smile.

"Perhaps as old as you, signorina, although I am so much smaller. I
shall be fifteen in a month."

"So old!"

Tato laughed merrily.

"Ah, you might well say 'so young,' amico mia! To be grown up is much
nicer; do you not think so? And then I shall not look such a baby as
now, and have people scold me when I get in the way, as they do little
bambini."

"But when you are grown you cannot wear boys' clothing, either."

Tato sighed.

"We have a saying in Sicily that 'each year has its sunshine and rain,'
which means its sorrow and its joy," she answered. "Perhaps I sometimes
think more of the tears than of the laughter, although I know that is
wrong. Not always shall I be a mountaineer, and then the soft dresses of
the young girls shall be my portion. Will I like them better? I do not
know. But I must go now, instead of chattering here. Farewell,
signorini, until to-morrow."

"Will you not remain with us?"

"Oh, no; although you are kind. I am expected home. But to-morrow I will
come for the money. You will be silent?"

"Surely, Tato."

The child smiled upon them pleasantly. It was a relief to deal with two
tender girls instead of cold and resentful men, such as she had
sometimes met. At the door she blew a kiss to them, and darted away.

In the courtyard Frascatti saw her gliding out and discreetly turned his
head the other way.

Tato took the old road, circling around the theatre and through the
narrow, winding streets of the lower town to the Catania Gate. She
looked back one or twice, but no one noticed her. If any of the
villagers saw her approaching they slipped out of her path.

Once on the highway, however, Tato became lost in reflection. Her
mission being successfully accomplished, it required no further thought;
but the sweet young American girls had made a strong impression upon the
lonely Sicilian maid, and she dreamed of their pretty gowns and ribbons,
their fresh and comely faces, and the gentleness of their demeanor.

Tato was not gentle. She was wild and free and boyish, and had no pretty
gowns whatever. But what then? She must help her father to get his
fortune, and then he had promised her that some day they would go to
Paris or Cairo and live in the world, and be brigands no longer.

She would like that, she thought, as she clambered up the steep paths;
and perhaps she would meet these American girls again, or others like
them, and make them her friends. She had never known a girl friend, as
yet.

These ambitions would yesterday have seemed far in the dim future; but
now that her stern old grandmother was gone it was possible her father
would soon fulfill his promises. While the Duchessa lived she ruled them
all, and she was a brigand to the backbone. Now her father's will
prevailed, and he could refuse his child nothing.

Kenneth was not an expert detective, but he had managed to keep Tato in
sight without being suspected by her. He had concealed himself near the
Catania Gate, through which he knew she must pass, and by good luck she
had never looked around once, so intent were her musings.

When she came to the end of the path and leaned against the rock to sing
the broken refrain which was the "open sesame" to the valley, the boy
was hidden snug behind a boulder where he could watch her every
movement.

Then the rock opened; Tato passed in, and the opening closed behind her.

Kenneth found a foothold and climbed up the wall of rock, higher and
higher, until at last he crept upon a high ridge and looked over.

The hidden valley lay spread before him in all its beauty, but the
precipice at his feet formed a sheer drop of a hundred feet or more, and
he drew back with a shudder.

Then he took courage to look again, and observed the house, on the porch
of which stood Tato engaged in earnest conversation with a tall, dark
Sicilian. Uncle John was nowhere to be seen, but the boy understood that
he was there, nevertheless, and realized that his prison was so secure
that escape was impossible.

And now he climbed down again, a much more difficult feat than getting
up. But although he was forced to risk his life several times, he was
agile and clear-headed, and finally dropped to the path that led to the
secret door of the passage.

His next thought was to mark the exact location of the place, so that he
could find it again; and as he returned slowly along the paths through
the rocky fissures he took mental note of every curve and communication,
and believed he could now find his way to the retreat of the brigands at
any time he chose.




CHAPTER XXIV

PATSY'S NEW FRIEND


"I must say that I don't like the job," said Patsy, the next morning, as
she stood by the window and faced Beth and Kenneth. "Suppose we fail?"

"In the bright lexicon of youth--"

"Shut up, Ken. If we fail," said Beth, "we will be no worse off than
before."

"And if we win," added the boy, "they'll think twice before they try to
rob Americans again."

"Well, I'm with you, anyhow," declared Patricia. "I can see it's risky,
all right; but as you say, no great harm will be done if we slip up."

"You," announced Beth, gravely, "must be the captain."

"It isn't in me, dear. You figured the thing out, and Ken and I will
follow your lead."

"No," said Beth, decidedly; "I'm not quick enough, either in thought or
action, to be a leader, Patsy. And there's a bit of deception required
that I couldn't manage. That clever little thing, Tato, would know at
once I was up to some mischief; but she would never suspect you."

"I like that compliment," replied Patricia. "I may deserve it, of
course; but it strikes me Louise is the one best fitted for such work."

"We can't let Louise into this plot," said the boy, positively; "she'd
spoil it all."

"Don't be silly, Patsy," said Beth. "You're genuine and frank, and the
child likes you. I could see that yesterday. All you have to do is to be
nice to her and win her confidence; and then, when the climax comes, you
must be the spokesman and talk straight out from the shoulder. You can
do that all right."

"I'll bet on her," cried Kenneth, with an admiring look at the girl.

"Then," said Patsy, "it is all arranged, and I'm the captain. And is it
agreed that we won't lisp a word to Mr. Watson or Louise?"

"Not a word."

"Here," said Kenneth, drawing a revolver from his pocket, "is Uncle
John's pop-gun. It's the only one I could find in his room, so he must
have taken the other with him. Be careful of it, Patsy, for it's loaded
all 'round. Can you shoot?"

"No; but I suppose the pistol can. I know enough to pull the trigger."

"And when you do, remember to point it away from your friends. Now hide
it, my dear, and be careful of it."

Patsy concealed the weapon in the bosom of her dress, not without making
a wry face and shivering a bit.

"Have you got your revolver, Beth?" asked the boy.

"Yes."

"And she can shoot just wonderfully!" exclaimed Patsy. "Yesterday she
picked an orange off a tree with a bullet. You should have seen her."

"I know," said Ken, nodding. "I've seen Beth shoot before, and she's our
main reliance in this conspiracy. For my part, I can hit a mark
sometimes, and sometimes I can't. See here." He exhibited a beautiful
pearl and silver-mounted weapon which he drew from his pocket. "Mr.
Watson and I have carried revolvers ever since we came to Sicily, but
we've never had occasion to use them. I can hardly believe, even now,
that this beautiful place harbors brigands. It's such a romantic
incident in our prosaic world of to-day. And now, young ladies, we are
armed to the teeth and can defy an army. Eh, Captain Pat?"

"If you're not more respectful," said the girl, "I'll have you
court-marshalled and drummed out of camp."

On the afternoon train came Louise and Mr. Watson from Messina. The
American agents had responded promptly, and the bank had honored the
orders and delivered the money without delay.

"It is all safe in my satchel," said the lawyer, as they rode together
to the hotel; "and our dear friends are as good as rescued already. It's
pretty bulky, Kenneth--four hundred thousand lira--but it is all in
notes on the Banca d'Italia, for we couldn't manage gold."

"Quite a haul for the brigand," observed Kenneth, thoughtfully.

"True; but little enough for the lives of two men. That is the way I
look at the transaction. And, since our friends can afford the loss, we
must be as cheerful over the thing as possible. It might have been a
tragedy, you know."

Louise shivered.

"I'm glad it is all over," she said, gratefully.

The conspirators looked at one another and smiled, but held their peace.

Arriving at the hotel, Beth and Kenneth at once disappeared, saying they
were going to town, as they would not be needed longer. Patsy
accompanied their cousin and the lawyer to the sitting-room, where
presently Tato came to them.

"Well, little one," said the lawyer, pleasantly, "We have secured the
money required to enable Mr. Merrick to purchase the ring, and
Mr.--er--Count Ferralti to buy his bracelet. Will you count it?"

"Yes, signore, if you please," replied Tato, with a sober face.

Mr. Watson drew out two packages of bank notes and placed them upon the
table. The child, realizing the importance of the occasion, carefully
counted each bundle, and then replaced the wrappers.

"The amounts are correct, signore," she said. "I thank you for making my
task so easy. And now I will go."

The lawyer brought a newspaper and wrapped the money in it once again.

"It is always dangerous to carry so much money," said he; "but now no
one will be likely to suspect the contents of your package."

Tato smiled.

"No one would care to molest me," she said; "for they fear those that
protect me. Good afternoon, signore. Your friends will be with you in
time to dine in your company. Good afternoon, signorini," turning to
Patsy and Louise.

"I'll walk a little way with you; may I?" asked Patsy, smiling into
Tato's splendid eyes.

"To be sure, signorina," was the quick response.

Patricia caught up a sunshade and followed the child out at the side
entrance, which was little used. Tato took the way along the old road,
and Patsy walked beside her, chatting brightly of the catacombs, the
Norman villa that showed its checkered tower above the trees and the
ancient wall that still hemmed in the little village.

"I love Taormina," she said, earnestly, "and shall be sorry to leave it.
You must be very happy, Tato, to be able to live here always."

"It is my birthplace," she said; "but I long to get away from it and see
other countries. The view is fine, they say; but it tires me. The air is
sweet and pure; but it oppresses me. The climate is glorious; but I have
had enough of it. In other places there is novelty, and many things that
Sicily knows nothing of."

"That is true," replied Patsy, tucking the little one's arm underneath
her own, with a sympathetic gesture. "I know just how you feel, Tato.
You must come to America some day, and visit me. I will make you very
welcome, dear, and you shall be my friend."

The child looked into her face earnestly.

"You do not hate me, signorina, because--because--"

"Because why?"

"Because my errand to you has been so lawless and--and--unfriendly?"

"Ah, Tato, you do not choose this life, do you?"

"No, signorina."

"It is forced on you by circumstances, is it not?"

"Truly, signorina."

"I know. You would not long so wistfully to change your condition if you
enjoyed being a little brigand. But nothing that has passed must
interfere with our friendship, dear. If I were in your place, you see, I
would do just as you have done. It is not a very honest life, Tato, nor
one to be proud of; but I'm not going to blame you one bit."

They had passed the Catania Gate and reached the foot of one of the
mountain paths. Tato paused, hesitatingly.

"Oh, I'll go a little farther," said Patsy, promptly. "No one will
notice two girls, you know. Shall I carry your parcel for a time?"

"No," replied the child, hugging it close with her disengaged arm. But
she offered no objection when Patsy continued to walk by her side.

"Have you any brothers or sisters, Tato?"

"No, signorina."

"Have you a mother?"

"No, signorina. My father and I are alone."

"I know him well, Tato. We were on the ship together, crossing the
ocean. He was gruff and disagreeable, but I made him talk to me and
smile."

"I know; he has told me of the Signorina Patsy. He is fond of you."

"Yet he robbed my uncle."

The child flushed, and drew away her arm.

"That is it. That is why you should hate me," she replied, bitterly. "I
know it is robbery, and brigandage, although my father masks it by
saying he sells antiques. Until now I have seen nothing wrong in this
life, signorina; but you have made me ashamed."

"Why, dear?"

"Because you are so good and gentle, and so forgiving."

Patsy laughed.

"In reality, Tato, I am resentful and unforgiving. You will find out,
soon, that I am a very human girl, and then I will not make you ashamed.
But your father's business is shameful, nevertheless."

Tato was plainly puzzled, and knew not what to reply. But just then they
reached the end of the crevasse, and the child said:

"You must return now, Signorina Patsy."

"But why cannot I go on with you, and come back with my uncle?"

Tato hesitated. Accustomed as she was to duplicity and acting, in her
capacity as lure for her thieving father, the child was just now
softened by Patsy's kindly manner and the successful accomplishment of
her mission. She had no thought of any treachery or deception on the
part of the American girl, and the request seemed to her natural
enough.

"If you like," she decided, "you may come as far as the barrier, and
there wait for your uncle. It will not be long."

"Very well, dear."

Tato clambered over the dividing rock and dropped into the path beyond.
Patsy sprang lightly after her. A short distance farther and they
reached the barrier.

"This is the place, signorina. You will sit upon that stone, and wait
until your uncle appears." She hesitated, and then added, softly: "I may
not see you again. But you will not forget me?"

"Never, Tato. And if you come to America you must not forget to visit
me. Remember, whatever happens, that we are friends, and must always
remain so."

The child nodded, gratefully. Then, leaning against the face of the
cliff, she raised her voice and warbled clearly the bit of song that
served as the signal to her father.




CHAPTER XXV

TURNING THE TABLES


No sooner had the notes ceased than Kenneth sprang from behind a rock
that had concealed him and grasped the child in his strong arms, trying
to cover her mouth at the same time to prevent her from crying out.

Tato developed surprising strength. The adventure of yesterday had so
thoroughly frightened her that when she found herself again seized she
struggled madly. The boy found that he could scarcely hold her, so he
enfolded her in both his arms and, letting her scream as she might,
picked up her tiny form and mounted the slope of the hill, leaping from
rock to rock until he came to a broad boulder twenty feet or more above
the path. Here he paused, panting, and awaited results.

The rock doors had opened promptly. Even while Kenneth struggled with
the brigand's daughter Patsy could see straight through the tunnel and
into the valley beyond. The child had dropped her bundle in the effort
to escape, and while Kenneth was leaping with her up the crags Patsy ran
forward and secured the money, returning quickly to her position facing
the tunnel.

And now they heard shouts and the sound of hastening feet as Il Duca ran
from the tunnel, followed closely by two of his brigands. They paused a
moment at the entrance, as if bewildered, but when the father saw his
child in the grasp of a stranger and heard her screams he answered with
a roar of fury and prepared to scramble up the rock to rescue her.

That was where Patsy showed her mettle. She hastily covered the brigand
with her revolver and shouted warningly:

"Stop, or you are a dead man!"

It was wonderfully dramatic and effective.

Il Duca shrank back, scowling, for he had no weapon at hand. Leaning
against the entrance to his valley he glared around to determine the
number of his foes and the probable chance of defeating them.

Kenneth laughed boyishly at his discomfiture. Kneeling down, the youth
grasped Tato by both wrists and lowered her body over the edge of the
rock so that her feet just touched a little ledge beneath. He continued
to hold fast to her wrists, though, and there she remained, stretched
against the face of the rock fronting the path, in full view of all, but
still unable to move.

From this exasperating sight Il Duca glanced at Patsy. She was holding
the revolver rigidly extended, and her blue eyes blazed with the
excitement of the moment. It was a wonder she did not pull the trigger
inadvertently, and the thought that she might do so caused the brigand
to shudder.

Turning half around he beheld a third enemy quietly seated upon the
rocks directly across the path from Kenneth, her pose unconcerned as she
rested her chin lightly upon her left hand. It was Beth, who held her
revolver nonchalantly and gazed upon the scene below her with calm
interest.

The Duke gave a cough to clear his throat. His men hung back of him,
silent and motionless, for they did not like this absolute and dangerous
defiance of their chief.

"Tell me, then, Tato," he called in English, "what is the cause of this
trouble?"

"I do not know, my father, except that these are friends of Signor
Merrick who have secretly followed me here."

The carefully arranged programme gave Patsy a speech at this point, but
she had entirely forgotten it.

"Let me explain," said Beth, coldly. "You have dared to detain in your
robbers' den the persons of Mr. Merrick and Count Ferralti. You have
also demanded a ransom for their release. That is brigandage, which is
denounced by the laws of Sicily. We have appealed to the authorities,
but they are helpless to assist us. Therefore, being Americans, we have
decided to assist ourselves. We command you to deliver to us on this
spot, safe and uninjured, the persons of our friends, and that without
any unnecessary delay."

The Duke listened with a sneer.

"And if we refuse, signorina?"

"If you refuse--if you do not obey at once--I swear that I will shoot
your child, Tato, whose body yonder awaits my bullet. And afterward I
shall kill you."

As she spoke she levelled the revolver and aimed it carefully at the
exposed body of the child.

The brigand paled, and grasped the rock to steady himself.

"Bah! No girl can shoot from that distance," he exclaimed, scornfully.

"Indeed! Take care of your finger," called Beth, and a shot echoed
sharply along the mountain side.

The brigand jumped and uttered a yell, at the same time whipping his
right hand underneath his left arm; for Beth's bullet had struck one of
his fingers and then flattened itself against the cliff.

That settled all argument, as far as Il Duca was concerned; for he now
had ample evidence that the stern-eyed girl above him could shoot, and
was not to be trifled with. All his life he had ruled by the terror of
his threats; to-day he was suddenly vanquished by a determination he
dared not withstand.

"Enough!" he cried. "Have your way."

He spoke to his men in Italian, and they hastened through the tunnel,
glad to escape.

Following their departure there was a brief silence, during which all
stood alert. Then, Tato, still half suspended against the cliff, said in
a clear, soft voice:

"Father, if you think you can escape, let them shoot me, and keep your
prisoners. The money for their ransom I brought to this place, and they
will pay it even yet to save their friends from your vengeance. Do not
let these wild Americans defeat us, I beg of you. I am not afraid. Save
yourself, and let them shoot me, if they will!"

Kenneth afterward declared that he thought "the jig was up" then, for
they had no intention whatever of harming Tato. It was all merely a bit
of American "bluff," and it succeeded because the brigand was a coward,
and dared not emulate his daughter's courage.

"No, no, Tato!" cried the Duke, brokenly, as he wrung his hands in
anguish. "There is more money to be had, but I have only one child. They
shall not harm a hair of your head, my pretty one!"

Patsy wanted to yell "bravo!" but wisely refrained. Her eyes were full
of tears, though, and her resolution at ebb tide.

Fortunately the men had made haste. They returned with surprising
promptness, pushing the amazed prisoners before them.

Uncle John, as he emerged from the tunnel, looked around upon the tragic
scene and gasped:

"Well, I declare!"

Count Ferralti was more composed, if equally surprised. He lifted his
hat politely to Beth and Patsy, and smiled with great satisfaction.

"You are free," said Il Duca, harshly. "Go!"

They lost no time in getting the brigands between themselves and the
mouth of the tunnel, and then Kenneth gently drew Tato to a place beside
him and assisted her to clamber down the path.

"Good bye, little one," he said, pleasantly; "you're what we call a
'brick' in our country. I like you, and I'm proud of you."

Tato did not reply. With streaming eyes she was examining her father's
shattered hand, and sobbing at sight of the blood that dripped upon the
rocks at his feet.

"Get inside!" called Beth, sharply; "and close up that rock. Lively,
now!"

The "girl who could shoot" still sat toying with her revolver, and the
mountaineers obeyed her injunction. The rock promptly closed, and the
group of Americans was left alone.

Then Beth came slowly down to where Patsy was hugging Uncle John in a
wild frenzy of delight, and Count Ferralti was shaking Kenneth's hand
with a face eloquent of emotion.

"Come," said she, her voice sounding faint and weary, "let us get away
from here. It was a pretty game, while it lasted, but I'll feel safer
when we are home again. Where's the money?"

"I've got it," said Kenneth, holding up the package.

"What! didn't you pay?" demanded Uncle John, astounded.

"Of course not, dear," said Patsy, gleefully. "Did you think your nieces
would let you be robbed by a bunch of dagoes?"

Ferralti caught hold of Beth's swaying form.

"Look after your cousin," he said, sharply. "I think she has fainted!"




CHAPTER XXVI

THE COUNT UNMASKS


"And now," said Uncle John, as he sat in their cosy sitting-room,
propped in an easy chair with his feet upon a stool, "it's about time
for you to give an account of yourselves, you young rascals."

They had eaten a late but very satisfactory dinner at the
Castello-a-Mare, where the return of the missing ones was hailed with
joy by the proprietor and his assistants. Even the little bewhiskered
head-waiter, who resembled a jack-in-the-box more than he did a man,
strove to celebrate the occasion by putting every good thing the house
afforded before the returned guests. For, although they dared not
interfere to protect the victims of the terrible Il Duca, the hotel
people fully recognized the fact that brigandage was not a good
advertisement for Taormina, and hoped the "little incident" would not
become generally known.

Old Silas Watson, dignified lawyer as he was, actually danced a hornpipe
when he beheld his old friend safe and sound. But he shook his head
reproachfully when he learned of the adventure his ward and the two
girls had undertaken with such temerity but marvelous success.

Beth had quickly recovered from her weakness, although Kenneth had
insisted on keeping her arm all the way home. But the girl had been
silent and thoughtful, and would eat nothing at dinner.

When they had gathered in their room to talk it all over the lawyer
thought his young friends deserved a reproof.

"The money wasn't worth the risk, you crazy lunatics!" he said.

"It wasn't the money at all," replied Patsy, demurely.

"No?"

"It was the principle of the thing. And wasn't Beth just wonderful,
though?"

"Shucks!" said Kenneth. "She had to go and faint, like a ninny, and she
cried all the way home, because she had hurt the brigand's finger."

The girl's eyes were still red, but she answered the boy's scornful
remark by saying, gravely:

"I am sorry it had to be done. I'll never touch a revolver again as long
as I live."

Uncle John gathered his brave niece into an ample embrace.

"I'm very proud of you, my dear," he said, stroking her hair lovingly,
"and you mustn't pay any attention to that silly boy. I've always known
you were true blue, Beth, and now you have proved it to everyone. It may
have been a reckless thing to do, as Mr. Watson says, but you did it
like a major, and saved our self-esteem as well as our money."

"Hurrah for Beth!" yelled the boy, changing his colors without a blush.

"If you don't shut up, I'll box your ears," said his guardian, sternly.

Uncle John and young Ferralti were the heroes of the evening. The little
old gentleman smoked a big cigar and beamed upon his nieces and friends
with intense satisfaction, while Ferralti sat glum and silent beside
Louise until an abrupt challenge from Mr. Merrick effectually aroused
him.

"I've only one fault to find with this young man," was the observation
referred to: "that he made our acquaintance under false pretenses. When
a fairly decent fellow becomes an impostor there is usually reason for
it, and I would like Count Ferralti--or whatever his name is--to give us
that reason and make a clean breast of his deception."

Ferralti bowed, with a serious face, but looked significantly toward the
other members of the company.

"Whatever you have to say should be heard by all," declared Uncle John,
answering the look.

"Perhaps you are right, Mr. Merrick, and all present are entitled to an
explanation," answered the young man, slowly. "I may have been foolish,
but I believe I have done nothing that I need be ashamed of.
Fortunately, there is now no further reason for concealment on my part,
and in listening to my explanation I hope you will be as considerate as
possible."

They were attentive enough, by this time, and every eye was turned, not
unkindly, upon the youth who had so long been an enigma to them
all--except, perhaps, to Louise.

"I am an American by birth, and my name is Arthur Weldon."

In the pause that followed Uncle John gave a soft whistle and Patsy
laughed outright, to the undisguised indignation of Louise.

"Years ago," resumed the youth, "my father, who was a rich man, made a
trip to Sicily and, although I did not know this until recently, was
seized by brigands and imprisoned in the hidden valley we have just
left. There he fell in love with a beautiful girl who was the daughter
of the female brigand known as the Duchess of Alcanta, and who assisted
him to escape and then married him. It was a pretty romance at the time,
but when my father had taken his bride home to New York and became
immersed in the details of his business, his love grew cold and he began
to neglect his wife cruelly. He became a railway president and amassed
a great fortune, but was not so successful a husband as he was a
financier. The result was that the Sicilian girl, after some years of
unhappiness and suffering, deserted him and returned to her own country,
leaving her child, then three years old, behind her. To be frank with
you, it was said at the time that my mother's mind had become
unbalanced, or she would not have abandoned me to the care of a loveless
father, but I prefer to think that she had come to hate her husband so
bitterly that she could have no love for his child or else she feared
that her terrible mother would kill me if I came into her power. Her
flight mattered little to my father, except that it made him more stern
and tyrannical toward me. He saw me very seldom and confided my
education to servants. So I grew up practically unloved and uncared for,
and when the proper time arrived I was sent to college. My father now
gave me an ample allowance, and at the close of my college career called
me into his office and ordered me to enter the employ of the railway
company. I objected to this. I did not like the business and had other
plans for my future. But he was stubborn and dictatorial, and when I
continued unsubmissive he threatened to cast me off entirely and leave
his fortune to charity, since he had no other near relatives. He must
have thought better of this decision afterward, for he gave me a year to
decide whether or not I would obey him. At the end of that time, he
declared, I would become either a pauper or his heir, at my option.

"It was during this year that I formed the acquaintance of your niece,
Miss Merrick, and grew to love her devotedly. Louise returned my
affection, but her mother, learning of my quarrel with my father,
refused to sanction our engagement until I was acknowledged his heir. I
was forbidden her house, but naturally we met elsewhere, and when I knew
she was going to Europe with you, sir, who had never seen me, we hit
upon what we thought was a happy and innocent plan to avoid the long
separation. I decided to go to Europe also, and without you or your
other nieces suspecting, my identity, attach myself to your party and
enjoy the society of Louise while she remained abroad. So I followed
you on the next ship and met you at Sorrento, where I introduced myself
as Count Ferralti--a name we had agreed I should assume before we parted
in America.

"The rest of my story you know. My father was killed in an accident on
his own railroad, and I received the news while we were prisoners of the
brigand, whom I discovered to be my uncle, but who had no mercy upon me
because of the relationship. To-night, on my return here, I found a
letter from my father's attorney, forwarded from my bankers in Paris.
Through my father's sudden death I have inherited all his wealth, as he
had no time to alter his will. Therefore Mrs. Merrick's objection to me
is now removed, and Louise has never cared whether I had a penny or
not."

He halted, as if not knowing what more to say, and the little group of
listeners remained quiet because it seemed that no remark from them was
necessary. Young Weldon, however, was ill at ease, and after hitching
nervously in his chair he addressed Uncle John in these words:

"Sir, you are the young lady's guardian for the present, as she is in
your charge. I therefore ask your consent to our formal engagement."

"Not any," said Uncle John, decidedly. "I'll sanction no engagement of
any children on this trip. You are wrong in supposing I am Louise's
guardian--I'm just her chum and uncle. It's like cradle-snatching to
want to marry a girl of sixteen, and you ought to be ashamed of
yourself, for you can't be much more than twenty-one yourself. While
Louise is in my care I won't have any entanglements of any sort, so
you'll have to wait till you get home and settle the business with her
mother."

"Very wise and proper, sir," said Mr. Watson, nodding gravely.

Louise's cheeks were flaming.

"Do you intend to drive Arthur away, Uncle?" she asked.

"Why should I, my dear? except that you've both taken me for a blind old
idiot and tried to deceive me. Let the boy stay with us, if he wants
to, but he'll have to cut out all love-making and double-dealing from
this time on--or I'll take you home in double-quick time."

The young man seemed to resent the indictment.

"The deception seemed necessary at the time, sir," he said, "and you
must not forget the old adage that 'all's fair in love and war.' But I
beg that you will forgive us both and overlook our fault, if fault it
was. Hereafter it is our desire to be perfectly frank with you in all
things."

That was a good way to disarm Uncle John's anger, and the result was
immediately apparent.

"Very good," said the old gentleman; "if you are proper and obedient
children I've no objection to your being together. I rather like you,
Arthur Weldon, and most of your failings are due to the foolishness of
youth. But you've got to acquire dignity now, for you have suddenly
become a man of consequence in the world. Don't think you've got to
marry every girl that attracts you by her pretty face. This devotion to
Louise may be 'puppy-love,' after all, and--"

"Oh, Uncle!" came a chorus of protest.

"What, you rascals! are you encouraging this desperate fol-de-rol?"

"You are too severe, Uncle John," said Patsy, smiling. "The trouble with
you is that you've never been in love yourself."

"Never been in love!" He beamed upon the three girls with devotion
written all over his round, jolly face.

"Then you're jealous," said Kenneth. "Give the poor kids a fair show,
Uncle John."

"All right, I will. Arthur, my lad, join our happy family as one of my
kidlets, and love us all--but no one in particular. Eh? Until we get
home again, you know. We've started out to have the time of our lives,
and we're getting it in chunks--eh, girls?"

"We certainly are, Uncle John!" Another chorus.

"Well, what do you say, Arthur Weldon?"

"Perhaps you are right, sir," answered the young man. "And, anyway, I am
deeply grateful for your kindness. I fear I must return home in a couple
of weeks, to look after business matters; but while I remain with you I
shall try to conduct myself as you wish."

"That sounds proper. Is it satisfactory to you, Louise?"

"Yes, Uncle."

"Then we've settled Cupid--for a time, anyway. And now, my dears, I
think we have all had enough of Taormina. Where shall we go next?"




CHAPTER XXVII

TATO IS ADOPTED


They canvassed the subject of their future travels with considerable
earnestness. Uncle John was bent upon getting to Rome and Venice, and
from there to Paris, and the nieces were willing to go anywhere he
preferred, as they were sure to enjoy every day of their trip in the old
world. But Mr. Watson urged them strongly to visit Syracuse, since they
were not likely to return to Sicily again and the most famous of all the
ancient historic capitals was only a few hours' journey from Taormina.
So it was finally decided to pass a week in Syracuse before returning to
the continent, and preparations were at once begun for their departure.

Kenneth pleaded for one more day in which to finish his picture of Etna,
and this was allowed him. Uncle John nevertheless confessed to being
uneasy as long as they remained on the scene of his recent exciting
experiences. Mr. Watson advised them all not to stray far from the
hotel, as there was no certainty that Il Duca would not make another
attempt to entrap them, or at least to be revenged for their escape from
his clutches.

On the afternoon of the next day, however, they were startled by a call
from the Duke in person. He was dressed in his usual faded velvet
costume and came to them leading by the hand a beautiful little girl.

The nieces gazed at the child in astonishment.

Tato wore a gray cloth gown, ill-fitting and of coarse material; but no
costume could destroy the fairy-like perfection of her form or the
daintiness of her exquisite features. With downcast eyes and a troubled
expression she stood modestly before them until Patsy caught her
rapturously in her arms and covered her face with kisses.

"You lovely, lovely thing!" she cried. "I'm _so_ glad to see you again,
Tato darling!"

The Duke's stern features softened. He sighed heavily and accepted
Uncle John's polite invitation to be seated.

The little party of Americans was fairly astounded by this unexpected
visit. Kenneth regretted that he had left his revolver upstairs, but the
others remembered that the brigand would not dare to molest them in the
security of the hotel grounds, and were more curious than afraid.

Il Duca's hand was wrapped in a bandage, but the damaged finger did not
seem to affect him seriously. Beth could not take her eyes off this
dreadful evidence of her late conflict, and stared at it as if the
bandage fascinated her.

"Signore," said the Duke, addressing Uncle John especially, "I owe to
you my apologies and my excuses for the annoyance I have caused to you
and your friends. I have the explanation, if you will so kindly permit
me."

"Fire away, Duke," was the response.

"Signore, I unfortunately come of a race of brigands. For centuries my
family has been lawless and it was natural that by education I, too,
should become a brigand. In my youth my father was killed in an affray
and my mother took his place, seizing many prisoners and exacting from
them ransom. My mother you have seen, and you know of her sudden madness
and of her death. She was always mad, I think, and by nature a fiend.
She urged my elder brother to wicked crimes, and when he rebelled she
herself cast him, in a fit of anger, into the pit. I became duke in his
place, and did my mother's bidding because I feared to oppose her. But
for years I have longed to abandon the life and have done with crime.

"With me our race ends, for I have no sons. But my one child, whom you
know as Tato, I love dearly. My greatest wish is to see her happy. The
last few days have changed the fortunes of us both. The Duchessa is
gone, and at last I am the master of my own fate. As for Tato, she has
been charmed by the young American signorini, and longs to be like them.
So we come to ask that you forgive the wrong we did you, and that you
will now allow us to be your friends."

Uncle John was amazed.

"You have decided to reform, Duke?" he asked.

"Yes, signore. Not alone for Tato's sake, but because I loathe the life
of brigandage. See; here is my thought. At once I will disband my men
and send them away. My household effects I will sell, and then abandon
the valley forever. Tato and I have some money, enough to live in quiet
in some other land, where we shall be unknown."

"A very good idea, Duke."

"But from my respect for you, Signer Merreek, and from my daughter's
love for your nieces--the brave and beautiful signorini--I shall dare to
ask from you a favor. But already I am aware that we do not deserve it."

"What is it, sir?"

"That you take my Tato to keep for a few weeks, until I can send away my
men and arrange my affairs here. It would be unpleasant for the child
here, and with you she will be so happy. I would like the sweet
signorini to buy nice dresses, like those they themselves wear, for my
little girl, and to teach her the good manners she could not gain as
the brigand's daughter. Tato has the money to pay for everything but the
kindness, if you will let her stay in your society until I can claim
her. I am aware that I ask too much; but the Signorina Patsy has said to
my child that they would always be friends, whatever might happen, and
as I know you to be generous I have dared to come to you with this
request. I only ask your friendship for my Tato, who is innocent. For
myself, after I have become a good man, then perhaps you will forgive
me, too."

Uncle John looked thoughtful; the old lawyer was grave and listened
silently. Patsy, her arms still around the shrinking form of the child,
looked pleadingly at her uncle. Beth's eyes were moist and Louise smiled
encouragingly.

"Well, my dears? The Duke is certainly not entitled to our friendship,
as he truly says; but I have nothing against little Tato. What do you
advise?"

"Let us keep her, and dress her like the beautiful doll she is, and love
her!" cried Patsy.

"She shall be our adopted cousin," said Louise.

"Tato is good stuff!" declared Kenneth.

"Well, Beth?"

"It seems to me, Uncle," said the girl, seriously, "that if the Duke
really wishes to reform, we should give him a helping hand. The little
girl has led a bad life only because her father forced her to lure his
victims and then procure the money for their ransoms; but I am sure her
nature is sweet and pure, and she is so young that she will soon forget
the evil things she has learned. So I vote with my cousins. Let us adopt
Tato, and care for her until her father can introduce her into a new and
more proper life."

"Well argued, Beth," said Uncle John, approvingly. "I couldn't have put
the case better myself. What do you say, Silas Watson?"

"That you are all quite right," answered the old lawyer. "And the best
part of the whole thing, to me, is the fact that this nest of brigands
will be wiped out of existence, and Taormina be hereafter as safe for
tourists as old Elmhurst itself. I wish I could say as much for the rest
of Sicily."

Uncle John extended his hand to the Duke, who took it gratefully,
although with a shamefaced expression that was perhaps natural under the
circumstances.

"Look up, dear," said Patsy to the girl, softly; "look up and kiss me.
You've been adopted, Tato! Are you glad?"




CHAPTER XXVIII

DREAMS AND DRESS-MAKING


Tato was now one of the family. They left Taormina the next day, and
Frascatti drove all the girls in his victoria to the station.

"You must come again, signorini," said he, looking regretful at their
departure. "Next year the fountain of the ice cream soda will be in
operation, like those you have in Chicago, which is America. Our culture
increases with our civilization. It is even hinted that Il Duca is to
abandon our island forever. He has been interesting to us, but not
popular, and you will not miss him when you come again to find he is not
here. If this time he has caused you an inconvenience, I am sorry. It is
regrettable, but,--"

"But it is so!" said Patsy, laughing.

Tato was again transformed. Patricia, who was the smallest of the three
nieces, though not especially slim, had quickly altered one of her own
pretty white gowns to fit the child, and as she was deft with her needle
and the others had enthusiastically assisted her, Tato now looked more
like a fairy than ever.

It was really wonderful what a suitable dress could do for the tiny
Sicilian maid. She had lost her free and boyish manner and become shy
and retiring with strangers, although when in the society of the three
nieces she was as sweet and frank as ever. She wore her new gown
gracefully, too, as if well accustomed to feminine attire all her life.
The only thing now needed, as Patsy said, was time in which to grow her
hair, which had always been cut short, in boyish fashion.

They were a merry party when they boarded the train for Syracuse, and
Uncle John arranged with the guard to secure two adjoining compartments
all to themselves, that they might have plenty of room.

"Where did you put the money, Uncle John?" Beth whispered, when at last
they were whirling along and skirting the base of Mt. Etna toward the
Catania side.

"I've hidden it in my trunk," he replied, in the same confidential tone.
"There is no bank in this neighborhood to receive it, so I decided to
carry it with us."

"But will it be safe in the trunk?" she enquired.

"Of course, my dear. Who would think of looking there for fifty thousand
dollars? And no one knows we happen to have so much money with us."

"What did the Count--I mean, Mr. Weldon--do with his ransom?"

"Carries it in his satchel, so he can keep it with him and have an eye
on it. It's a great mistake, Beth, to do such a thing as that. It'll
make him uneasy every minute, and he won't dare to let a _facchino_
handle his grip. But in my case, on the other hand, I know it's
somewhere in the baggage car, so I don't have to worry."

The journey was a delightful one. The road skirted the coast through the
oldest and most picturesque part of Sicily, and it amazed them to
observe that however far they travelled Etna was always apparently next
door, and within reaching distance.

At Aci Castello they were pointed out the seven Isles of the Cyclops,
which the blind Polyphemus once hurled after the crafty Ulysses. Then
they came to Catania, which is the second largest city in Sicily, but
has little of historic interest. Here they were really at the nearest
point to the mighty volcano, but did not realize it because it always
seemed to be near them. Eighteen miles farther they passed Leontinoi,
which in ancient days dared to rival Siracusa itself, and an hour later
the train skirted the bay and Capo Santa Panagia and slowly came to a
halt in that city which for centuries dominated all the known world and
was more powerful and magnificent in its prime than Athens
itself--Syracuse.

The day had become cloudy and gray and the wind whistled around them
with a chill sweep as they left their coach at the station and waited
for Kenneth to find carriages. Afterward they had a mile to drive to
their hotel; for instead of stopping in the modern town Uncle John had
telegraphed for rooms at the Villa Politi, which is located in the
ancient Achradina, at the edge of the Latomia de Cappuccini. By the time
they arrived there they were blue with cold, and were glad to seek the
warm rooms prepared for them and pass the remainder of the afternoon
unpacking and "getting settled."

"I'm afraid," said Patsy, dolefully, "that we shall miss the bright
sunshine and warmth of Taormina, Tato."

"Oh, it is not always warm there, nor is it always cold here," replied
the child. "Indeed, signorina, I have heard that the climate of Siracusa
is very delightful."

"It doesn't look it," returned Patsy; "but it may improve."

The interior of the hotel was comfortable, though, however bleak the
weather might be outside. A good dinner put them all in a better humor
and they passed the evening watching the strangers assembled in the
parlors and wondering where they had come from and who they were.

"That money," whispered Uncle John to Beth, as he kissed her good
night, "is still as safe as can be. I've lost the key to my trunk, and
now I can't even get at it myself."

"Lost it!" she exclaimed.

"Yes; but that won't matter. It's the big trunk that holds the things I
don't often use, and if I can't unlock it no one else can, that's
certain. So I shall rest easy until I need something out of it, and then
I'll get a locksmith to pick the lock."

"But I wish you hadn't lost the key," said the girl, thoughtfully.

"Strikes me it's good luck. Pleasant dreams, my dear. I can fancy Arthur
Weldon lying awake all night with his dreadful thirty thousand tucked
under his pillow. It's a great mistake to carry so much money with you,
Beth, for you're sure to worry about it."

The next morning when they came down to breakfast they were all amazed
at the gorgeous sunshine and the genial temperature that had followed
the dreary afternoon of their arrival. Syracuse was transformed, and
from every window of the hotel the brilliant glow of countless flowers
invited one to wander in the gardens, which are surpassed by few if any
in the known world.

The Villa Politi stood so near the edge of a monstrous quarry that it
seemed as if it might topple into the abyss at any moment. Our friends
were on historic ground, indeed, for these quarries--or latomia, as they
are called--supplied all the stone of which the five cities of ancient
Syracuse were built--cities which in our age have nearly, if not quite,
passed out of existence. The walls of the quarry are a hundred feet in
depth, and at the bottom are now acres upon acres of the most delightful
gardens, whose luxuriance is attributable to the fact that they are
shielded from the winds while the sun reaches them nearly all the day.
There are gardens on the level above, and beautiful ones, too; but these
in the deep latomia are the most fascinating.

The girls could scarcely wait to finish breakfast before rushing out to
descend the flights of iron steps that lead to the bottom of the vast
excavation. And presently they were standing on the ground below and
looking up at the vine covered cliffs that shut out all of the upper
world.

It was peaceful here, and soothing to tired nerves. Through blooming
shrubbery and along quiet paths they might wander for hours, and at
every step find something new to marvel at and to delight the senses.

Here were ancient tombs cut from the solid rock--one of them that of an
American midshipman who died in Syracuse and selected this impressive
and lovely vault for his burial place. And there stood the famous statue
of Archimedes, who used in life to wander in this very latomia.

"Once," said Mr. Watson, musingly, "there were seven thousand Athenian
prisoners confined in this very place, and allowed to perish through
starvation and disease. The citizens of Syracuse--even the fine ladies
and the little children--used to stand on the heights above and mock at
the victims of their king's cruelty."

"Couldn't they climb out?" asked Patsy, shuddering at the thought that
some of the poor prisoners might have died on the very spot her feet
now trod.

"No, dear. And it is said the guards constantly patrolled the edge to
slay any who might venture to make the attempt."

"Wasn't it dreadful!" she exclaimed. "But I'm glad they have made a
flower garden of it now. Somehow, it reminds me of a cemetery."

But there were other interesting sights to be seen at Syracuse, and they
laid out a systematic programme of the places they would visit each
morning while they remained there. The afternoons were supposed to be
reserved for rest, but the girls were so eager to supply Tato with a
fitting wardrobe that they at once began to devote the afternoons to
shopping and dress-making.

The child had placed in Uncle John's keeping a liberally supplied purse,
which the Duke wished to be applied to the purchase of whatever his
daughter might need or desire.

"He wants me to dress as you do," said Tato, simply; "and because you
will know what is fitting my station and will be required in my future
life, he has burdened you with my society. It was selfish in my father,
was it not? But but--I wanted so much to be with you--because you are
good to me!"

"And we're mighty glad to have you with us," answered Patsy. "It's no
end of fun getting a girl a whole new outfit, from top to toe; and,
aside from that, we already love you as if you were our little sister."

Beth and Louise equally endorsed this statement; and indeed the child
was so sweet and pretty and so grateful for the least kindness bestowed
upon her that it was a pleasure to assist and counsel her.

Tato looked even smaller in girls' clothing than in boys', and she
improved so rapidly in her manners by constantly watching the nieces
that it was hard to imagine she had until now been all unused to polite
society. Already they began to dread the day when her father would come
to claim her, and the girls and Uncle John had conceived a clever plan
to induce the Duke to let his daughter travel with them on the continent
and then go for a brief visit to them in America.

"By that time," declared Louise, "Tato's education will be
accomplished, and she will be as refined and ladylike as any girl of her
age we know. Blood will tell, they say, and the monk who taught her must
have been an intelligent and careful man."

"She knows more of history and languages than all the rest of us put
together," added Beth.

"And, having adopted her, we mustn't do the thing by halves," concluded
Patsy; "so our darling little brigandess must tease her papa to let her
stay with us as long as possible."

Tato smiled and blushed with pleasure. It was very delightful to know
she had such enthusiastic friends. But she was afraid the Duke would not
like to spare her for so long a time as a visit to America would
require.

"You leave him to me," said Uncle John. "I'll argue the case clearly and
logically, and after that he will have to cave in gracefully."

Meantime the dainty gowns and pretty costumes were one by one finished
and sent to the hotel, and the girls ransacked the rather inadequate
shops of Syracuse for the smartest things in lingerie that could be
procured. As they were determined to "try everything on" and see how
their protg looked in her finery, Tato was now obliged to dress for
dinner and on every other possible occasion, and she not only astonished
her friends by her loveliness but drew the eye of every stranger as
surely as the magnet attracts the needle.

Even in Sicily, where the Greek type of beauty to-day exists more
perfectly than in Helene, there were few to compare with Tato, and it
was only natural that the Americans should be very proud of her.

Kenneth was sketching a bit of the quarry and the old monastery beyond
it, with the blue sea glimmering in the distance. Sometimes he would
join the others in their morning trips to the catacombs, the cathedrals
or the museum; but the afternoons he devoted to his picture, and the
others came to the gardens with him and sat themselves down to sew or
read beside his easel.

Arthur Weldon was behaving very well indeed; and although a good deal of
the credit belonged to Louise, who managed him with rare diplomatic
ability, Uncle John grew to like the young man better each day, and had
no fault whatever to find with him.

He was still rather silent and reserved; but that seemed a part of his
nature, inherited doubtless from his father, and when he chose to talk
his conversation was interesting and agreeable.

Kenneth claimed that Arthur had a bad habit of "making goo-goo eyes" at
Louise; but the young man's manner was always courteous and judicious
when addressing her, and he managed to conceal his love with admirable
discretion--at least when others were present.

Uncle John's private opinion, confided in secret to his friend Mr.
Watson, was that Louise "really might do worse; that is, if they were
both of the same mind when they grew up."

And so the days passed pleasantly away, and the time for their departure
from Syracuse drew near.

On the last morning all of them--with the exception of Tato, who pleaded
a headache--drove to the Latomia del Paradiso to see the celebrated "Ear
of Dionysius"--that vast cavern through which the tyrant is said to
have overheard every whisper uttered by the prisoners who were confined
in that quarry. There is a little room at the top of the cliff, also
built from the rock, where it is claimed Dionysius sat and played
eavesdropper; and it is true that one in that place can hear the
slightest sound uttered in the chamber below.

Afterward the amphitheatre and the ancient street of the tombs were paid
a final visit, with a stop at San Giovanni, where St. Paul once
preached. And at noon the tourists returned to the hotel hungry but
enthusiastic, in time for the table-d'-hote luncheon.




CHAPTER XXIX

TATO WINS


"This is funny!" cried Patsy, appearing before Uncle John with a white
and startled face. "I can't find Tato anywhere."

"And her new trunk is gone from her room, as well as her gowns and
everything she owns," continued Beth's clear voice, over her cousin's
shoulder.

Uncle John stared at them bewildered. Then an expression of anxiety
crept over his kindly face.

"Are you sure?" he asked.

"There can't be a mistake, Uncle. She's just _gone_."

"None of you has offended, or annoyed the child, I suppose?"

"Oh, no, Uncle. She kissed us all very sweetly when we left her this
morning."

"I can't understand it."

"Nor can we."

"Could her father have come for her, do you think?" suggested Mr.
Merrick, after a moment's thought.

"I can't imagine her so ungrateful as to leave us without a word," said
Patsy. "I know Tato well, Uncle, and the dear child would not hurt our
feelings for the world. She loves us dearly."

"But she's a queer thing," added Louise, "and I don't trust her
altogether. Sometimes I've surprised a look in her eyes that wasn't as
innocent and demure as she would have us imagine her."

"Oh, Louise!"

"And there's another reason."

"What is it?"

"She reformed too suddenly."

Uncle John slapped his forehead a mighty blow as a suspicious and
dreadful thought flashed across his mind. But next instant he drew a
long breath and smiled again.

"It was lucky I lost that key to the trunk," he observed, still a little
ashamed of his temporary lack of confidence in Tato. "It's been locked
ever since we left Taormina, so the child couldn't be tempted by that."

"She wouldn't touch your money for the world!" said Patsy, indignantly.
"Tato is no thief!"

"She comes of a race of thieves, though," Beth reminded her.

"I wonder if Arthur's money is still safe," remarked Louise, following
the line of thought suggested.

As if with one accord they moved down the hall to the door of the young
man's room.

"Are you in, Arthur?" asked Uncle John, knocking briskly.

"Yes, sir."

He opened his door at once, and saw with surprise the little group of
anxious faces outside.

"Is your money safe?" asked Uncle John.

Weldon gave them a startled glance and then ran to his dresser and
pulled open a drawer. After a moment's fumbling he turned with a smile.

"All safe, sir."

Uncle John and his nieces were visibly relieved.

"You see," continued Arthur, "I've invented a clever hiding-place,
because the satchel could not be left alone and I didn't wish to lug it
with me every step I took. So I placed the packages of bills inside the
leg of a pair of trousers, and put them in a drawer with some other
clothing at top and bottom. A dozen people might rummage in that drawer
without suspecting the fact that money is hidden there. I've come to
believe the place is as good as a bank; but you startled me for a
minute, with your question. What's wrong?"

"Tato's gone."

"Gone!"

"Departed bag and baggage."

"But your fifty thousand, sir. Is it safe?"

"It has to be," answered Uncle John. "It is in a steel-bound,
double-locked trunk, to which I've lost the key. No bank can beat that,
my boy."

"Then why did the child run away?"

They could not answer that.

"It's a mystery," said Patsy, almost ready to weep. "But I'll bet it's
that cruel, wicked father of hers. Perhaps he came while we were out and
wouldn't wait a minute."

"What does the hall porter say?" asked Kenneth, who had joined the group
in time to overhear the last speech and guess what had happened.

"Stupid!" cried Uncle John. "We never thought of the hall-porter. Come
back to our sitting room, and we'll have him up in a jiffy."

The portiere answered his hell with alacrity. The Americans were liberal
guests.

The young lady? Ah, she had driven away soon after they had themselves
gone. A thin-faced, dark-eyed man had called for her and taken her away,
placing her baggage on the box of the carriage. Yes, she had paid her
bill and tipped the servants liberally.

"Just as I suspected!" cried Patsy. "That horrid duke has forced her to
leave us. Perhaps he was jealous, and feared we would want to keep her
always. Was she weeping and miserable, porter?"

"No, signorina. She laughed and was very merry. And--but I had
forgotten! There is a letter which she left for the Signorina D'Oyle."

"Where?"

"In the office. I will bring it at once."

He ran away and quickly returned, placing a rather bulky parcel in the
girl's hands.

"You read it, Uncle John," she said. "There can't be anything private in
Tato's letter, and perhaps she has explained everything."

He put on his glasses and then took the missive and deliberately opened
it. Tato wrote a fine, delicate hand, and although the English words
were badly spelled she expressed herself quite well in the foreign
tongue. With the spelling and lack of punctuation corrected, her letter
was as follows:

"Dear, innocent, foolish Patsy: How astonished you will be to find I
have vanished from your life forever; and what angry and indignant words
you will hurl after poor Tato! But they will not reach me, because you
will not know in which direction to send them, and I will not care
whether you are angry or not.

"You have been good to me, Patsy, and I really love you--fully as much
as I have fear of that shrewd and pretty cousin of yours, whose cold
eyes have made me tremble more than once. But tell Beth I forgive her,
because she is the only clever one of the lot of you. Louise thinks she
is clever, but her actions remind me of the juggler who explained his
tricks before he did them, so that the audience would know how skillful
he was."

"But oh, Patsy, what simpletons you all are! And because you have been
too stupid to guess the truth I must bother to write it all down. For it
would spoil much of my satisfaction and enjoyment if you did not know
how completely I have fooled you.

"You tricked us that day in the mountain glen, and for the first time an
Alcanta brigand lost his prisoners and his ransom money through being
outwitted. But did you think that was the end? If so you failed to
appreciate us.

"Look you, my dear, we could have done without the money, for our family
has been robbing and accumulating for ages, with little need to expend
much from year to year. It is all in the Bank of Italy, too, and drawing
the interest, for my father is a wise man of business. That four hundred
thousand lira was to have been our last ransom, and after we had fairly
earned it you tricked us and did not pay.

"So my father and I determined to get even with you, as much through
revenge as cupidity. We were obliged to desert the valley at once,
because we were getting so rich that the government officials became
uneasy and warned us to go or be arrested. So we consulted together and
decided upon our little plot, which was so simple that it has worked
perfectly. We came to you with our sad story, and you thought we had
reformed, and kindly adopted me as one of your party. It was so easy
that I almost laughed in your foolish faces. But I didn't, for I can
act. I played the child very nicely, I think, and you quite forgot I was
a brigand's daughter, with the wild, free blood of many brave outlaws
coursing in my veins. Ah, I am more proud of that than of my acting.

"Innocent as I seemed, I watched you all carefully, and knew from
almost the first hour where the money had been put. I stole the key to
Uncle John's trunk on the train, while we were going from Taormina to
Syracuse; but I did not take the money from it because I had no better
place to keep it, and the only danger was that he would force the lock
some day. But Ferralti's money--I call him Ferralti because it is a
prettier name than Weldon--bothered me for a long time. At the first he
would not let that little satchel out of his sight, and when he finally
did he had removed the money to some other place. I searched his room
many times, but could not find his hiding place until last night. While
he was at dinner I discovered the bills in one of the drawers of his
dresser.

"But for this difficulty I should have left your charming society
before, as my father has been secretly waiting for me for three days.
Having located Ferralti's money I waited until this morning and when you
had all left me I signalled to my father from my window and prepared to
disappear. It took but a few minutes to get the money from Uncle John's
trunk and Arthur's trouser-leg. Much obliged for it, I'm sure. Then I
packed up all my pretty dresses in my new trunk--for part of our plot
was to use your good taste in fitting me out properly--and now I am
writing this loving epistle before I leave.

"We shall go to Paris or Vienna or Cairo or London--guess which! We
shall have other names--very beautiful ones--and be rich and dignified
and respected. When I grow older I think I shall marry a prince and
become a princess; but that will not interest you much, for you will not
know that the great princess is your own little Tato.

"Tell Uncle John I have left the key to his trunk on the mantel, behind
the picture of the madonna. I stuffed papers into Arthur's trouser leg
to deceive him if he came back before I had a chance to escape. But I
hoped you would discover nothing until you read this letter, for I
wanted to surprise you. Have I? Then I am content. You tricked me once;
but I have tricked you at the last, and the final triumph is mine.

"In spite of all, Patsy dear, I love you; for you are sweet and good,
and although I would not be like you for the world I can appreciate your
excellent qualities. Remember this when your anger is gone. I won't be
able to visit you in America, but I shall always think of you in a more
kindly way than I fear you will think of the Sicilian tomboy, TATO."




CHAPTER XXX

A WAY TO FORGET


The faces of the group, as Uncle John finished reading, were worth
studying. Arthur Weldon was white with anger, and his eyes blazed. Silas
Watson stared blankly at his old friend, wondering if it was because he
was growing old that he had been so easily hoodwinked by this saucy
child. Beth was biting her lip to keep back the tears of humiliation
that longed to trickle down her cheeks. Louise frowned because she
remembered the hard things Tato had said of her. Patsy was softly crying
at the loss of her friend.

Then Kenneth laughed, and the sound sent a nervous shiver through the
group.

"Tato's a brick!" announced the boy, audaciously. "Can't you see, you
stupids, that the thing is a good joke on us all? Or are you too thin
skinned to laugh at your own expense?"

"Oh, we can laugh," responded Uncle John, gravely. "But if Tato's a
brick it's because she is hard and insensible. The loss of the money
doesn't hurt me, but to think the wicked little lass made me love her
when she didn't deserve it is the hardest blow I have ever received."

That made Patsy sob outright, while Louise ejaculated, with scorn: "The
little wretch!"

"It serves us right for having confidence in a child reared to crime and
murder from the cradle," said Arthur, rather savagely. "I don't know how
much money I am worth, but I'd gladly spend another thirty thousand to
bring this wretched creature to justice."

"Money won't do it," declared the lawyer, shaking his head regretfully.
"The rascals are too clever to be caught in Europe. It would be
different at home."

"Well, the best thing to do is to grin and bear it, and forget the
unpleasant incident as soon as possible," said Uncle John. "I feel as if
I'd had my pocket picked by my best friend, but it isn't nearly as
disgraceful as being obliged to assist the thief by paying ransom
money. The loss amounts to nothing to either of us, and such treachery,
thank goodness, is rare in the world. We can't afford to let the thing
make us unhappy, my friends; so cheer up, all of you, and don't dwell
upon it any more than you can help."

They left Syracuse a rather solemn group, in spite of this wise advice,
and journeyed back to Naples and thence to Rome. There was much to see
here, and they saw it so energetically that when they boarded the train
for Florence they were all fagged out and could remember nothing clearly
except the Coliseum and the Baths of Carracalla.

Florence was just now a bower of roses and very beautiful. But Kenneth
lugged them to the galleries day after day until Uncle John declared he
hated to look an "old master" in the face.

"After all, they're only daubs," he declared. "Any ten-year-old boy in
America can paint better pictures."

"Don't let anyone hear you say that, dear," cautioned Patsy. "They'd
think you don't know good art."

"But I do," he protested. "If any of those pictures by old masters was
used in a street-car 'ad' at home it would be money wasted, for no one
would look at them. The people wouldn't stand for it a minute."

"They are wonderful for the age in which they were painted," said
Kenneth, soberly. "You must remember that we have had centuries in which
to improve our art, since then."

"Oh, I've a proper respect for old age, I hope," replied Uncle John;
"but to fall down and worship a thing because it's gray-haired and
out-of-date isn't just my style. All of these 'Oh!'s' and 'Ahs!' over
the old masters are rank humbug, and I'm ashamed of the people that
don't know better."

And now Arthur Weldon was obliged to bid good-bye to Louise and her
friends and take a train directly to Paris to catch the steamer for
home. His attorney advised him that business demanded his immediate
presence, and he was obliged to return, however reluctantly.

Kenneth and Mr. Watson also left the party at Florence, as the boy
artist wished to remain there for a time to study the pictures that
Uncle John so bitterly denounced. The others went on to Venice, which
naturally proved to the nieces one of the most delightful places they
had yet seen. Mr. Merrick loved it because he could ride in a gondola
and rest his stubby legs, which had become weary with tramping through
galleries and cathedrals. These last monuments, by the way, had grown to
become a sort of nightmare to the little gentleman. The girls were
enthusiastic over cathedrals, and allowed none to escape a visit. For a
time Uncle John had borne up bravely, but the day of rebellion was soon
coming.

"No cathedrals in Venice, I hope?" he had said on their arrival.

"Oh, yes, dear; the loveliest one in the world! St. Mark's is here, you
know."

"But no St. Paul's or St. Peter's?"

"No, Uncle. There's the Saluta, and the--"

"Never mind. We'll do that first one, and then quit. What they build so
many churches for I can't imagine. Nobody goes to 'em but tourists, that
I can see."

He developed a streak of extravagance in Venice, and purchased Venetian
lace and Venetian glassware to such an extent that the nieces had to
assure him they were all supplied with enough to last them and their
friends for all time to come. Major Doyle had asked for a meerschaum
pipe and a Florentine leather pocket book; so Uncle John made a
collection of thirty-seven pipes of all shapes and sizes, and bought so
many pocketbooks that Patsy declared her father could use a different
one every day in the month.

"But they're handy things to have," said her uncle, "and we may not get
to Europe again in a hurry."

This was his excuse for purchasing many things, and it was only by
reminding him of the duty he would have to pay in New York that the
girls could induce him to desist.

This customs tax worried the old gentleman at times. Before this trip he
had always believed in a protective tariff, but now he referred to the
United States customs as a species of brigandage worse than that of Il
Duca himself.

They stopped at Milan to visit the great cathedral, and then raced
through Switzerland and made a dash from Luzerne to Paris.

"Thank heaven," said Uncle John, "there are no cathedrals in gay Paree,
at any rate."

"Oh, yes there are," they assured him. "We must see Notre Dame, anyway;
and there are a dozen other famous cathedrals."

Here is where Uncle John balked.

"See here, my dears," he announced, "Not a cathedral will I visit from
this time on! You can take a guide and go by yourselves if you feel you
can't let any get away from you. Go and find another of Mike Angelo's
last work; every church has got one. For my part, I've always been
religiously inclined, but I've been to church enough lately to last me
the rest of my natural life, and I've fully determined not to darken the
doors of another cathedral again. They're like circuses, anyhow; when
you've seen one, you've seen 'em all."

No argument would induce him to abandon this position; so the girls
accepted his proposal and visited their beloved cathedrals in charge of
a guide, whose well of information was practically inexhaustible if not
remarkable for its clarity.

The opera suited Uncle John better, and he freely revelled in the shops,
purchasing the most useless and preposterous things in spite of that
growing bugbear of the customs duties.

But finally this joyous holiday came to an end, as all good things will,
and they sailed from Cherbourg for New York.

Uncle John had six extra trunks, Patsy carried a French poodle that was
as much trouble as an infant in arms, and Louise engineered several
hat-boxes that could not be packed at the last minute. But the girls
embarked gay and rosy-cheeked and animated, and in spite of all the
excitement and pleasure that had attended their trip, not one of the
party was really sorry when the return voyage began.




CHAPTER XXXI

SAFE HOME


"To me," said Uncle John, as he stood on the deck and pointed proudly to
the statue of Liberty in New York harbor, "that is the prettiest sight
I've seen since I left home."

"Prettier than the old masters, Uncle?" asked Patsy, mischievously.

"Yes, or the cathedrals!" he retorted.

When they reached the dock there was the Major waiting to receive Patsy
in a new checked suit with a big flower in his button-hole and a broad
smile on his jolly face.

And there was Mrs. Merrick, too, with Arthur Weldon beside her, which
proved to Louise that he had succeeded in making his peace with her
mother. Also there were the stern-featured custom-house officials in
their uniforms, and the sight of them sent the cold chills flying down
Uncle John's spine.

There was no one present to receive Beth, but her uncle tucked her arm
underneath his own with a proud gesture and kept her close beside him.
For the girl had quite won his loving old heart on this trip, and she
seemed to him more mature and far sweeter than when they had left home.

But the greetings and the "brigandage" were soon over, and in good time
they were all assembled in the Doyle flat, where the joyous Major had
prepared an elaborate dinner to celebrate the return of the wanderers.

"We've a million pipes and pocket-books for you, daddy," whispered
Patsy, hugging him for the twentieth time; "and I've got a thousand
things to tell you about our adventures in strange lands."

"Save 'em till we're alone," said the Major; "they're too good to waste
on a crowd."

Mr. Merrick was placed at the head of the table to make a speech. It was
brief and to the point.

"I promised these young ladies to give them time of their lives," he
said, "Did I do it, girls?"

And in a lively chorus they answered:

"You did, Uncle John!"






CHAPTER I

INTRODUCING "MUMBLES"


Major Gregory Doyle paced nervously up and down the floor of the cosy
sitting room.

"Something's surely happened to our Patsy!" he exclaimed.

A little man with a calm face and a bald head, who was seated near the
fire, continued to read his newspaper and paid no attention to the
outburst.

"Something has happened to Patsy!" repeated the Major, "Patsy" meaning
his own and only daughter Patricia.

"Something is always happening to everyone," said the little man,
turning his paper indifferently. "Something is happening to me, for I
can't find the rest of this article. Something is happening to you,
for you're losing your temper."

"I'm not, sir! I deny it."

"As for Patsy," continued the other, "she is sixteen years old and
knows New York like a book. The girl is safe enough."

"Then where is she? Tell me that, sir. Here it is, seven o'clock, dark
as pitch and raining hard, and Patsy is never out after six. Can you,
John Merrick, sit there like a lump o' putty and do nothing, when your
niece and my own darlin' Patsy is lost--or strayed or stolen?"

"What would you propose doing?" asked Uncle John, looking up with a
smile.

"We ought to get out the police department. It's raining and cold,
and--"

"Then we ought to get out the fire department. Call Mary to put on
more coal and let's have it warm and cheerful when Patsy comes in."

"But, sir--"

"The trouble with you, Major, is that dinner is half an hour late. One
can imagine all sorts of horrible things on an empty stomach. Now,
then--"

He paused, for a pass-key rattled in the hall door and a moment later
Patsy Doyle, rosy and animated, fresh from the cold and wet outside,
smilingly greeted them.

She had an umbrella, but her cloak was dripping with moisture and in
its ample folds was something huddled and bundled up like a baby,
which she carefully protected.

"So, then," exclaimed the Major, coming forward for a kiss, "you're
back at last, safe and sound. Whatever kept ye out 'til this time o'
night, Patsy darlin'?" he added, letting the brogue creep into his
tone, as he did when stirred by any emotion.

Uncle John started to take off her wet cloak.

"Look out!" cried Patsy; "you'll disturb Mumbles."

The two men looked at her bundle curiously.

"Who's Mumbles?" asked one.

"What on earth is Mumbles?" inquired the other.

The bundle squirmed and wriggled. Patsy sat down on the floor and
carefully unwound the folds of the cloak. A tiny dog, black and
shaggy, put his head out, blinked sleepily at the lights, pulled his
fat, shapeless body away from the bandages and trotted solemnly over
to the fireplace. He didn't travel straight ahead, as dogs ought to
walk, but "cornerwise," as Patsy described it; and when he got to the
hearth he rolled himself into a ball, lay down and went to sleep.

During this performance a tense silence had pervaded the room. The
Major looked at the dog rather gloomily; Uncle John with critical eyes
that held a smile in them; Patsy with ecstatic delight.

"Isn't he a dear!" she exclaimed.

"It occurs to me," said the Major stiffly, "that this needs an
explanation. Do you mean to say, Patsy Doyle, that you've worried the
hearts out of us this past hour, and kept the dinner waiting, all
because of a scurvy bit of an animal?"

"Pshaw!" said Uncle John. "Speak for yourself, Major. I wasn't worried
a bit."

"You see," explained Patsy, rising to take off her things and put them
away, "I was coming home early when I first met Mumbles. A little boy
had him, with a string tied around his neck, and when Mumbles tried
to run up to me the boy jerked him back cruelly--and afterward kicked
him. That made me mad."

"Of course," said Uncle John, nodding wisely.

"I cuffed the boy, and he said he'd take it out on Mumbles, as soon as
I'd gone away. I didn't like that. I offered to buy the dog, but the
boy didn't dare sell him. He said it belonged to his father, who'd
kill him and kick up a row besides if he didn't bring Mumbles home.
So I found out where they lived and as it wasn't far away I went home
with him."

"Crazy Patsy!" smiled Uncle John.

"And the dinner waiting!" groaned the Major, reproachfully.

"Well, I had a time, you can believe!" continued Patsy, with
animation. "The man was a big brute, and half drunk. He grabbed up the
little doggie and threw it into a box, and then told me to go home and
mind my business."

"Which of course you refused to do."

"Of course. I'd made up my mind to have that dog."

"Dogs," said the Major, "invariably are nuisances."

"Not invariably," declared Patsy. "Mumbles is different. Mumbles is a
good doggie, and wise and knowing, although he's only a baby dog yet.
And I just couldn't leave him to be cuffed and kicked and thrown
around by those brutes. When the man found I was determined to have
Mumbles he demanded twenty-five dollars."

"Twenty-five dollars!" It startled Uncle John.

"For that bit of rags and meat?" asked the Major, looking at the puppy
with disfavor. "Twenty-five cents would be exorbitant."

"The man misjudged me," observed Patsy, with a merry laugh that
matched her twinkling blue eyes. "In the end he got just two
dollars for Mumbles, and when I came away he bade me good-bye very
respectfully. The boy howled. He hasn't any dog to kick and is
broken-hearted. As for Mumbles, he's going to lead a respectable life
and be treated like a dog."

"Do you mean to keep him?" inquired the Major.

"Why not?" said Patsy. "Don't you like him, Daddy?"

Her father turned Mumbles over with his toe. The puppy lay upon its
back, lazily, with all four paws in the air, and cast a comical glance
from one beady bright eye at the man who had disturbed him.

The Major sighed.

"He can't hunt, Patsy; he's not even a mouser."

"We haven't a mouse in the house."

"He's neither useful nor ornamental. From the looks o' the beast he's
only good to sleep and eat."

"What's the odds?" laughed Patsy, coddling Mumbles up in her arms.
"We don't expect use or ornamentation from Mumbles. All we ask is his
companionship."

Mary called them to dinner just then, and the girl hurried to her room
to make a hasty toilet while the men sat down at the table and eyed
their soup reflectively.

"This addition to the family," remarked Uncle John, "need not make
you at all unhappy, my dear Major. Don't get jealous of Mumbles, for
heaven's sake, for the little brute may add a bit to Patsy's bliss."

"It's the first time I've ever allowed a dog in the house."

"You are not running this present establishment. It belongs
exclusively to Patsy."

"I've always hated the sight of a woman coddling a dog," added the
Major, frowning.

"I know. I feel the same way myself. But it isn't the dog's fault.
It's the woman's. And Patsy won't make a fool of herself over that
frowsy puppy, I assure you. On the contrary, she's likely to get a lot
of joy out of her new plaything, and if you really want to make her
happy, Major, don't discourage this new whim, absurd as it seems. Let
Patsy alone. And let Mumbles alone."

The girl came in just then, bringing sunshine with her. Patsy Doyle
was not very big for her years, and some people unkindly described her
form as "chubby." She had glorious red hair--really-truly red--and her
blue eyes were the merriest, sweetest eyes any girl could possess. You
seldom noticed her freckles, her saucy chin or her turned-up nose; you
only saw the laughing eyes and crown of golden red, and seeing them
you liked Patsy Doyle at once and imagined she was very good to look
at, if not strictly beautiful. No one had friends more loyal,
and these two old men--the stately Major and round little Uncle
John--fairly worshiped Patsy.

No one might suspect, from the simple life of this household, which
occupied the second corner flat at 3708 Willing Square, that Miss
Doyle was an heiress. Not only that, but perhaps one of the very
richest girls in New York. And the reason is readily explained when
I state the fact that Patsy's Uncle John Merrick, the round little
bald-headed man who sat contentedly eating his soup, was a man of many
millions, and this girl his favorite niece. An old bachelor who had
acquired an immense fortune in the far Northwest, Mr. Merrick had
lately retired from active business and come East to seek any
relatives that might remain to him after forty years' absence. His
sister Jane had gathered around her three nieces--Louise Merrick,
Elizabeth De Graf and Patricia Doyle--and when Aunt Jane died Uncle
John adopted these three girls and made their happiness the one care
of his jolly, unselfish life. At that time Major Doyle, Patsy's only
surviving parent, was a poor bookkeeper; but Uncle John gave him
charge of his vast property interests, and loving Patsy almost as
devotedly as did her father, made his home with the Doyles and began
to enjoy himself for the first time in his life.

At the period when this story opens the eldest niece, Louise Merrick,
had just been married to Arthur Weldon, a prosperous young business
man, and the remaining two nieces, as well as Uncle John, were feeling
rather lonely and depressed. The bride had been gone on her honeymoon
three days, and during the last two days it had rained persistently;
so, until Patsy came home from a visit to Beth and brought the tiny
dog with her, the two old gentlemen had been feeling dreary enough.

Patsy always livened things up. Nothing could really depress this
spirited girl for long, and she was always doing some interesting
thing to create a little excitement.

"If she hadn't bought a twenty-five cent pup for two dollars,"
remarked the Major, "she might have brought home an orphan from the
gutters, or a litter of tomcats, or one of the goats that eat the
tin cans at Harlem. Perhaps, after all, we should be thankful it's
only--what's his name?"

"Mumbles," said Patsy, merrily. "The boy said they called him that
because he mumbled in his sleep. Listen!"

Indeed, the small waif by the fire was emitting a series of noises
that seemed a queer mixture of low growls and whines--evidence
unimpeachable that he had been correctly named.

At Patsy's shout of laughter, supplemented by Uncle John's chuckles
and a reproachful cough from the Major, Mumbles awakened and lifted
his head. It may be an eye discovered the dining-table in the next
room, or an intuitive sense of smell directed him, for presently the
small animal came trotting in--still traveling "cornerwise"--and sat
up on his hind legs just beside Patsy's chair.

"That settles it," said the Major, as his daughter began feeding the
dog. "Our happy home is broken up."

"Perhaps not," suggested Uncle John, reaching out to pat the soft head
of Mumbles. "It may be the little beggar will liven us all up a bit."




CHAPTER II

UNCLE JOHN'S IDEA


Two hours later Uncle John, who had been dozing in his big chair by
the fire while Patsy drummed on the piano, sat up abruptly and looked
around him with a suddenly acquired air of decision.

"I have an idea," he announced.

"Did you find it in your dreams, then?" asked the Major, sharply.

"Why, Daddy, how cross you are!" cried Patsy. "Can't Uncle John have
an idea if he wants to?"

"I'm afraid of his ideas," admitted the Major, suspiciously. "Every
time he goes to sleep and catches a thought, it means trouble."

Patsy laughed, looking at her uncle curiously, and the little man
smiled at her genially in return.

"It takes me a long time to figure a thing out," he said; "and when
I've a problem to solve a bit of a snooze helps wonderfully. Patsy,
dear, it occurs to me we're lonely."

"We surely are, Uncle!" she exclaimed.

"And in the dumps."

"Our spirits are at the bottom of the bottomless pit."

"So what we need is--a change."

"There it goes!" said the Major ruefully. "I knew very well any idea
of John Merrick's would cause us misery. But understand this, you
miserable home-wrecker, sir, my daughter Patsy steps not one foot out
of New York this winter."

"Why not?" mildly inquired Uncle John.

"Because you've spirited her away from me times enough, and deprived
her only parent of her society. First you gallivanted off to Europe,
and then to Millville, and next to Elmhurst; so now, egad, I'm going
to keep the girl with me if I have to throttle every idea in your
wicked old head!"

"But I'm planning to take you along, this time. Major," observed Uncle
John reflectively.

"Oh. Hum! Well, I can't go. There's too much business to be attended
to--looking after your horrible money."

"Take a vacation. You know I don't care anything about the business.
It can't go very wrong, anyhow. What does it matter if my income isn't
invested properly, or the bond coupons cut when they're due? Drat the
money!"

"That's what I say," added Patsy eagerly. "Be a man, Major Doyle, and
put the business out of your mind. Let's go somewhere and have a good
romp. It will cheer us up."

The Major stared first at one and then at the other.

"What's the programme, John?" he asked stiffly.

"It's going to be a cold winter," remarked the little man, bobbing his
head up and down slowly.

"It is!" cried Patsy, clasping her hands fervently. "I can feel it in
my bones."

"So we're going," said Uncle John, impressively, "to California--where
they grow sunshine and roses to offset our blizzards and icicles."

"Hurray!" shouted Patsy. "I've always wanted to go to California."

"California!" said the Major, amazed; "why, it's farther away than
Europe. It takes a month to get there."

"Nonsense." retorted Uncle John. "It's only four days from coast to
coast. I have a time-table, somewhere," and he began searching in his
pockets.

There was a silence, oppressive on the Major's part, ecstatic as far
as Patsy was concerned. Uncle John found the railway folder, put on
his spectacles, and began to examine it.

"At my time of life," remarked Major Doyle, who was hale and hearty as
a boy, "such a trip is a great undertaking."

"Twenty-four hours to Chicago," muttered Uncle John; "and then three
days to Los Angeles or San Francisco. That's all there is to it."

"Four days and four nights of dreary riding. We'd be dead by that
time," prophesied the Major.

Uncle John looked thoughtful. Then he lay back in his chair and spread
his handkerchief over his face again.

"No, no!" cried the Major, in alarm. "For mercy's sake, John, don't
go to sleep and catch any more of those terrible ideas. No one knows
where the next one might carry us--to Timbuktu or Yucatan, probably.
Let's stick to California and settle the question before your hothouse
brain grows any more weeds."

"Yucatan," remarked Mr. Merrick, composedly, his voice muffled by the
handkerchief, "isn't a bad suggestion."

"I knew it!" wailed the Major. "How would Ethiopia or Hindustan strike
you?"

Patsy laughed at him. She knew something good was in store for her
and like all girls was enraptured at the thought of visiting new and
interesting scenes.

"Don't bother Uncle John, Daddy," she said. "You know very well he
will carry out any whim that seizes him; especially if you oppose the
plan, which you usually do."

"He's the most erratic and irresponsible man that ever lived,"
announced her father, staring moodily at the spread handkerchief which
covered Uncle John's cherub-like features. "New York is good enough
for anybody, even in winter; and now that you're in society, Patsy--"

"Oh, bother society! I hate it."

"True," he agreed; "it's a regular treadmill when it has enslaved one,
and keeps you going on and on without progressing a bit. The object of
society is to tire you out and keep you from indulging in any other
occupation."

"You know nothing about it," observed Patsy, demurely, "and that is
why you love to rail at society. The things you know, Daddy dear, are
the things you never remark upon."

"Huh!" grunted the Major, and relapsed into silence.

Mumbles had finished his after-dinner nap and was now awakening to
activity. This dog's size, according to the Major, was "about 4x6; but
you can't tell which is the 4 and which the 6." He was distressingly
shaggy. Patsy could find the stump of his tail only by careful search.
Seldom were both eyes uncovered by hair at the same time. But, as his
new mistress had said, he was a wise little dog for one who had only
known the world for a few months, and his brain was exceedingly alert.
After yawning at the fire he rubbed his back against the Major's legs,
sat up beside Patsy and looked at her from one eye pleadingly. Next he
trotted over to Uncle John. The big white handkerchief attracted him
and one corner hung down from the edge of the reclining chair. Mumbles
sat up and reached for it, but could not quite get it in his teeth.
So he sat down and thought it over, and presently made a leap so
unexpectedly agile that Patsy roared with merriment and even the Major
grinned. Uncle John, aroused, sat up and found the puppy rolling on
the floor and fighting the handkerchief as if it had been some deadly
foe.

"Thank goodness," sighed the Major. "The little black rascal has
providently prevented you from evolving another idea."

"Not so," responded Mr. Merrick amiably. "I've thought the thing all
out, and completed our programme."

"Is it still to be California?" anxiously inquired Patsy.

"Of course. I can't give up the sunshine and roses, you know. But we
won't bore the Major by four solid days of railway travel. We'll break
the journey, and take two or three weeks to it--perhaps a month."

"Conquering Caesar! A month!" ejaculated the old soldier, a desperate
look on his face.

"Yes. Listen, both of you. We'll get to Chicago in a night and a day.
We will stop off there and visit the stockyards, and collect a few
squeals for souvenirs."

"No, we won't!" declared Patsy, positively.

"We might sell Mumbles to some Chicago sausage factory," remarked the
Major, "but not for two whole dollars. He wouldn't make more than half
a pound at twenty cents the pound."

"There are other sights to be seen in Chicago," continued Uncle John.
"Anyhow, we'll stop off long enough to get rested. Then on to Denver
and Pike's Peak."

"That sounds good," said Patsy.

"At Denver," said Uncle John, "we will take a touring car and cross
the mountains in it. There are good roads all the way from there to
California."

"Who told you so?" demanded the Major.

"No one. It's a logical conclusion, for I've lived in the West and
know the prairie roads are smoother than boulevards. However, Haggerty
told me the other day that he has made the trip from Denver to Los
Angeles by automobile, and what others can do, we can do."

"It will be glorious!" prophesied Patsy, delightedly.

The Major looked grave, but could find no plausible objection to
offer. He really knew nothing about the West and had never had
occasion to consider such a proposition before.

"We'll talk to Haggerty," he said. "But you must remember he's a
desperate liar, John, and can't be trusted as a guidepost. When do you
intend to start?"

"Why not to-morrow?" asked Uncle John mildly.

Even Patsy demurred at this.

"Why, we've got to get ready, Uncle," she said. "And who's going? Just
we three?"

"We will take Beth along, of course." Beth was Elizabeth De Graf,
another niece. "But Beth is fortunately the sort of girl who can pull
up stakes and move on at an hour's notice."

"Beth is always ready for anything," agreed Patsy. "But if we are
going to a warm climate we will need summer clothes."

"You can't lug many clothes in a motor car," observed the Major.

"No; but we can ship them on ahead."

"Haggerty says," remarked Uncle John, "that you won't need thin
clothes until you get out to California. In fact, the mountain trip is
rather cool. But it's perpetual sunshine, you know, even there, with
brisk, keen air; and the whole journey, Haggerty says, is one of
absolute delight."

"Who is Haggerty?" asked Patsy.

"A liar," answered the Major, positively.

"He's a very good fellow whom we sometimes meet in the city," said
Uncle John. "Haggerty is on the Board, and director in a bank or two,
and quite respectable. But the Major--"

"The Major's going to California just to prove that Haggerty can't
speak the truth," observed that gentleman, tersely heading off any
threatened criticism. "I see there is no opposing your preposterous
scheme, John, so we will go with you and make the best of it. But I'm
sure it's all a sad mistake. What else did Haggerty tell you?"

"He says it's best to pick up a motor car and a chauffeur in Denver,
rather than ship them on from here. There are plenty of cars to be
had, and men who know every inch of the road."

"That seems sensible," declared Patsy, "and we won't lose time waiting
for our own car to follow by freight. I think, Uncle John, I can be
ready by next Tuesday."

"Why, to-morrow's Saturday!" gasped the Major. "The business--"

"Cut the business off short," suggested his brother-in-law. "You've to
cut it somewhere, you know, or you'll never get away; and, as it's my
business, I hereby authorize you to neglect it from this moment until
the day of our return. When we get back you can pick up the details
again and worry over it as much as you please."

"Will we ever get back?" asked the Major, doubtingly.

"If we don't, the business won't matter."

"That's the idea," cried Patsy, approvingly. "Daddy has worked hard
all summer, Uncle John, looking after that annoying money of yours,
and a vacation will do him oodles of good."

Major Doyle sighed.

"I misdoubt the wisdom of the trip," said he, "but I'll go, of course,
if you all insist. Over the Rocky Mountains and across the Great
American Desert in an automobile doesn't sound very enticing, but--"

"Haggerty says--"

"Never mind Haggerty. We'll find out for ourselves."

"And, after all," said Patsy, "there are the sunshine and roses at the
end of the journey, and they ought to make up for any amount of bother
in getting there."

"Girl, you're attempting to deceive me--to deceive your old Daddy,"
said the Major, shaking his head at her. "You wouldn't have any fun
riding to California in a palace car; even the sunshine and roses
couldn't excite you under such circumstances; but if there's a chance
for adventure--a chance to slide into trouble and make a mighty
struggle to get out again--both you and that wicked old uncle of yours
will jump at it. I know ye both. And that's the real reason we're
going to travel in an automobile instead of progressing comfortably as
all respectable people do."

"You're a humbug," retorted Mr. Merrick. "You wouldn't go by train if
I'd let you."

"No," admitted the Major; "I must be on hand to rescue you when you
and Patsy go fighting windmills."




CHAPTER III

MYRTLE DEAN


"We were due in Denver three hours ago, and it's an hour's run or more
yet," remarked Beth De Graf, walking briskly up and down the platform
of a way station where the train had stopped for orders.

"And it's beginning to snow," observed Patricia Doyle, beside her.
"I'm afraid this weather isn't very propitious for an automobile
trip."

"Uncle John doesn't worry," said Beth. "He believes there is perpetual
sunshine west of Denver."

"Yes; a man named Haggerty told him. But you'll notice that Daddy
doesn't seem to believe the tale. Anyhow, we shall soon know the
truth, Beth, and the trip is somewhat on the order of a voyage of
discovery, which renders it fascinating to look forward to. There is
such fun in not knowing just what is going to happen next."

"When one travels with Uncle John," returned Beth, smiling, "she
knows exactly--nothing. That is why I am always eager to accept if he
invites me to go anywhere with him."

The passengers thronging the platform--"stretching their legs" after
the confinement of the tedious railway journey--eyed these two girls
admiringly. Beth was admitted a beauty, and one of the society
journals had lately announced that she had few peers in all the great
metropolis. Chestnut brown hair; dark, serious and steady eyes; an
exquisite complexion and rarely regular features all conspired to
render the young girl wonderfully attractive. Her stride was athletic,
free and graceful; her slender form well poised and dignified. Patsy,
the "plug-ugly," as she called herself, was so bright and animated and
her blue eyes sparkled so constantly with fun and good humor, that
she attracted fully as much attention as her more sedate and more
beautiful cousin, and wherever she went was sure to make a host of
friends.

"See!" she cried, clasping Beth's arm; "there is that lovely girl at
the window again. I've noticed her ever since the train left Chicago,
and she is always in the same seat in that tourist coach. I wonder why
she doesn't get out for a bit of fresh air now and then."

Beth looked up at the fair, girlish face that gazed wistfully from
the window. The unknown seemed very young--not more than fourteen or
fifteen years of age. She wore a blue serge suit of rather coarse
weave, but it was neat and becoming. Around the modest, sweet eyes
were deep circles, denoting physical suffering or prolonged worry; yet
the lips smiled, wanly but persistently. She had evidently noticed
Uncle John's two nieces, for her eyes followed them as they marched
up and down the platform and when Patsy looked up and nodded, a soft
flush suffused her features and she bowed her head in return.

At the cry of "all aboard!" a scramble was made for the coaches and
Beth and Patsy, re-entering their staterooms, found their Uncle and
the Major still intent upon their interminable game of cribbage.

"Let's go back and talk to the girl," suggested Patsy. "Somehow,
the poor thing seems lonely, and her smile was more pathetic than
cheerful."

So they made their way through the long train to the tourist coach,
and there found the girl they were seeking. The surrounding seats were
occupied by groups of passengers of rather coarse caliber, many being
foreign laborers accompanied by their wives and children. The air in
the car was close and "stuffy" and the passengers seemed none too neat
in their habits and appearance. So the solitary girl appeared like a
rose blooming in a barnyard and her two visitors were instantly sorry
for her. She sat in her corner, leaning wearily against the back of
the cane seat, with a blanket spread over her lap. Strangely
enough the consideration of her fellow passengers left the girl in
undisturbed possession of a double seat.

"Perhaps she is ill," thought Patsy, as she and Beth sat down opposite
and entered into conversation with the child. She was frankly
communicative and they soon learned that her name was Myrtle Dean, and
that she was an orphan. Although scarcely fifteen years of age she
had for more than two years gained a livelihood by working in a skirt
factory in Chicago, paying her board regularly to a cross old aunt who
was her only relative in the big city. Three months ago, however, she
had met with an accident, having been knocked down by an automobile
while going to her work and seriously injured.

"The doctors say," she confided to her new friends, "that I shall
always be lame, although not quite helpless. Indeed, I can creep
around a little now, when I am obliged to move, and I shall get better
every day. One of my hips was so badly injured that it will never be
quite right again, and my Aunt Martha was dreadfully worried for fear
I would become a tax upon her. I cannot blame her, for she has really
but little money to pay for her own support. So, when the man who ran
over me paid us a hundred dollars for damages--"

"Only a hundred dollars!" cried Beth, amazed.

"Wasn't that enough?" inquired Myrtle innocently.

"By no means," said Patsy, with prompt indignation. "He should have
given you five thousand, at least. Don't you realize, my dear, that
this accident has probably deprived you of the means of earning a
livelihood?"

"I can still sew," returned the girl, courageously, "although of
course I cannot get about easily to search for employment."

"But why did you leave Chicago?" asked Beth.

"I was coming to that part of my story. When I got the hundred dollars
Aunt Martha decided I must use it to go to Leadville, to my Uncle
Anson, who is my mother's only brother. He is a miner out there, and
Aunt Martha says he is quite able to take care of me. So she bought my
ticket and put me on the train and I'm now on my way to Leadville to
find Uncle Anson."

"To _find_ him!" exclaimed Patsy. "Don't you know his address?"

"No; we haven't had a letter from him for two years. But Aunt Martha
says he must be a prominent man, and everybody in Leadville will know
him, as it's a small place."

"Does he know you are coming?" asked Beth, thoughtfully.

"My aunt wrote him a letter two days before I started, so he ought
to receive it two days before I get there," replied Myrtle, a little
uneasily. "Of course I can't help worrying some, because if I failed
to find Uncle Anson I don't know what might happen to me."

"Have you money?" asked Beth.

"A little. About three dollars. Aunt gave me a basket of food to last
until I get to Leadville, and after paying for my ticket and taking
what I owed her for board there wasn't much left from the hundred
dollars."

"What a cruel old woman!" cried Patsy, wrathfully. "She ought to be
horsewhipped!"

"I am sure it was wrong for her to cast you off in this heartless
way," added Beth, more conservatively.

"She is not really bad," returned Myrtle, the tears starting to her
eyes. "But Aunt Martha has grown selfish, and does not care for me
very much. I hope Uncle Anson will be different. He is my mother's
brother, you know, while Aunt Martha is only my father's sister, and
an old maid who has had rather a hard life. Perhaps," she added,
wistfully, "Uncle Anson will love me--although I'm not strong or
well."

Both Patsy and Beth felt desperately sorry for the girl.

"What is Uncle Anson's other name?" asked the latter, for Beth was
the more practical of Uncle John's nieces and noted for her clear
thinking.

"Jones. Mr. Anson Jones."

"Rather a common name, if you have to hunt for him," observed the
questioner, musingly. "Has he been in Leadville long?"

"I do not know," replied Myrtle. "His last letter proved that he was
in Leadville two years ago, and he said he had been very successful
and made money; but he has been in other mining camps, I know, and has
wandered for years all over the West."

"Suppose he should be wandering now?" suggested Patsy; but at the look
of alarm on Myrtle's face she quickly changed the subject, saying:
"You must come in to dinner with us, my dear, for you have had nothing
but cold truck to eat since you left Chicago. They say we shall be in
Denver in another hour, but I'm afraid to believe it. Anyhow, there is
plenty of time for dinner."

"Oh, I can't go, really!" cried the girl. "It's--it's so hard for me
to walk when the train is moving; and--and--I wouldn't feel happy in
that gay, luxurious dining car."

"Well, we must go, anyway, or the Major will be very disagreeable,"
said Patsy. "Good-bye, Myrtle; we shall see you again before we leave
the train."

As the two girls went forward to their coach Beth said to Patsy:

"I'm afraid that poor thing will be greatly disappointed when she gets
to Leadville. Imagine anyone sending a child on such a wild goose
chase--and an injured and almost helpless child, at that!"

"I shudder to think what would become of her, with no uncle to care
for her and only three dollars to her name," added Patsy. "I have
never heard of such an inhuman creature as that Aunt Martha, Beth. I
hope there are not many like her in the world."

At dinner they arranged with the head waiter of the dining car to send
in a substantial meal, smoking hot, to Myrtle Dean, and Patsy herself
inspected the tray before it went to make sure everything was there
that was ordered. They had to satisfy Uncle John's curiosity at this
proceeding by relating to him Myrtle Dean's story, and the kindly
little man became very thoughtful and agreed with them that it was a
cruel act to send the poor girl into a strange country in search of an
uncle who had not been heard of in two years.

When the train pulled into the station at Denver the first care of
John Merrick's party was to look after the welfare of the lame girl.
They got a porter to assist her into the depot waiting room and then
Uncle John inquired about the next train for Leadville, and found it
would not start until the following morning, the late overland train
having missed that day's connections. This was a serious discovery for
poor Myrtle, but she smiled bravely and said:

"I can pass the night in this seat very comfortably, so please don't
worry about me. It is warm here, you know, and I won't mind a bit the
sitting up. Thank you all very much for your kindness, and good-bye.
I'll be all right, never fear."

Uncle John stood looking down at her thoughtfully.

"Did you engage a carriage, Major?" he asked.

"Yes; there's one now waiting," was the reply.

"All right. Now, then, my dear, let's wrap this blanket around you
tight and snug."

"What are you going to do?" asked Myrtle with a startled look.

"Carry you outside. It's pretty cold and snowy, so we must wrap you up.
Now, Major, take hold on the other side. Here we go!"

Patsy smiled--rather pitifully--at the expression of bewilderment on
Myrtle's face. Uncle John and the Major carried her tenderly to a
carriage and put her in the back seat. Patsy sprang in next, with
Mumbles clasped tightly in her arms, the small dog having been forced
to make the journey thus far in the baggage car. Beth and the Major
entered the carriage next, while Uncle John mounted beside the driver
and directed him to the Crown Palace Hotel.

It was growing dark when they reached the dingy hostelry, which might
have been palatial when it was named but was now sadly faded and
tawdry. It proved to be fairly comfortable, however, and the first
care of the party was to see Myrtle Dean safely established in a cosy
room, with a grate fire to cheer her. Patsy and Beth had adjoining
rooms and kept running in for a word with their protg, who was
so astonished and confused by her sudden good fortune that she was
incapable of speech and more inclined to cry than to laugh.

During the evening Uncle John was busy at the telegraph booth. He sent
several messages to Leadville, to Anson Jones, to the Chief of Police
and to the various hotels; but long before midnight, when the last
replies were received, he knew that Anson Jones had left Leadville
five months ago, and his present whereabouts were unknown. Having
learned these facts the little man went to bed and slept peacefully
until morning.

Myrtle had begged them to see that she was called at five o'clock,
that she might have ample time to get to the depot for her train, but
no one called her and the poor child was so weary and worn with her
trip that the soft bed enthralled her for many hours after daybreak.

Patsy finally aroused her, opening the blinds to let in the sunshine
and then sitting beside Myrtle's bed to stroke her fair hair and tell
her it was nearly noon.

"But my train!" wailed the girl, greatly distressed.

"Oh, the train has gone hours ago. But never mind that, dear. Uncle
John has telegraphed to Leadville and found that Anson Jones is
not there. He left months ago, and is now wandering; in fields and
pastures unknown."

Myrtle sat up in bed and glared at Patsy wild-eyed.

"Gone!" she said. "Gone! Then what am I to do?"

"I can't imagine, dear," said Patsy, soothingly. "What do you think
you will do?"

The girl seemed dazed and for a time could not reply.

"You must have thought of this thing," suggested her new friend, "for
it was quite possible Anson Jones would not be in Leadville when you
arrived there."

"I did not dare think of it," returned Myrtle in a low, frightened
tone. "I once asked Aunt Martha what I could do in case Uncle Anson
wasn't to be found, and she said he _must_ be found, for otherwise I
would be obliged to earn my own living."

"And she knew you to be so helpless!"

"She knows I can sew, if only I can get work to do," said the girl,
simply. "I'm not really a cripple, and I'm getting better of my hurt
every day. Aunt Martha said I would be just as well off in Denver or
Leadville as in Chicago, and made me promise, if the worst came, not
to let any charitable organization send me back to her."

"In other words," exclaimed Patsy, indignantly, "she wanted to get rid
of you, and did not care what became of you."

"She was afraid I would cost her money," admitted the poor child, with
shamed, downcast eyes.

Patsy went to the window and stood looking out for a time. Myrtle
began to dress herself. As she said, she was not utterly helpless,
moving the upper part of her body freely and being able to walk slowly
about a room by holding on to chairs or other furniture.

"I'm afraid I'm causing you a lot of worry over me," said she, smiling
sadly as Patsy turned toward her; "and that is ungrateful when I
remember how kind you have all been. Why, these hours since I met you
have seemed like fairyland. I shall treasure them as long as I live.
There must be another train to Leadville soon, and I'll take that. As
soon as I am ready I will go to the depot and wait there."

Patsy looked at her reflectively. The poor child was called upon to
solve a queer problem--one which might well have bewildered the brain
of a more experienced person.

"Tell me," she said; "why should you go to Leadville at all, now that
you have no friend or relative there to care for you?"

"My ticket is to Leadville, you know," replied Myrtle. "If I did not
go I would waste the money it cost."

Patsy laughed at this.

"You're a wonderfully impractical child," she said, deftly assisting
Myrtle to finish dressing. "What you really need is some one to order
you around and tell you what to do. So you must stop thinking about
yourself, for a time, and let _us_ do the thinking. Here--sit in this
chair by the window. Do you want Mumbles in your lap? All right. Now
gaze upon the scenery until I come back. There's a man washing windows
across the street; watch and see if he does his work properly."

Then she went away to join a conference in Uncle John's sitting room.
Major Doyle was speaking when she entered and his voice was coldly
ironical.

"The temperature outside is six degrees above freezing," he observed.
"The clerk downstairs says the snow is nine feet deep over the
mountain trails and the wind would cut an iron beam in two. If you
take an automobile to California, John, you must put it on snowshoes
and connect it with a steam heating-plant."

Uncle John, his hands thrust deep in his pockets, paced thoughtfully
up and down the room.

"Haggerty said--"

"Didn't I give you Haggerty's record, then?" asked the Major. "If
you want the exact truth it's safe to go directly opposite to what
Haggerty says."

"He's a very decent fellow," protested Mr. Merrick, "and is considered
in the city to be strictly honest."

"But after this?"

"You can't blame him for the weather conditions here. I've been
talking with Denver people myself, this morning, and they all say
it's unusual to have such cold weather at this time of year. The
thermometer hasn't been so low in the past twenty-six years, the
natives say."

"Are they all named Haggerty?" asked the Major, scornfully.

"If you will kindly allow me to speak, and tell you what Haggerty
said," remarked Uncle John tersely, "I shall be able to add to your
information."

"Go ahead, then."

"Haggerty said that in case we ran into cold weather in Denver, which
was possible--"

"Quite possible!"

"Then we had best go south to Santa Fe and take the route of the old
Santa Fe Trail as far as Albuquerque, or even to El Paso. Either way
we will be sure to find fine weather, and good roads into California."

"So Haggerty says."

"It stands to reason," continued Mr. Merrick, "that on the Southern
route we will escape the severe weather. So I have decided to adopt
that plan."

"I think you are quite wise in that," broke in Patsy, before her
father could object.

"All those queer Spanish names sound interesting," said Beth. "When do
we start, Uncle?"

"In a day or two. I have some things here to attend to that may delay
us that long. But when once we are started southward we shall bowl
along right merrily."

"Unless we run into more snowstorms." Of course it was the Major who
said that, and pointedly ignoring the remark Uncle John turned to
Patsy and said:

"How did you find Myrtle Dean this morning?"

"She is rested, and seems very bright and cheerful, Uncle; but of
course she is much distressed by the news that her Uncle Anson has
vanished from Leadville. Yet she thinks she will continue her journey
by the next train, as she has paid for her ticket and can't afford to
waste the money."

"It would be absurd for the child to go to Leadville on that account.
A mining camp is no place for such a frail thing," returned Mr.
Merrick. "What would you suggest, Patsy?"

"Really, Uncle John, I don't know what to suggest."

"She can never earn her living by sewing," declared Beth. "What she
ought to have is a trained nurse and careful attention."

"I'll have a doctor up to look her over," said Uncle John, in his
decisive way. He was a mild little man generally, but when he made up
his mind to do a thing it was useless to argue with him. Even Major
Doyle knew that; but the old soldier was so fond of arguing for
the sake of argument, and so accustomed to oppose his wealthy
brother-in-law--whom he loved dearly just the same--that he was
willing to accept defeat rather than permit Mr. Merrick to act without
protest.




CHAPTER IV

AN INTERESTING PROTG


A young physician was appointed by the management to attend any guest
who might require his services, and Uncle John had a talk with him and
sent him to Myrtle's room to give her a thorough examination. This he
did, and reported that the girl's present condition was due largely to
mismanagement of her case at the time she was injured. With care she
would get better and stronger rapidly, but the hip joint was out of
its socket and only a skillful operation would serve to permanently
relieve her of lameness.

"What she needs just now," continued the doctor, "is a pair of
crutches, so she can get around better and be in the fresh air and
sunshine as much as possible. She is a very frail little woman at
present and must build up her health and strength before submitting
to the operation I have mentioned. Then, if it is properly done, she
ought to recover completely and be as good as new."

"I must inform you," said Uncle John, "that Myrtle Dean is just a
little waif whom my nieces picked up on the train. I believe she is
without friends or money. Such being the circumstances, what would you
advise?"

The doctor shook his head gravely.

"Poor thing!" he said. "She ought to be rich, at this juncture,
instead of poor, for the conditions facing her are serious. The
operation I speak of is always an expensive one, and meantime the
child must go to some charitable institution or wear out her feeble
strength in trying to earn enough to keep the soul in her body. She
seems to have a brave and beautiful nature, sir, and were she educated
and cared for would some day make a splendid woman. But the world is
full of these sad cases. I'm poor myself, Mr. Merrick, but this child
interests me, and after you have gone I shall do all in my power to
assist her."

"Thank you," said Uncle John, thoughtfully nodding his bald head.
"I'll think it over and see you again, doctor, before I leave."

An hour later Myrtle was fitted with crutches of the best sort
obtainable, and was overjoyed to find how greatly they assisted her.
The Major, a kindly man, decided to take Myrtle out for a drive, and
while they were gone Uncle John had a long conversation with Beth and
Patsy.

"Here is a case," said he, "where my dreadful money can do some good.
I am anxious to help Myrtle Dean, for I believe she is deserving of
my best offices. But I don't exactly know what to do. She is really
_your_ protg, my dears, and I am going to put the affair in your
hands for settlement. Just tell me what to do, and I'll do it. Spend
my money as freely upon Myrtle as you please."

The girls faced the problem with enthusiasm.

"She's a dear little thing," remarked Patsy, "and seems very grateful
for the least kindness shown her. I am sure she has never been treated
very nicely by that stony-hearted old aunt of hers."

"In all my experience," said Beth, speaking as if her years were
doubled, "I have never known anyone so utterly helpless. She is very
young and inexperienced, with no friends, no money, and scarcely
recovered from an accident. It is clearly our duty to do something for
Myrtle, and aside from the humane obligation I feel that already I
love the child, having known her only a day."

"Admitting all this, Beth," returned her uncle, "you are not answering
my question. What shall we do for Myrtle? How can we best assist her?"

"Why not take her to California with us?" inquired Patsy, with sudden
inspiration. "The sunshine and roses would make a new girl of her in a
few weeks."

"Could she ride so far in an automobile?" asked Beth, doubtfully.

"Why not? The fresh air would be just the thing for her. You'll get a
big touring car, won't you, Uncle John?"

"I've bought one already--a seven-seated 'Autocrat'--and there will be
plenty of room in it for Myrtle," he said.

"Good gracious! Where did you find the thing so suddenly?" cried
Patsy.

"I made the purchase this morning, bright and early, before you were
up," replied Mr. Merrick, smilingly. "It is a fine new car, and as
soon as I saw it I knew it was what I wanted. It is now being fitted
up for our use."

"Fitted up?"

"Yes. I've an idea in my head to make it a movable hotel. If we're
going to cross the plains and the mountains and the deserts, and all
that sort of thing, we must be prepared for any emergencies. I've also
sent for a chauffeur who is highly recommended. He knows the route
we're going to take; can make all repairs necessary in case of
accident, and is an experienced driver. I expect him here any minute.
His name is Wampus."

"But about Myrtle,"' said Beth. "Can we make her comfortable on a long
ride?"

"Certainly," asserted Uncle John. "We are not going to travel day and
night, my dear, for as soon as we get away from this frozen country we
can take our time and journey by short stages. My notion is that we
will have more fun on the way than we will in California."

"Myrtle hasn't any proper clothes," observed Patsy, reflectively.
"We'll have to shop for her, Beth, while Uncle is getting the car
ready."

"Are you sure to leave to-morrow, Uncle John?" inquired Beth.

"To-morrow or the next day. There's no use leaving before the
'Autocrat' is ready to ship."

"Oh; we're not going to ride in it, then?"

"Not just yet. We shall take the train south to Santa Fe, and perhaps
to Albuquerque. I'll talk to Wampus about that. When we reach a good
climate we'll begin the journey overland--and not before."

"Then," said Patsy, "I'm sure we shall have time to fit out Myrtle
very nicely."

Mr. Wampus was announced just then, and while Uncle John conferred
with the chauffeur his two nieces went to their room to talk over
Myrtle Dean's outfit and await the return of the girl from her ride.

"They tell me," said Mr. Merrick, "that you are an experienced
chauffeur."

"I am celebrate," replied Wampus. "Not as chauffeur, but as expert
automobilist."

He was a little man and quite thin. His legs were short and his arms
long. He had expressionless light gray eyes and sandy hair cropped
close to his scalp. His mouth was wide and good-humored, his chin long
and broad, his ears enormous in size and set at right angles with
his head. His cheek bones were as high and prominent as those of an
Indian, and after a critical examination of the man Uncle John was
impelled to ask his nationality.

"I am born in Canada, at Quebec Province," he answered. "My father
he trapper; my mother squaw. For me, I American, sir, and my name
celebrate over all the world for knowing automobile like father knows
his son." He paused, and added impressively: "I am Wampus!"

"Have you ever driven an 'Autocrat' car?" asked Mr. Merrick.

"'Autocrat?' I can take him apart blindfold, an' put him together
again."

"Have you ever been overland to California?"

"Three time."

"Then you know the country?"

"In the dark. I am Wampus."

"Very good, Wampus. You seem to be the man I want, for I am going
to California in an 'Autocrat' car, by way of the Santa Fe Trail
and--and--"

"No matter. We find way. I am--"

"I know. Now tell me, Wampus: if I employ you will you be faithful and
careful? I have two girls in my party--three girls, in fact--and from
the moment you enter my service I shall expect you to watch over our
welfare and guide us with skill and intelligence. Will you do this?"

The man seemed somewhat offended by the question.

"When you have Wampus, what more you want?" he inquired. "Maybe you
not know Wampus. You come from far East. All right. You go out and ask
automobile man about Wampus. Ask ever'body. When you have inquire you
feel more happy. I come again."

He started to go, but Mr. Merrick restrained him.

"You have been highly recommended already," said he. "But you cannot
expect me to have as high an opinion of you as you have of yourself;
at least, until I know you better. Would you like to undertake this
engagement?"

"Yes. Just now I free. My business is expert automobilist. I am
Wampus. But perhaps you want cheap man. My price high."

"What is your price?"

"Fifty dollar week. You eat me an' sleep me."

"I do not object to your price. Come out with me to the garage and I
will show you my car and explain what is being done to it."

Although all the automobile men seemed to defer most respectfully to
Wampus, Mr. Merrick did not neglect to make proper inquiries in regard
to the man. Locally he really was "celebrate" and Uncle John was
assured on all sides that he was fortunate to get so intelligent and
experienced a chauffeur as this same Wampus.

"He seems to have instinctive knowledge of all machinery," said one
informant, "and can handle perfectly any car that is made. The only
trouble with the fellow is that he is conceited."

"I've noticed that," returned Mr. Merrick.

"Another thing," said the gentleman; "don't believe implicitly all
that Wampus tells you. He has a habit of imagining things. But he is a
faithful, honest fellow, for all that, and will handle your car better
than any other man you could get in Denver--or anywhere in the West, I
imagine."

So Wampus was engaged, and putting the man's references and
indorsements all together Mr. Merrick felt that he had gained a prize.

When the big Major, returning from his drive, escorted Myrtle Dean to
the elevator, the girl was joyously using her new crutches. Patsy and
Beth met her and said they had important news to communicate. Not
until she was in her own room, seated in a comfortable chair and
gazing at them anxiously, did they tell the poor waif of the good
fortune in store for her.

"Uncle John," announced Patsy, "has invited you to join our party and
go to California with us."

Myrtle stared a moment, as if trying to realize what that meant. The
tiny Mumbles, sitting beside the chair with his head cocked to one
side, suddenly made a prodigious leap and landed in Myrtle's lap,
where he began licking her chin and wagging his stumpy tail as if
seconding the invitation. As the girl stroked his soft hair her eyes
filled with tears.

"Oh, you are all so kind to me!" she sobbed, losing her composure.
"But I can't go! Of course I can't go."

"Why not?" asked Beth, smiling.

"It would be an--impersition!" Poor Myrtle sometimes stumbled over big
words. "I know that. I can't let you burden your happy party with a
poor cripple, just because your hearts are kind and you pity me!"

"Nonsense!" said Beth. "You're not a cripple, dear; you're just an
invalid, and will soon be as strong as any of us. We have invited you,
Myrtle, because we all like you, and shall soon learn to love you. We
are selfish enough to want your companionship. It isn't pity, at all,
you see."

"I'm mighty glad," added Patsy, "your Uncle Anson ran away from
Leadville. If he hadn't done that we should have had to give you
up; but now we may keep you as long as we wish, for you haven't any
particular engagement to interfere with our plans."

All this was said so frankly and unaffectedly that little Myrtle was
led to abandon her suspicion and grew radiant with delight. Indeed,
she hugged and squeezed the squirming Mumbles until he resented such
strenuous fondling and escaped to Patsy's more moderate embraces.
Myrtle had never yet ridden in an automobile, and the prospect of
a long journey across the country in a big touring car, with
California's roses and sunshine at the end of it, was certainly
alluring enough to intoxicate one far more accustomed to pleasure than
this friendless, impoverished girl.

After the cousins had explained all their plans to Myrtle and assured
her she was to be their cherished guest for a long time--until she was
well and strong again, at the least--they broached the subject of
her outfit. The poor child flushed painfully while admitting the
meagerness of her wardrobe. All her possessions were contained in one
small canvas "hold-all," and she lacked many necessities which her
callous aunt had suggested that Uncle Anson might be induced to buy
for her once she had joined him in Leadville. Uncle John's nieces grew
more and more indignant as they discovered the details of this selfish
woman's crime--for Patsy declared it was nothing less than a crime to
send a helpless child far into the West to search for an unknown uncle
whose whereabouts were only conjectural.

That very afternoon Beth and Patsy began shopping for Myrtle, and
presently all sorts of parcels, big and little, began to arrive for
their new protg. Myrtle was amazed and awed by the splendor of her
new apparel, and could scarcely believe her good fortune. It seemed
like a fairy tale to her, and she imagined herself a Cinderella with
two fairy godmothers who were young and pretty girls possessing the
purse of Fortunatus and the generosity of Glinda the Good. At night,
when she was supposed to be asleep, Myrtle crept from her bed, turned
on the electric light and gloated over her treasures, which she had
almost feared might vanish into thin air and leave her as desolate as
before.

Next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, the girls took Myrtle out
with them to some of the shops, fitting her to shoes and gloves and
having her try on some ready-made gowns so that they might be quickly
altered for her use. Patsy also bought her a set of soft and pretty
furs, thinking she might need them on the journey if the weather
continued cool, and this seemed to cap the climax of Myrtle's
happiness.

"What 'stonishes me most," gasped the child, trying to get her breath
between the surprises she experienced, "is how you can think of so
many things to do for me. Of course I know you are rich; but I've
never before heard of rich people being so very generous to poor
ones."

"Once," said Beth, gravely, "we were poor ourselves, Patsy and I, and
had to work hard for our living. That was before our Uncle John came
and gave us a share of his money, together with his love and sympathy.
Isn't it natural, my dear, that we should now be eager to share our
good fortune with you, since we have more money than we can use
otherwise, and you are to be our little friend and companion?"

"Perhaps so," replied Myrtle, smiling gaily and much comforted by the
explanation. "But, oh dear! I'm so glad you found me!"

"We are glad, too," said Patsy. "But here it is, time for luncheon,
and we've wasted the whole morning in shopping. I'm sure the Major
will be cross if we do not hurry back to the hotel."




CHAPTER V

A WONDER ON WHEELS


But the Major was not cross when they met him in Uncle John's sitting
room. He beamed upon the three girls most genially, for he liked
Myrtle and fully approved all that was being done for her.

"Of course it's like Patsy," he had said to Mr. Merrick that morning.
"She couldn't help being a sweet ministering angel if she tried; and
Beth is growing more and more like her. It will do those girls good,
John, to have some human being to coddle and care for. If Patsy could
have a fault, it would be wasting so much affection on that bunch o'
rags Mumbles, who audaciously chewed up one of my pet slippers while I
was at dinner last evening. No dog is a fit thing to occupy a girl's
time, and this imp o' mischief Mumbles must take a back seat from now
on."

Uncle John laughed, for he knew his brother-in-law had never conquered
his antipathy for poor Mumbles, and realized why.

"Take care that you do not get jealous of Myrtle," he replied.
"You're a selfish old beast, and don't wish Patsy to love anyone but
yourself."

"And why should she?" was the inquiry. "Any dutiful daughter ought to
be satisfied with loving such a father as I am."

"And in that," remarked Uncle John, whimsically, "you remind me of
Wampus. You should strut around and say: 'Behold me! I am Patsy's
father!'"

The Major was full of news at luncheon time.

"What do you think, my dears?" he said, addressing the girls. "Your
crazy uncle must have had another snooze, unbeknown to us, for he's
got the wildest idea into his head that human brains--or lack of
them--ever conceived."

"You are not very respectful, sir," retorted Mr. Merrick stiffly,
as he ate his salad. "But we must not expect too much of a disabled
soldier--and an Irishman to boot--who has not been accustomed to good
society."

Major Doyle looked at his brother-in-law with an approving smile.

"Very well put, John," he said. "You're improving in repartee.
Presently you'll add that I'm unlettered and uncivilized, and no fit
associate for a person who has made an egregious fortune out of tin
cans in the wilds of Oregon."

"But what's the news?" asked Patsy impatiently. "What new idea has
Uncle John conceived?"

"First," replied the Major, "he has bought an automobile as big as a
baggage car. Next he has engaged a chauffeur who is a wild Canadian
Indian with a trace of erratic French blood in his veins--a
combination liable to result in anything. Mr. Wampus, the half-breed
calls himself, and from the looks of him he's murdered many a one in
his day."

"Oh, Major!"

"Show me an automobile driver that hasn't. Myrtle knows. It's no trick
to knock over a peaceful pedestrian or so, to say nothing of chickens,
cats and dogs mangled by the roadside. I confidently expect he'll make
a pancake of dear little Mumbles before he's five miles on the road.
Eh, Patsy?"

"Be sensible, Daddy."

"It's my strong point. If I'm any judge of character this Wampus is a
speed fiend."

"He is recommended as a very careful driver," said Mr. Merrick; "and
moreover he has signed a contract to obey my orders."

"Very good," said Beth. "I'm not afraid of Mr. Wampus. What next,
Major?"

"Next," continued Patsy's father, with a solemn wink at the row of
curious faces, "your inventive relative has ordered the automobile
rebuilt, thinking he's wiser than the makers. He's having a furnace
put in it, for one thing--it's a limousine, you know, and all enclosed
in glass. Also it's as big as a barn, as I said."

"You said a freight car," observed Patsy.

"True. A small barn or a big freight car. The seats are to be made
convertible into sleeping berths, so if we get caught out overnight we
have all the comforts of a hotel except the bell boys."

"I'll be the bell boy," promised Patsy.

"Also we're to take a portable kitchen along, like they use in the
army, with a gasoline stove all complete. The thing fits under the
back seat, I believe."

"All this," said Beth, "strikes me as being very sensible and a credit
to Uncle John's genius. I'm a good cook, as you know, and the kitchen
outfit appeals to me. But how about provisions?"

"Provisions are being provided," replied her uncle, genially
smiling at her praise. However scornfully the Major might view his
preparations he was himself mightily proud of them.

"Tinned stuff, I presume," remarked his brother-in-law. "John Merrick
has a weakness for tin cans, having got his money out of them."

"You're wrong," protested Uncle John. "I merely made my money from the
tin the cans were made of. But we won't get money out of these cans
when they're opened; it will be something better, such as sardines and
hominy, preserved cream and caviar, beans and boned chicken."

"Sounds fine!" cried Patsy with enthusiasm. "But how can you arrange
to carry so much, Uncle?"

"The limousine body is pretty big, as the Major says, and high enough
to allow me to put in a false bottom. In the space beneath it I shall
stow all the bedding, the eatables and kitchen utensils, and a small
tent. Then we shall be prepared for whatever happens."

"I doubt it," objected the Major. "There's gasoline to be reckoned
with. It's well enough to feed ourselves, but what if we ran short of
the precious feed for the engines?"

"The two tanks will hold sixty gallons. That ought to carry us any
reasonable distance," replied Mr. Merrick.

"You see, Daddy, our Uncle John is an experienced traveler, while you
are not," declared Patsy. "In all our journeys together I've found him
full of resources and very farsighted. This trip doesn't worry me at
all."

"Nor me," added Beth. "We are sure to have a delightful time under
Uncle's auspices."

"Wampus," said Uncle John, "is so pleased with my preparations that he
wants us to start in the car from here."

"Can you put it on runners, like a sledge?" asked the Major. "That's
the only way it could travel through this snow. Or perhaps you'll hire
a snowplow to go ahead of it."

"No; I told Wampus it was impracticable," was the reply. "We shall
load our machine on a flat car and ship it to Albuquerque, which is in
New Mexico and almost directly south of Denver. We shall then be over
the worst grades of the Rocky Mountains."

"And which way do we go then?" inquired Beth.

"I have not yet decided. We can go still farther south, into Texas,
or make our way down into Phoenix and across the prairies to Imperial
Valley, or follow the Santa Fe route by way of the Grand Canyon."

"Oh, let's go that way!" exclaimed Patsy.

"And freeze to death?" asked the Major. "It's the northernmost route."

"When we get to Albuquerque we will be below the line of frosts and
snow," explained Mr. Merrick. "The climate is genial all through that
section during winter. Haggerty says--"

"I guessed it!" groaned the Major. "If Haggerty recommends this trip
we'll surely be in trouble."

"Aside from Haggerty, Wampus knows that country thoroughly," said
Uncle John stoutly.

"Tell me: did Haggerty recommend Wampus?"

"No."

"Then there's hopes of the fellow. As you say, John, there is no need
to decide until we get to Albuquerque. When do we make the start?"

"Day after to-morrow. The car will be shipped to-morrow night, but our
party will follow by daylight, so as to see Colorado Springs, Pike's
Peak and Pueblo as we pass by them."




CHAPTER VI

WAMPUS SPEEDS


"So this is Albuquerque," observed Patsy Doyle, as they alighted from
the train. "Is it a big town playing peek-a-boo among those hills,
Uncle John, or is this really all there is to the place?"

"It's a pretty big town, my dear. Most of the houses are back on the
prairie, but fortunately our hold is just here at the depot."

It was a quaint, attractive building, made of adobe cement, in the
ancient mission style; but it proved roomy and extremely comfortable.

"Seems to me," whispered Myrtle to Beth, "we're high up on the
mountains, even yet."

"So we are," was the reply. "We're just between Glorietta Pass and the
Great Continental Divide. But the steepest of the Rockies are behind
us, and now the slopes are more gradual all the way to California. How
do you like it, dear?"

"Oh, the mountains are grand!" exclaimed Myrtle. "I had never imagined
anything so big and stately and beautiful." The other girls had seen
mountains before, but this was their friend's first experience, and
they took much pleasure in Myrtle's enthusiastic delight over all she
saw.

Adjoining the hotel was a bazaar, in front of which sat squatted upon
the ground two rows of Mojave Indians, mostly squaws, with their
curious wares spread out for sale upon blankets. There must have
been a score of them, and they exhibited odd pottery ornaments of
indistinguishable shapes, strings of glass beads and beadwork bags,
and a few really fine jardinieres and baskets. After the girls had
been to their rooms and established themselves in the hotel they
hurried out to interview the Indians, Myrtle Dean supporting herself
by her crutches while Patsy and Beth walked beside her. The lame girl
seemed to attract the squaws at once, and one gave her a bead necklace
while another pressed upon her a small brown earthenware fowl with
white spots all over it. This latter might have been meant to
represent a goose, an ostrich or a guinea hen; but Myrtle was
delighted with it and thanked the generous squaw, who responded merely
with a grunt, not understanding English. A man in a wide sombrero who
stood lazily by observed the incident and said:

"Don't thank the hag. She's selfish. The Mojaven think it brings luck
to have a gift accepted by a cripple."

Myrtle flushed painfully.

"I suppose my crutches make me look more helpless than I really am,"
she whispered to her friends as they moved away. "But they're such a
help in getting around that I'm very grateful to have them, and as I
get stronger I can lay them aside and not be taken for a cripple any
more."

The air was delightfully invigorating here in the mountains, yet it
was not at all cold. The snow, as Uncle John had predicted, had all
been left behind them. After dinner they took a walk through the
pretty town and were caught in the dark before they could get back.
The twilights are very brief in Albuquerque.

"This is a very old town," remarked Uncle John. "It was founded by a
Spanish adventurer named Cabrillo in the seventeenth century, long
before the United States came into existence. But of course it never
amounted to anything until the railroad was built."

Next day they were sitting in a group before the hotel when a man was
seen approaching them with shuffling steps. Uncle John looked at him
closely and Mumbles leaped from Patsy's lap and rushed at the stranger
with excited barks.

"Why, it's Wampus," said Mr. Merrick. "The car must have arrived."

Wampus caught up the baby dog and held it under his arm while he took
his cap off and bowed respectfully to his employer.

"He an' me, we here," he announced.

"Who is 'he,' Wampus?"

"Aut'mob'l'."

"When did you arrive?"

"Half hour ago. He on side track."

"Very good. You have made capital time, for a freight train. Let us go
at once and get the car unloaded."

Wampus hesitated, looking sheepish.

"I been arrest," he said.

"Arrested! For what?"

"I make speed. They not like it. They arrest me--_Me_--Wampus!" He
straightened his slim little form with an assumption of dignity.

"I knew it," sighed the Major. "I decided he was a speed fiend the
first time I saw him."

"But--dear me!" said Uncle John; "how could you be arrested for
speeding when the automobile was on a fiat car?"

Wampus glanced over his shoulder. Two railroad men had followed him
and were now lounging against the porch railing. One had his right eye
bandaged while the other carried one arm in a sling. Both scowled as
they eyed the Canadian fixedly.

"Freight train make pretty slow time," began the chauffeur. "I know
you in hurry, so freight train he make me nervous. I say polite to
conductor I like to go faster. He laugh. I say polite to brakeman we
must go faster. He make abusing speech. I climb into engine an' say
polite to engineer to turn on steam. He insult me. So I put my foot
on him an' run engine myself. I am Wampus. I understan' engine--all
kinds. Brakeman he swear; he swear so bad I put him off train.
Conductor must have lump of coal in eye to keep quiet. Fireman he jus'
smile an' whistle soft an' say nothing; so we friends. When I say
'shovel in coal,' he shovel. When we pass stations quick like, he
whistle with engine loud. So now we here an' I been arrest."

Patsy tittered and stuffed her handkerchief into her mouth. Uncle John
first chuckled and then looked grave. The Major advanced to Wampus and
soberly shook his hand.

"You're a brave man, sir, for a chauffeur," he said. "I congratulate
you,"

Wampus still looked uneasy.

"I been arrest," he repeated.

Uncle John beckoned the railroad men to come forward.

"Is this story true?" he asked.

"Most of it, sir," answered the conductor. "It's only by the mercy of
Providence we're here alive. This scoundrel held up the whole crew
and ran away with the engine. We might have had a dozen collisions or
smash-ups, for he went around curves at sixty miles an hour. We'd cut
our train in two, so as to pull half of it at a time up the grade at
Lamy, and so there were only six cars on this end of it. The other
half is seventy miles back, and part of what we have here ought to
have been left at the way stations. I can't make out, sir, whether
it's burglary, or highway robbery or arson an' murder he's guilty of,
or all of 'em; but I've telegraphed for instructions and I'll hold him
a prisoner until the superintendent tells me what to do with him."

Mr. Merrick was very sober now.

"The matter is serious," he said. "This man is in my employ, but I did
not hire him to steal a railway train or fight its crew. Not badly
hurt, I hope, sir?"

"My eye's pretty bad," growled the conductor. "Tom, here, thought his
arm was broken, at first; but I guess it's only sprained."

"How about the brakeman he threw off the train?"

"Why, we were not going fast, just then, and it didn't hurt him. We
saw him get up and shake his fist at the robber. If he ever meets Mr.
Wampus again he'll murder him."

"Come with me to the telegraph office and I'll see what I can do to
straighten this out," said Mr. Merrick briskly. On the way he remarked
to the conductor: "I'm sorry I let Wampus travel alone. He's just
a little bit affected in his mind, you know, and at times isn't
responsible for what he does."

The conductor scratched his head doubtfully.

"I suspected he was crazy," he replied, "and that's why I didn't hurt
him. But if he's crazy he's the most deliberate loonatic I ever run
acrost."

The superintendent had just wired instructions to put the outlaw in
jail when Mr. Merrick reached the telegraph office, but after an hour
spent in sending messages back and forth a compromise was affected and
the little millionaire had agreed to pay a goodly sum to the company
by way of damages and to satisfy the crew of the freight train--which
he succeeded in doing by a further outlay of money.

"You're not worth all this bother," said Mr. Merrick to the humbled
Wampus, when the final settlement had been made, "but chauffeurs are
scarce in Albuquerque and I can't be delayed. Never, sir, while you
are in my employ, must you allow yourself to be guilty of such an act
again!"

Wampus sighed.

"Never," he promised, "will I ride by freight train again. Send car by
express. I am Wampus. Freight train he make me nervous."

The automobile was quickly unloaded and at once Wampus set to work to
get it in running order. He drove it to the hotel at about sundown
and Mr. Merrick told the girls to be ready to start after an early
breakfast the next morning.

"Which way do we go?" asked the Major.

"We'll have a talk with Wampus this evening and decide," said Uncle
John.

"Don't leave out the Grand Canyon!" begged Patsy.

"Nor the Petrified Forests." added Beth. "And couldn't we visit the
Moki Indian reservation?"

"Those things may be well enough in their way," observed the Major,
"but is their way our way? That's the question. The one thing we must
take into consideration is the matter of roads. We must discover which
road is the best and then take it. We're not out of the mountains yet,
and we shall have left the railroad, the last vestige of civilization,
behind us."

But the conference evolved the fact, according to Wampus, that the
best and safest roads were for a time along the line of the Santa Fe,
directly west; and this would enable them to visit most of the scenes
the girls were eager to see.

"No boulevard in mountain anywhere," remarked Wampus; "but road he
good enough to ride on. Go slow an' go safe. I drive 'Autocrat' from
here to Los Angeles blindfold."

With this assurance they were obliged to be content, and an eager
and joyful party assembled next morning to begin the journey so long
looked forward to. The landlord of the hotel, a man with a careworn
face, shook his head dismally and predicted their return to
Albuquerque within twenty-four hours.

"Of course people _do_ make the trip from here to the coast," he said;
"but it's mighty seldom, and they all swear they'll never do it again.
It's uncomfortable, and it's dangerous."

"Why?" asked Uncle John.

"You're headed through a wild country, settled only by Mexicans,
Indians, and gangs of cowboys still worse. The roads are something
awful. That man Wampus is an optimist, and will tackle anything and
then be sorry for it afterward. The towns are scattered from here on,
and you won't strike a decent meal except at the railway stations.
Taking all these things into consideration, I advise you to make your
headquarters here for the winter."

"Thank you," returned Mr. Merrick pleasantly. "It's too late for us to
back out now, even if we felt nervous and afraid, which I assure you
we do not."

"We are not looking for excessive comfort on this journey, you know,"
remarked Patsy. "But thank you for your warning, sir. It has given us
great pleasure; for if there were no chance of adventure before us we
should all be greatly disappointed."

Again the landlord shook his head.

"Right?" asked Wampus, at the wheel.

"Go ahead," said Mr. Merrick, and slowly the big car started upon its
journey into the Golden West.

The air was keen and bracing, but not chilly. The sunshine flooded the
landscape on every side. All the windows of the limousine had been
lowered.

Myrtle Dean had been established in one corner of the broad back seat,
where she nestled comfortably among the cushions. Uncle John sat
beside her, with Beth and the Major on the seat on front. There were
two folding chairs that could be used on occasion, and the back seat
easily accommodated three, the "Autocrat" being a seven passenger car;
but Patsy was perched in front beside Wampus, which was really the
choicest seat of all, so there was ample room inside to "swing a cat,"
as the Major stated--if anyone had cared to attempt such a feat. Of
course the wee Mumbles was in Patsy's lap, and he seemed to have
overcome his first aversion of Wampus and accepted the little
chauffeur into the circle of his favored acquaintances. Indeed, they
soon became fast friends.

On leaving the town Wampus turned into a smooth, hard wagon road that
ran in zigzag fashion near the railroad grade. The car bowled along
right merrily for some twenty miles, when the driver turned to the
right and skimmed along a high plateau. It was green and seemed
fertile, but scarcely a farmhouse could they see, although the clear
air permitted a broad view.

"He up hill now all way to Continental Divide," said Wampus to Patsy;
"then he go down hill long time."

"It doesn't seem to be much uphill," returned the girl, "and the road
is very good."

"We make time here," observed the driver. "By'm-by we find rock an'
bad road. Then we go slow."

The Major was watching the new chauffeur carefully, and despite his
dismal forebodings the man seemed not at all reckless but handled his
car with rare skill. So the critic turned to his brother-in-law and
asked:

"Is it fully decided which way we shall go?"

"I've left it to Wampus and the girls," was the reply. "On account
of our little invalid here we shall take the most direct route to
California. It isn't a short route, at that. On Beth's account we
shall visit the Moki and Navajo reservations, and on Patsy's account
we're going by way of the Grand Canyon of Arizona. Wampus says he
knows every inch of the road, so for my part I'm content to be just a
passenger."

"Which remark," said the Major, "indicates that I'm to be just a
passenger also. Very well, John; I'm willing. There may be trouble
ahead of us, but to-day is so magnificent that it's wise to forget
everything but the present."




CHAPTER VII

THE CHAUFFEUR IMPROVES


They all enjoyed that first day's ride. Wampus did not drive fast,
for there were places where he couldn't; yet by one o'clock they had
reached Laguna, sixty miles from their starting point. There was an
excellent railway hotel here, so they decided to spend the rest of the
day and the night at Laguna and proceed early the next morning.

The big car was an object of much curiosity to the natives, and during
the afternoon Wampus was the center of attraction. Myrtle had stood
the ride remarkably well, and Uncle John noticed that her eyes were
brighter and a shade of color had already crept into her pale cheeks.
Having risen early all three of the girls took a nap during the
afternoon, as did Mr. Merrick. The Major gossiped with the station
agent, the most important individual in town, and gleaned sundry
information that made him look rather glum.

"I don't say the road's exactly dangerous, mind you," added the man,
"but these greasers and Injuns get mischievous, at times, harmless
as they look. All I'm advisin' is that you keep a sharp eye on 'em."
Finding Wampus cleaning his car, while a circle of silent, attentive
inhabitants looked on, the Major said to him in a low voice: "Have you
a revolver?"

Wampus shook his head.

"Never carry him," he replied. "All gun he make trouble. Sometime he
shoot wrong man. Don't like gun. Why should I? I am Wampus!"

The Major entered the hotel frowning.

"That fellow," he muttered, "is a natural-born coward, and we needn't
expect help from him if trouble comes."

No trouble came that night, however, and in the early morning, while
the sky was still reddened by the rising sun, they were off again,
following more closely now the railroad, as rocky defiles began to
loom up before them.

By the zigzag course they were obliged to take it was ninety miles to
Gallup, and this they easily made, despite the growing steepness of
the mountain road. Here was the famous Continental Divide, and the
State of Arizona lay just beyond. The Continental Divide is the ridge
that separates the streams tributary to the Atlantic ocean from those
tributary to the Pacific, so that after crossing it one might well
feel that at last the East was left behind and the great West with its
romance now faced him.

They came to the little town in time to see the gorgeous sunset from
this, the highest point of the Rockies, and especially to Myrtle, who
had traveled so little, was the sight impressive and awe inspiring.
There was a small but fairly good hotel in the place, and after supper
Patsy and Beth went out for a stroll, being much interested in the
dark-skinned Mexicans and still darker Indians who constituted far
the larger part of the population. The party had everywhere met with
respect from these people, who, although curious, were silent and
well-behaved; so Uncle John and the Major, deep in a political
argument on the hotel porch, had no thought of danger when they saw
the two girls start away arm in arm.

The sky was still aglow, although the sun had set, and in the subdued
light the coarse adobe huts and rickety frame dwellings were endowed
with a picturesque appearance they did not really possess. Beth and
Patsy came to the end of the main street rather suddenly, and stood a
moment looking at the shadows cast by the rocky cliffs near by. Some
of the peaks had snow upon them, and there was a chill in the air, now
that the sun had withdrawn its warmth. The girls turned presently and
took another route that might bring them quicker to the hotel, but had
only proceeded a short way when in passing a rather solitary adobe
structure a man stepped from the shadow of the wall and confronted
them. He wore a red flannel shirt and a broad sombrero, the latter
scarcely covering his dark, evil features.

The cousins stopped short. Then Beth whispered: "Let's go the other
way." But as they were about to turn the Mexican drew a revolver and
said in harsh, uneven English: "You halt. Keep a-still, or I shoot."

"What do you want?" asked Beth, quietly.

"Money. All you got. Jew'lry--all you got. Give 'm quick, or I shoot!"

As they stood hesitating a sound of footsteps was heard and someone
approached quickly from behind them. Patsy looked hurriedly around
and saw Wampus. He was walking with his thin little form bent and his
hands deep in his trousers pockets. Incidentally Wampus was smoking
the stub of a cigar, as was his custom when off duty.

The Mexican saw him, but marking his small size and mild manner did
not flinch from his position. With one revolver still leveled at the
girls he drew another from a hip pocket and turned it upon Wampus.

"You stop--halt!" he exclaimed fiercely.

Wampus did not halt. His eyes fixed upon the bandit's ugly features,
still puffing his cigar and with hands in his pockets he walked
deliberately past Patsy and Beth and straight up to the muzzles of the
revolvers.

"Stop!" cried the Mexican; and again: "Stop!"

Wampus stopped when one revolver nearly touched his nose and another
covered his body. Slowly he drew one hand from his pocket and grasped
the barrel of the nearest weapon.

"Let him go," he said, not raising his voice. The man stared into the
little chauffeur's eyes and released his hold of the revolver. Wampus
looked at it, grunted, and put it in his pocket.

"Now the other gun," he said.

The fellow drew back and half turned, as if to escape.

"No, no!" said Wampus, as if annoyed. "You give me gun. See--I am
Wampus!"

Sheepishly enough the Mexican surrendered the other weapon.

"Now turn aroun' an' go to hotel," commanded the chauffeur.

The man obeyed. Wampus turned to the girls, who were now not only
relieved but on the verge of laughter and said deprecatingly:

"Do not be scare, for poor man he make no harm. He jus' try a
goozle--no dare shoot here in town. Then come; I go back with you."

Silently they accompanied him along the lane, the Mexican keeping in
front and looking around from time to time to see if they followed.
A short distance from the hotel Wampus gave a queer whistle which
brought the bandit cringing to his side. Without ado he handed the
fellow his two revolvers and said calmly: "Go 'long."

The Mexican "went along" briskly and the dusk soon swallowed him up.

"Thank you, Wampus," said Patsy, gratefully; "you've saved us from a
dreadful experience."

"Oh, that!" snapping his fingers scornfully. "He not a good bad-man,
for he too much afraid. I have no gun, for I do not like gun. Still,
if I not come, he make you give him money an' trinkets."

"You were very kind," replied Beth, "and I thank you as much as Patsy
does. If you had not arrived just when you did I might have killed the
man."

"You?" inquired Wampus, doubtingly.

"Yes." She showed him a small pearl-handled revolver which she carried
in the pocket of her jacket. "I can shoot, Wampus."

The little chauffeur grinned; then looked grave and shook his head.

"It make funny world, these day," said he. "One time girl from city
would scream to see a gun; now she carry him in pocket an' can shoot!
Ver' fine; ver' fine. But I like me old style girl who make scream.
Then a man not feel foolish when he try protect her."

Patsy laughed merrily; but Beth saw he was offended and hastened to
say:

"I am very grateful to you, Wampus, and I know you are a brave and
true man. I shall expect you to protect me at all times, for I really
don't wish to shoot anyone, although I think it best to carry a
revolver. Always after this, before I am tempted to fire, I shall look
to see if you are not near me."

"All right," he said more cheerfully. "I am Wampus. I will be there,
Miss 'Lizbeth."




CHAPTER VIII

AMONG THE INDIANS


Little Myrtle grew brighter day by day. She even grew merry and
developed a fine sense of humor, showing new traits in her hitherto
undeveloped character. The girl never mentioned her injury nor
admitted that she suffered any pain, even when directly questioned.
Indeed she was not uncomfortable during that splendid automobile ride
over mountain and plain into the paradise of the glowing West. Never
before in her life had Myrtle enjoyed an outing, except for an hour or
two in a city park; never before had she known a friend to care for
her and sympathize honestly with her griefs. Therefore this experience
was so exquisitely delightful that her responsive heart nearly burst
with gratitude. Pretty thoughts came to her that she had never had
before; her luxurious surroundings led her to acquire dainty ways and
a composed and self-poised demeanor.

"Our rosebud is unfolding, petal by petal, and beginning to bloom
gloriously," said Patsy to sympathetic Uncle John. "Could anyone be
more sweet or lovely?"

Perhaps almost any girl, situated as Myrtle Dean was, would have
blossomed under similar influences. Certain it was that Uncle John
came to have a tender affection for the poor child, while the Major's
big heart had warmed from the first toward the injured girl. Beth and
Patsy were devoted to their new friend and even Mumbles was never so
happy as when Myrtle would hold and caress him. Naturally the former
waif responded freely to all this wealth of affection and strove to be
companionable and cheery, that they might forget as much as possible
her physical helplessness.

Mumbles was not the least important member of the party, but proved
a constant source of amusement to all. In the novel domains they now
traversed the small dog's excitable nature led him to investigate
everything that seemed suspicious, but he was so cowardly, in spite of
this, that once when Patsy let him down to chase a gopher or prairie
dog--they were not sure which--the animal turned at bay and sent
Mumbles retreating with his stubby tail between his legs. His
comradeship for Wampus surprised them all. The Canadian would talk
seriously to the dog and tell it long stories as if the creature could
understand every word--which perhaps he did. Mumbles would sit up
between the driver and Patsy and listen attentively, which encouraged
Wampus to talk until Patsy in self-defense turned and tossed the fuzzy
animal in to Myrtle, who was always glad to receive him.

But Patsy did not always sit on the front seat. That honor was divided
among them all, by turns, except the Major, who did not care for the
place. Yet I think Patsy rode there oftener than anyone else, and it
came to be considered her special privilege because she had first
claimed it.

The Major, after the incident at Gallup, did not scorn Wampus so
openly as before; but he still reserved a suspicion that the fellow
was at heart a coward and a blusterer. The chauffeur's sole demerit in
the eyes of the others was his tremendous egotism. The proud remark:
"I am Wampus!" was constantly on his lips and he had wonderful tales
to tell to all who would listen of his past experiences, in every one
of which he unblushingly figured as the hero. But he really handled
the big touring car in an admirable manner, and when one afternoon
a tire was punctured by a cactus spine by the roadside--their first
accident--they could not fail to admire the dexterous manner in which
he changed the tube for a new one.

From Gallup they took a wagon road to Fort Defiance, in the Navajo
Indian reservation; but the Navajos proved uninteresting people, not
even occupying themselves in weaving the famous Navajo blankets, which
are now mostly made in Philadelphia. Even Patsy, who had longed to
"see the Indians in their native haunts," was disgusted by their filth
and laziness, and the party expected no better results when they came
to the adjoining Moki reservation. Here, however, they were happily
disappointed, for they arrived at the pueblo of Oraibi, one of
the prettiest villages on the mesa, on the eve of one of their
characteristic snake dances, and decided to remain over night and
see the performance. Now I am not sure but the "Snake Dance" was so
opportune because Uncle John had a private interview with the native
chieftain, at which the head Snake Priest and the head Antelope Priest
of the tribe were present. These Indians spoke excellent English and
the chief loved the white man's money, so a ceremony that has been
held during the month of August for many centuries--long before the
Spanish conquistadors found this interesting tribe--was found to be on
tap for that very evening. The girls were tremendously excited at the
prospect and Wampus was ordered to prepare camp for the night--the
first they had spent in their automobile and away from a hotel. Not
only was the interior of the roomy limousine converted into sleeping
quarters for the three girls, but a tent was spread, one side fastened
to the car while the other was staked to the ground. Three wire
folding cots came from some hidden place beneath the false bottom of
the car, with bedding enough to supply them, and these were for the
use of the men in the tent. The two "bedrooms" having been thus
prepared, Wampus lighted the tiny gasoline stove, over which Patsy and
Beth enthusiastically cooked the supper. Beth wanted to "Newburg" the
tinned lobster, and succeeded in creaming it very nicely. They had
potato chips, coffee and toasted Holland rusks, as well, and all
thoroughly enjoyed the improvised meal.

Their camp had been pitched just at the outskirts of the Indian
village, but the snake dance was to take place in a rocky glen some
distance away from the pueblo and so Uncle John instructed Wampus to
remain and guard their outfit, as the Moki are notorious thieves. They
left the lean little chauffeur perched upon the driver's seat, smoking
one of his "stogie" cigars and with Mumbles sitting gravely beside
him.

Myrtle hobbled on her crutches between Beth and Patsy, who carried
little tin lanterns made with lamp chimneys that had candles inside
them. They first visited the chief, who announced that the ceremonies
were about to begin. At a word from this imposing leader a big Indian
caught up Myrtle and easily carried her on his shoulder, as if she
were light as a feather, leading the way to the rocky amphitheatre.
Here were assembled all the inhabitants of the village, forming a wide
circle around the performers. The snakes were in a pit dug in the
center of the space, over which a few branches had been placed. This
is called the "kisi."

These unique and horrifying snake dances of the Moki have been
described so often that I need not speak of this performance in
detail. Before it was half over the girls wished they were back in
their automobile; but the Major whispered that for them to leave would
cause great offense to the Indians and might result in trouble. The
dance is supposedly a religious one, in honor of the Rain God, and at
first the snakes were not used, but as the dancers became wrought up
and excited by their antics one by one they reached within the kisi
and drew out a snake, allowing the reptiles to coil around their
almost naked bodies and handling them with seeming impunity. A few
were harmless species, as bull snakes and arrow snakes; but mostly the
Moki used rattlesnakes, which are native to the mesa and its rocky
cliffs. Some travelers have claimed that the fangs of the rattlers are
secretly withdrawn before the creatures are handled, but this has been
proved to be untrue. The most accepted theory is that the snakes are
never permitted to coil, and cannot strike unless coiled, while the
weird chanting and graceful undulating motions of the dancers in some
manner "charms" or intoxicates the serpents, which are not aroused to
antagonism. Occasionally, however, one of the Moki priests is bitten,
in which case nothing is done to aid him and he is permitted to die,
it being considered a judgment of the Rain God for some sin he has
committed.

The barbaric rites seemed more picturesque, as well as more revolting,
in that they took place by the flickering light of torches and
bonfires in a rock strewn plain usually claimed by nature. When the
dancers were more frenzied they held the squirming serpents in their
mouths by the middle and allowed them to coil around their necks,
dancing wildly the while. The whole affair was so nauseating and
offensive that as soon as it was possible the visitors withdrew and
retired to their "camp." It was now almost midnight, but the path was
lighted by the little lanterns they carried.

As they approached the automobile Uncle John was disturbed not to see
Wampus at his post. A light showed from the front of the car, but the
chauffeur seemed to be missing. Coming nearer, however, they soon
were greeted by a joyous barking from Mumbles and discovered Wampus
squatting upon the ground, puffing at the small end of the cigar and
seeming quite composed and tranquil.

"What are you doing there?" demanded the Major, raising his lantern
the better to light the scene.

"I play jailer," grunted Wampus, without moving. "Him want to steal;
Mumble he make bark noise; for me, I steal too--I steal Injun."

A dusky form, prone upon the ground, began to squirm under Wampus, who
was then discovered to be sitting upon a big Indian and holding him
prisoner. The chauffeur, partly an Indian himself, knew well how to
manage his captive and quieted the fellow by squeezing his throat with
his broad stubby fingers.

"How long have you had him there?" inquired Uncle John, looking at the
discomfited "brave" curiously.

"About an hour," was the reply.

"Let him go, then. We have no prison handy, and the man has perhaps
been punished enough."

"I have wait to ask permission to kill him," said Wampus solemnly. "He
know English talk, an' I have told him he is to die. I have describe,
sir, several torture we make on Injun who steal, which make him think
he die several time. So he is now prepare for the worst."

The Indiam squirmed again, and with a sigh Wampus arose and set him
free.

"See," he said; "you are save only by mercy of Great White Chief. You
ver' lucky Injun. But Great White Chief will leave only one eye here
when he go away. If you try to steal again the eye will see, an' then
the torture I have describe will be yours. I am Wampus. I have spoke."

The Indian listened intently and then slunk away into the darkness
without reply. The night had no further event and in spite of their
unusual experiences all slept excellently and awoke in the morning
refreshed and ready for new adventures.




CHAPTER IX

NATURE'S MASTERPIECE


From the reservation to the Grand Canyon of the Colorado was not far,
but there was no "crosscut" and so they were obliged to make a wide
detour nearly to Williams before striking the road that wound upward
to the world's greatest wonder.

Slowly and tediously the big car climbed the miserable trail to the
rim of the Grand Canyon. It was night when they arrived, for they had
timed it that way, having been told of the marvelous beauty of the
canyon by moonlight. But unfortunately the sky filled with clouds
toward evening, and they came to Bright Angel, their destination, in a
drizzling rain and total darkness. The Major was fearful Wampus might
run them into the canyon, but the machine's powerful searchlights
showed the way clearly and by sticking to the road they finally drew
up before an imposing hotel such as you might wonder to find in so
remote a spot.

Eagerly enough they escaped from the automobile where they had been
shut in and entered the spacious lobby of the hotel, where a merry
throng of tourists had gathered.

"Dinner and bed," said Patsy, decidedly. "I'm all tired out, and poor
Myrtle is worn to a frazzle. There's no chance of seeing the canyon
to-night, and as for the dancing, card playing and promiscuous gaiety,
it doesn't appeal much to a weary traveler."

The girls were shown to a big room at the front of the hotel, having
two beds in it. A smaller connecting-room was given to Myrtle, while
Patsy and Beth shared the larger apartment. It seems the hotel, big
as it was, was fairly filled with guests, the railway running three
trains a day to the wonderful canyon; but Uncle John's nieces did
not mind occupying the same room, which was comfortably and even
luxuriously furnished.

A noise of footsteps along the corridor disturbed Patsy at an early
hour. She opened her eyes to find the room dimly lighted, as by the
first streaks of dawn, and sleepily arose to raise the window shade
and see if day was breaking. Her hand still upraised to guide the
shade the girl stood as motionless as if turned to stone. With a long
drawn, gasping breath she cried: "Oh, Beth!" and then stood staring at
what is undoubtedly the most entrancing, the most awe inspiring and at
the same time the most magnificent spectacle that mortal eye has ever
beheld--sunrise above the Grand Canyon of Arizona.

The master painters of the world have gathered in this spot in a vain
attempt to transfer the wondrous coloring of the canyon to canvas.
Authors famed for their eloquent command of language have striven as
vainly to tell to others what their own eyes have seen; how their
senses have been thrilled and their souls uplifted by the marvel that
God's hand has wrought. It can never be pictured. It can never be
described. Only those who have stood as Patricia Doyle stood that
morning and viewed the sublime masterpiece of Nature can realize what
those homely words, "The Grand Canyon" mean. Grand? It is well named.
Since no other adjective can better describe it, that much abused one
may well be accepted to incompletely serve its purpose.

Beth joined her cousin at the window and was instantly as awed
and absorbed as Patsy. Neither remembered Myrtle just then, but
fortunately their friend had left the connecting door of their
rooms ajar and hearing them stirring came in to see if anything had
happened. She found the two cousins staring intently from the window
and went to the second window herself, thus witnessing the spectacle
in all its glory.

Even after the magnificent coloring of sunrise had faded the sight was
one to rivet the attention. The hotel seemed built at the very edge of
the canyon, and at their feet the ground appeared to fall away and a
great gulf yawned that was tinted on all its diverse sides with hues
that rivaled those of the rainbow. Across the chasm they could clearly
see the trees and hills; yet these were fully thirteen miles distant,
for here is one of the widest portions of the great abyss.

"I'm going to dress," said Beth, breaking the silence at last. "It
seems a sin to stay cooped up in here when such a glorious panorama is
at one's feet."

The others did not reply in words, but they all began to dress
together with nervous haste, and then made their way down to the
canyon's brink. Others were before them, standing upon the ample
porches in interested groups; but such idleness would not content our
girls, who trooped away for a more intimate acquaintance with the
wonderful gorge.

"Oh, how small--how terribly small--I am!" cried Patsy, lost in
the immensity of the canyon's extent; but this is a common cry of
travelers visiting Bright Angel. You might place a baker's dozen of
the huge Falls of Niagara in the Grand Canyon and scarcely notice they
were there. All the vast cathedrals of Europe set upon its plateau
would seem like pebbles when viewed from the brink. The thing is
simply incomprehensible to those who have not seen it.

Presently Uncle John and the Major came out to join them and they all
wandered along the edge until they came to a huge rock that jutted
out far over the monster gulf. On the furthermost point of this rock,
standing with his feet at the very brink, was a tall, thin man, his
back toward them. It seemed a fearful thing to do--to stand where the
slightest slip would send him reeling into the abyss.

"It's like tempting fate," whispered Patsy, a safe distance away. "I
wish he would step back a little."

As if he had overheard her the man half turned and calmly examined the
group. His eyes were an almost colorless blue, his features destitute
of any expression. By his dress he seemed well-to-do, if not
prosperous, yet there was a hint of melancholy in his poise and about
him a definite atmosphere of loneliness.

After that one deliberate look he turned again and faced the canyon,
paying no attention to the interested little party that hovered far
enough from the edge to avoid any possible danger.

"Oh, dear!" whispered Myrtle, clinging to Beth's arm with trembling
fingers, "I'm afraid he's going to--to commit suicide!"

"Nonsense!" answered Beth, turning pale nevertheless.

The figure was motionless as before. Uncle John and the Major started
along the path but as Beth attempted to follow them Myrtle broke away
from her and hobbled eagerly on her crutches toward the stranger. She
did not go quite to the end of the jutting rock, but stopped some feet
away and called in a low, intense voice:

"Don't!"

The man turned again, with no more expression in his eyes or face than
before. He looked at Myrtle steadily a moment, then turned and slowly
left the edge, walking to firm ground and back toward the hotel
without another glance at the girl.

"I'm so ashamed," said Myrtle, tears of vexation in her eyes as she
rejoined her friends. "But somehow I felt I must warn him--it was an
impulse I just couldn't resist."

"Why, no harm resulted, in any event, my dear," returned Beth. "I
wouldn't think of it again."

They took so long a walk that all were nearly famished when they
returned to the hotel for breakfast.

Of course Patsy and Beth wanted to go down Bright Angel Trail into the
depths of the canyon, for that is the thing all adventurous spirits
love to do.

"I'm too fat for such foolishness," said Uncle John, "so I'll stay up
here and amuse Myrtle."

The Major decided to go, to "look after our Patsy;" so the three
joined the long line of daring tourists and being mounted on docile,
sure-footed burros, followed the guide down the trail.

Myrtle and Uncle John spent the morning on the porch of the hotel. At
breakfast the girl had noticed the tall man they had encountered at
the canyon's edge quietly engaged in eating at a small table in a far
corner of the great dining room. During the forenoon he came from the
hotel to the porch and for a time stood looking far away over the
canyon.

Aroused to sympathy by the loneliness of this silent person, Uncle
John left his chair and stood beside him at the railing.

"It's a wonderful sight, sir," he remarked in his brisk, sociable way;
"wonderful indeed!"

For a moment there was no reply.

"It seems to call one," said the man at length, as if to himself. "It
calls one."

"It's a wonder to me it doesn't call more people to see it," observed
Mr. Merrick, cheerfully. "Think of this magnificent thing--greater and
grander than anything the Old World can show, being here right in the
heart of America, almost--and so few rush to see it! Why, in time to
come, sir," he added enthusiastically, "not to have seen the Grand
Canyon of Arizona will be an admission of inferiority. It's--it's the
biggest thing in all the world!"

The stranger made no reply. He had not even glanced at Uncle John. Now
he slowly turned and stared fixedly at Myrtle for a moment, till she
cast down her eyes, blushing. Then he re-entered the hotel; nor was he
again seen by them.

The little man was indignant at the snub. Rejoining Myrtle he said to
her:

"That fellow wasn't worth saving--if you really saved him, my dear. He
says the canyon calls one, and for all I care he may go to the bottom
by any route he pleases."

Which speech showed that gentle, kindly Mr. Merrick was really
annoyed. But a moment later he was all smiles again and Myrtle found
him a delightful companion because he knew so well how to read
people's thoughts, and if they were sad had a tactful way of cheering
them.

The girls and the Major returned from their trip to the plateau full
of rapture at their unique experiences.

"I wouldn't have missed it for a million dollars!" cried the Major;
but he added: "and you couldn't hire me to go again for two million!"

"It was great," said Patsy; "but I'm tuckered out."

"I had nineteen narrow escapes from sudden death," began Beth, but her
cousin interrupted her by saying: "So had everyone in the party;
and if the canyon had caved in we'd all be dead long ago. Stop your
chattering now and get ready for dinner. I'm nearly starved."

Next morning they took a farewell view of the beautiful scene and then
climbed into their automobile to continue their journey. Many of the
tourists had wondered at their temerity in making such a long trip
through a poorly settled country in a motor car and had plied them
with questions and warnings. But they were thoroughly enjoying this
outing and nothing very disagreeable had happened to them so far. I am
sure that on this bright, glorious morning you could not have hired
any one of the party to abandon the automobile and finish the trip by
train.




CHAPTER X

A COYOTE SERENADE


The roads were bad enough. They were especially bad west of Williams.
Just now an association of automobile tourists has been formed to
create a boulevard route through from the Atlantic to the Pacific
coast, but at the time of this story no attention had been given the
roads of the far West and only the paths of the rancheros from town to
town served as guides. On leaving Williams they turned south so as to
avoid the more severe mountain roads, and a fine run through a rather
uninteresting country brought them to Prescott on the eve of the
second day after leaving the Canyon. Here they decided to take a day's
rest, as it was Sunday and the hotel was comfortable; but Monday
morning they renewed their journey and headed southwesterly across the
alkali plains--called "mesa"--for Parker, on the boundary line between
Arizona and California.

Towns of any sort were very scarce in this section and the country was
wild and often barren of vegetation for long stretches. There were
some extensive ranches, however, as this is the section favored for
settlement by a class of Englishmen called "remittance men." These are
mostly the "black sheep" or outcasts of titled families, who having
got into trouble of some sort at home, are sent to America to isolate
themselves on western ranches, where they receive monthly or quarterly
remittances of money to support them. The remittance men are poor
farmers, as a rule. They are idle and lazy except when it comes to
riding, hunting and similar sports. Their greatest industry is cattle
raising, yet these foreign born "cowboys" constitute an entirely
different class from those of American extraction, found in Texas and
on the plains of the Central West. They are educated and to an extent
cultured, being "gentlemen born" but sad backsliders in the practise
of the profession. Because other ranchers hesitate to associate with
them they congregate in settlements of their own, and here in Arizona,
on the banks of the Bill Williams Branch of the Colorado River, they
form almost the total population.

Our friends had hoped to make the little town of Gerton for the night,
but the road was so bad that Wampus was obliged to drive slowly and
carefully, and so could not make very good time. Accidents began
to happen, too, doubtless clue to the hard usage the machine had
received. First a spring broke, and Wampus was obliged to halt long
enough to clamp it together with stout steel braces. An hour later the
front tire was punctured by cactus spines, which were thick upon the
road. Such delays seriously interfered with their day's mileage.

Toward sunset Uncle John figured, from the information he had received
at Prescott, that they were yet thirty miles from Gerton, and so he
decided to halt and make camp while there was yet sufficient daylight
remaining to do so conveniently.

"We might hunt for a ranch house and beg for shelter," said he, "but
from the stories I've heard of the remittance men I am sure we will
enjoy ourselves better if we rely entirely upon our own resources."

The girls were, of course, delighted at the prospect of such an
experience, for the silent, solitary mesa made them feel they were
indeed "in the wilds of the Great American Desert." The afternoon had
been hot and the ride dusty, but there was now a cooler feeling in the
air since the sun had fallen low in the horizon.

They carried their own drinking water, kept ice-cold in thermos
bottles, and Uncle John also had a thermos tub filled with small
squares of ice. This luxury, in connection with their ample supply
of provisions, enabled the young women to prepare a supper not to be
surpassed in any modern hotel. The soup came from one can, the curried
chicken from another, while artichokes, peas, asparagus and plum
pudding shed their tin coverings to complete the meal. Fruits, cheese
and biscuits they had in abundance, so there was no hardship in
camping out on a deserted Arizona table-land, as far as food was
concerned. The Interior of the limousine, when made into berths for
the three girls, was as safe and cosy as a Pullman sleeping coach.
Only the men's quarters, the "lean-to" tent, was in any way open to
invasion.

After the meal was ended and the things washed and put away they all
sat on folding camp chairs outside the little tent and enjoyed the
intense silence surrounding them. The twilight gradually deepened into
darkness. Wampus kept one of the searchlights lit to add an element of
cheerfulness to the scene, and Myrtle was prevailed upon to sing one
or two of her simple songs. She had a clear, sweet voice, although not
a strong one, and they all--especially Uncle John--loved to hear her
sing.

Afterward they talked over their trip and the anticipated change from
this arid region to the verdure of California, until suddenly a long,
bloodcurdling howl broke the stillness and caused them one and all
to start from their seats. That is, all but Wampus. The chauffeur,
sitting apart with his black cigar in his mouth, merely nodded and
said: "Coyote."

The Major coughed and resumed his seat. Uncle John stood looking into
the darkness as if trying to discern the creature.

"Are coyotes considered dangerous?" he asked the Canadian.

"Not to us," replied Wampus. "Sometime, if one man be out on mesa
alone, an' plenty coyote come, he have hard fight for life. Coyote is
wild dog. He is big coward unless pretty hungry. If I leave light burn
he never come near us."

"Then let it burn--all night," said Mr. Merrick. "There he goes
again--and another with him! What a horrible wail it is."

"I rather like it," said Patsy, with her accustomed calmness. "It is
certainly an added experience to be surrounded by coyotes. Probably
our trip wouldn't have been complete without it."

"A little of that serenade will suffice me," admitted Beth, as the
howls grew nearer and redoubled in volume.

Myrtle's eyes were big and earnest. She was not afraid, but there was
something uncanny in being surrounded by such savage creatures.

Nearer and nearer sounded the howls, until it was easy to see a dozen
fierce eyes gleaming in the darkness, not a stone's throw away from
the camp.

"I guess you girls had better go to bed," remarked Uncle John, a bit
nervously. "There's no danger, you know--none at all. Let the brutes
howl, if they want to--especially as we can't stop them. But you are
tired, my dears, and I'd like to see you settled for the night."

Somewhat reluctantly they entered the limousine, drew the curtains and
prepared for bed. Certainly they were having a novel experience, and
if Uncle John would feel easier to have them listen to the howling
coyotes from inside the limousine instead of outside, they could not
well object to his request.

Presently Wampus asked the Major for his revolver, and on obtaining
the weapon he walked a few paces toward the coyotes and fired a shot
into their group. They instantly scattered and made off, only to
return in a few moments to their former position.

"Will they continue this Grand Opera chorus all night?" asked Uncle
John.

"Perhap," said Wampus. "They hungry, an' smell food. Coyote can no
reason. If he could, he know ver' well we never feed him."

"The next time we come this way let us fetch along a ton or so of
coyote feed," suggested the Major. "I wonder what the poor brutes
would think if they were stuffed full for once in their lives?"

"It have never happen, sir," observed Wampus, shaking his head
gravely. "Coyote all born hungry; he live hungry; he die hungry. If
ever coyote was not hungry he would not be coyote."

"In that case, Major," said Uncle John, "let us go to bed and try to
sleep. Perhaps in slumber we may forget these howling fiends."

"Very well," agreed Major Doyle, rising to enter the little tent.

Wampus unexpectedly interposed. "Wait," called the little chauffeur.
"Jus' a minute, if you please."

While the Major and Mr. Merrick stood wondering at the request, the
Canadian, who was still holding the revolver in one hand, picked a
steel rod from the rumble of the automobile and pushing aside the flap
of the little tent entered. The tail-lamp of the car burned inside,
dimly lighting the place.

The Major was about to follow Wampus when a revolver shot arrested
him. This sound was followed by a quick thumping against the ground of
the steel bar, and then Wampus emerged from the tent holding a dark,
squirming object on the end of the rod extended before him.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Merrick, somewhat startled.

"Rattlesnake," said Wampus, tossing the thing into the sagebrush. "I
see him crawl in tent while you eat supper."

"Why did you not tell us?" cried the Major excitedly.

"I thought him perhaps crawl out again. Him sometime do that. But no.
Mister snake he go sleep in tent which is reserve for his superior. I
say nothing, for I do not wish to alarm the young ladies. That is why
I hold the dog Mumble so tight, for he small eye see snake too, an'
fool dog wish to go fight him. Rattlesnake soon eat Mumble up--eh? But
never mind; there is no worry. I am Wampus, an' I am here. You go to
bed now, an' sleep an' be safe."

He said this rather ostentatiously, and for that reason neither of the
others praised his watchful care or his really brave act. That Wampus
was proving himself a capable and faithful servant even the Major was
forced to admit, yet the man's bombast and self-praise robbed him of
any word of commendation he justly earned.

"I think," said Uncle John, "I'll bunk on the front seat to-night. I'm
short, you see, and will just about curl up in the space. I believe
snakes do not climb up wheels. Make my bed on the front seat, Wampus."

The man grinned but readily obeyed. The Major watched him
thoughtfully.

"For my part," he said, "I'll have a bed made on top the roof."

"Pshaw!" said Uncle John; "you'll scratch the paint."

"That is a matter of indifference to me," returned the Major.

"You'll roll off, in your sleep, and hurt yourself."

"I'll risk that, sir."

"Are you afraid, Major?"

"Afraid! Me? Not when I'm awake, John. But what's to prevent more of
those vermin from crawling into the tent during the night?"

"Such thing very unusual." remarked Wampus, placing the last blanket
on Mr. Merrick's improvised bed. "Perhaps you sleep in tent a week an'
never see another rattler."

"Just the same," concluded the Major, "I'll have my bed on top the
limousine."

He did, Wampus placing blankets and a pillow for him without a word of
protest. The Major climbed over Uncle John and mounted to the roof of
the car, which sloped to either side but was broad and long enough
to accommodate more than one sleeper. Being an old campaigner and a
shrewd tactician, Major Doyle made two blankets into rolls, which he
placed on either side of him, to "anchor" his body in position. Then
he settled himself to rest beneath the brilliant stars while the
coyotes maintained their dismal howling. But a tired man soon becomes
insensible to even such annoyances.

The girls, having entered the limousine from the door opposite the
tent, were all unaware of the rattlesnake episode and supposed the
shot had been directed against the coyotes. They heard the Major
climbing upon the roof, but did not demand any explanation, being deep
in those bedtime confidences so dear to all girls. Even they came
to disregard the persistent howls of the coyotes, and in time fell
asleep.

Wampus did not seem afraid of snakes. The little chauffeur went to bed
in the tent and slept soundly upon his cot until daybreak, when the
coyotes withdrew and the Canadian got up to make the coffee.

The Major peered over the edge of the roof to watch him. He had a
sleepy look about his eyes, as if he had not rested well. Uncle John
was snoring with gentle regularity and the girls were still asleep.

"Wampus," said the Major, "do you know the proper definition of a
fool?"

Wampus reflected, stirring the coffee carefully.

"I am not--what you call him?--a dictionairre; no. But I am Wampus. I
have live much in very few year. I would say a fool is man who think
he is wise. For what is wise? Nothing!"

The Major felt comforted.

"It occurred to me," he said, beginning to climb down from the roof,
"that a fool was a man who left a good home for this uncomfortable
life on a barren desert. This country wasn't made for humans; it
belongs to the coyotes and the rattlesnakes. What right have we to
intrude upon them, then?"

Wampus did not reply. It was not his business to criticise his
employers.




CHAPTER XI

A REAL ADVENTURE AT LAST


Uncle John woke up when the Major inadvertently placed a heel upon his
round stomach on the way to the ground. The chubby little millionaire
had slept excellently and was in a genial humor this morning. He
helped Wampus fry the bacon and scramble the eggs, while the Major
called the girls.

It proved a glorious sunrise and the air was full of pure ozone. They
had suffered little from cold during the trip, although it was in
the dead of winter and the altitude considerable. Just now they were
getting closer to California every hour, and when they descended from
the mesa it would gradually grow warmer.

They were all becoming expert at "breaking camp," and preparing for
the road. Beth and Patsy put away the bedding and "made up" the
interior of the limousine for traveling. The Major and Uncle John
folded the tent and packed it away, while Wampus attended to the
dishes and tinware and then looked over his car. In a surprisingly
short time they were all aboard and the big machine was gliding over
the faint trail.

The mesa was not a flat or level country, for they were still near to
the mountain ranges. The way was up hill and down, in gentle slopes,
and soon after starting they breasted the brow of a hill and were
confronted by half a dozen mounted men, who seemed as much astonished
at the encounter as they were.

It being an event to meet anyone in this desolate place Wampus
involuntarily brought the car to a halt, while the riders lined up
beside it and stared rather rudely at the party. They were dressed as
cowboys usually are, with flannel shirts, chapelets and sombrero hats;
but their faces were not rugged nor healthy, as is the case with most
Western cowboys, but bore marks of dissipation and hard living.

"Remittance men," whispered Wampus.

Uncle John nodded. He had heard of this curious class. Especially were
the men staring at the three pretty, feminine faces that peered from
the interior of the limousine. They had remained silent thus far, but
now one of them, a fellow with dark eyes and a sallow complexion,
reined his horse nearer the car and removed his hat with a sweeping
gesture that was not ungraceful.

"A merry morning to you, fair ladies--or angels--I much misdoubt which
we have chanced upon. Anyhow, welcome to Hades!"

Uncle John frowned. He did not like the bantering, impudent tone. Beth
flushed and turned aside her head; Myrtle shrank back in her corner
out of sight; but Patsy glared fixedly at the speaker with an
expression that was far from gracious. The remittance man did not seem
daunted by this decided aversion. A sneering laugh broke from his
companions, and one of them cried:

"Back up, Algy, and give your betters a chance. You're out of it, old
man."

"I have no betters," he retorted. Then, turning to the girls again and
ignoring the presence of the men accompanying them, he continued:

"Beauteous visions, since you have wilfully invaded the territory of
Hades Ranch, of which diabolical domain I, Algernon Tobey, am by grace
of his Satanic majesty the master, I invite you to become my guests
and participate in a grand ball which I shall give this evening in
your honor."

His comrades laughed again, and one of them shouted:

"Good for you, Algy. A dance--that's the thing!"

"Why, we haven't had the chance of a dance for ages," said another
approvingly.

"Because we have had no ladies to dance with," explained Algy. "But
here are three come to our rescue--perhaps more, if I could see inside
that barricade--and they cannot refuse us the pleasure of their
society."

"Sir," said Major Doyle, stiffly, "you are pleased to be impertinent.
Ride on, you rascals, and spare us further sight of you."

The man turned upon him a scowling face.

"Don't interfere," he said warningly. "This isn't your party, you old
duffer!"

"Drive ahead, Wampus," commanded Uncle John.

Wampus had to get out and crank the engines, which he calmly proceeded
to do. The man who had called himself Algernon Tobey perceived his
intention and urged his pony to the front of the car.

"Let that thing alone. Keep your hands off!" he said.

Wampus paid no attention. The fellow brought his riding whip down
sharply on the chauffeur's shoulders, inflicting a stinging blow.
Instantly little Wampus straightened up, grasped Tobey by the leg
and with a swift, skillful motion jerked him from his horse. The man
started to draw his revolver, but in an instant he and Wampus were
rolling together upon the ground and the Canadian presently came
uppermost and held his antagonist firmly between his knees. Then
with deliberation he raised his clinched fist and thrust it forcibly
against Mr. Tobey's eye, repeating the impact upon his nose, his chin
and his cheek in a succession of jarring thumps that were delivered
with scientific precision. Algy fairly howled, kicking and struggling
to be free. None of his comrades offered to interfere and it seemed
they were grimly enjoying the punishment that was being; inflicted
upon their leader.

When Wampus had quite finished his work he arose, adjusted his
disarranged collar and tie and proceeded to crank the engines. Then he
climbed into his seat and started the car with a sudden bound. As he
did so a revolver shot rang out and one of the front tires, pierced by
the bullet, ripped itself nearly in two as it crumpled up. A shout of
derisive laughter came from the cowboys. Algy was astride his pony
again, and as Wampus brought the damaged car to a stop the remittance
men dashed by and along the path, taking the same direction Uncle
John's party was following". Tobey held back a little, calling out:

"Au revoir! I shall expect you all at my party. I'm going now to get
the fiddler."

He rejoined his comrades then, and they all clattered away until a
roll of the mesa hid them from sight.

Uncle John got down from his seat to assist his chauffeur.

"Thank you, Wampus," he said. "Perhaps you should have killed him
while you had the opportunity; but you did very well."

Wampus was wrestling with the tire.

"I have never start a private graveyard," he replied, "for reason I
am afraid to hurt anyone. But I am Wampus. If Mister Algy he dance
to-night, somebody mus' lead him, for he will be blind."

"I never met such a lawless brood in my life," prowled the Major,
indignantly. "If they were in New York they'd be put behind the bars
in two minutes."

"But they are in Arizona--in the wilderness," said Uncle John gravely.
"If there are laws here such people do not respect them."

It took a long time to set the new tire and inflate it, for the outer
tube was torn so badly that an extra one had to be substituted. But
finally the task was accomplished and once more they renewed their
journey.

Now that they were alone with their friends the girls were excitedly
gossiping over the encounter.

"Do you really suppose we are on that man's ground--his ranch, as he
calls it?" asked Myrtle, half fearfully.

"Why, I suppose someone owns all this ground, barren as it is,"
replied Patsy. "But we are following a regular road--not a very good
one, nor much traveled; but a road, nevertheless--and any road is
public property and open for the use of travelers."

"Perhaps we shall pass by their ranch house," suggested Beth.

"If we do," Uncle John answered, "I'll have Wampus put on full speed.
Even their wild ponies can't follow us then, and if they try shooting
up the tires again they are quite likely to miss as we spin by."

"Isn't there any other road?" the Major asked.

Wampus shook his head.

"I have never come jus' this same route before," he admitted; "but I
make good friend in Prescott, who know all Arizona blindfold. Him say
this is nice, easy road and we cannot get lost for a good reason--the
reason there is no other road at all--only this one."

"Did your friend say anything about Hades Ranch?" continued the
questioner.

"He say remittance man make much mischief if he can; but he one
foreign coward, drunk most time an' when sober weak like my aunt's
tea. He say don't let remittance man make bluff. No matter how many
come, if you hit one they all run."

"H-m," murmured Uncle John, "I'm not so sure of that, Wampus. There
seems to be a good many of those insolent rascals, and I hope we shall
not meet them again. They may give us trouble yet."

"Never be afraid," advised the chauffeur. "I am Wampus, an' I am
here!"

Admitting that evident truth, our tourists were not greatly reassured.
Wampus could not tell where the road might lead them, for he did not
know, save that it led by devious winds to Parker, on the border
between Arizona and California; but what lay between them and that
destination was a sealed book to them all.

The car was heavy and the road soft; so in spite of their powerful
engines the car was not making more than fifteen miles an hour. A
short ride brought them to a ridge, from the top of which they saw a
huddle of buildings not far distant, with a near-by paddock containing
a number of ponies and cattle. The buildings were not palatial, being
composed mostly of adobe and slab wood; but the central one, probably
the dwelling or ranch house, was a low, rambling pile covering
considerable ground.

The road led directly toward this group of buildings, which our
travelers at once guessed to be "Hades Ranch." Wampus slowed down and
cast a sharp glance around, but the land on either side of the trail
was thick with cactus and sagebrush and to leave the beaten path meant
a puncture almost instantly. There was but one thing to be done.

"Pretty good road here," said Wampus. "Hold tight an' don't get scare.
We make a race of it."

"Go ahead," returned Uncle John, grimly. "If any of those scoundrels
get in your way, run them down."

"I never like to hurt peoples; but if that is your command, sir, I
will obey," said Wampus, setting his jaws tightly together.

The car gathered speed and shot over the road at the rate of twenty
miles an hour; then twenty-five--then thirty--and finally forty. The
girls sat straight and looked eagerly ahead. Forms were darting here
and there among the buildings of the ranch, quickly congregating in
groups on either side of the roadway. A red flag fluttered in the
center of the road, some four feet from the ground.

"Look out!" shouted Uncle John. "Stop, Wampus; stop her, I say!"

Wampus saw why, and applied his brakes. The big car trembled, slowed
down, and came to a stop less than a foot away from three ugly bars of
barbed wire which had been placed across the road. They were now just
beside the buildings, and a triumphant shout greeted them from their
captors, the remittance men.




CHAPTER XII

CAPTURED


"Welcome to Hades!" cried a stout little man in a red blouse, sticking
his leering countenance through the door of the limousine.

"Shut up, Stubby," commanded a hoarse voice from the group. "Haven't
you any manners? You haven't been introduced yet."

"I've engaged the dark eyed one for the first dance," persisted
Stubby, as a dozen hands dragged him away from the door.

The Major sprang out and confronted the band.

"What are we to understand by this outrage?" he demanded fiercely.

"It means you are all invited to a party, and we won't accept any
regrets," replied a laughing voice.

Patsy put her head out of the window and looked at the speaker. It was
Mr. Algernon Tobey. He had two strips of sticking plaster over his
nose. One of his eyes was swollen shut and the other was almost
closed. Yet he spoke in a voice more cheerful than it was when they
first met him.

"Don't be afraid," he added. "No one has the slightest intention of
injuring any of you in any way, I assure you."

"We have not the same intention in regard to you, sir," replied Major
Doyle, fuming with rage, for his "Irish was up," as he afterward
admitted. "Unless you at once remove that barricade and allow us to
proceed we will not be responsible for what happens. You are warned,
sir!"

Uncle John, by this time standing beside the Major upon the ground,
had been quietly "sizing up the situation," as he would have expressed
it. He found they had been captured by a party of fourteen men, most
of whom were young, although three or four, including Tobey, were
of middle age. The atmosphere of the place, with its disorderly
surroundings and ill kept buildings, indicated that Hades Ranch was
bachelor quarters exclusively. Half a dozen Mexicans and one or two
Chinamen were in the background, curious onlookers.

Mr. Merrick noted the fact that the remittance men were an unkempt,
dissipated looking crew, but that their faces betokened reckless good
humor rather than desperate evil. There was no doubt but most of
them were considering this episode in the light of a joke, and were
determined to enjoy the experience at the expense of their enforced
guests.

Uncle John had lived many years in the West and knew something of
these peculiar English exiles. Therefore he was neither frightened
nor unduly angry, but rather annoyed by the provoking audacity of the
fellows. He had three young girls to protect and knew these men could
not be fit acquaintances for them. But he adopted a tone different
from the Major's and addressed himself to Tobey as the apparent leader
of the band.

"Sir," he said calmly but with pointed emphasis, "I believe you were
born a gentleman, as were your comrades here."

"You are right," answered Tobey. "And each and every one you see
before you has fallen from his former high estate--through no fault
of his own." This may have been a sarcasm, for the others laughed in
boisterous approval. "In some respects we are still gentlemen," Tobey
went on, "but in others we are not to be trusted. Be reasonable,
sir--I haven't the faintest idea who you are or what your name is--and
consider calmly our proposition. Here we are, a number of young
fellows who have seen better and happier days, living alone in the
midst of an alkali desert. Most of us haven't seen a female for
months, nor a lady for years. Why, last fall Stubby there rode eighty
miles to Buxton, just to stand on a corner and see a lot of greasy
Mexican women go by. We tire of exclusive male society, you see. We
get to bore one another terribly. So here, like a visitation from
heaven, three attractive young ladies descend upon us, traveling
through our domain, and having discovered their presence we instantly
decided to take advantage of the opportunity and invite them to an
impromptu ball. There's no use refusing us, for we insist on carrying
out our plan. If you men, perhaps the fathers of the young ladies,
behave reasonably, we will entertain you royally and send you on your
way rejoicing. Won't we, boys?"

They shouted approval.

"But if you oppose us and act ugly about this fte, gentlemen, we
shall be obliged to put a few bullets into you, and decide afterward
what disposition to make of the girls. About the best stunt we do is
shooting. We can't work; we're too poor to gamble much; but we hunt
a good bit and we can shoot straight. I assure you we wouldn't mind
losing and taking a few lives if a scrimmage is necessary. Eh, boys?"

"That's right, Algy," said one, answering for the others; "we'll have
that dance if we die for it--ev'ry man Jack of us."

Myrtle was trembling in her corner of the limousine. Beth sat still
with a curl on her lips. But Patsy was much interested in the
proceedings and had listened attentively to the above conversation.
Now the girl suddenly swung open the door and sprang out beside her
father, facing the group of cowboys.

"I am Patricia Doyle," she said in a clear voice, "and these
gentlemen," indicating the Major and Mr. Merrick, "are my father and
my uncle. You understand perfectly why they object to the arrangement
you suggest, as any one of you would object, had you a daughter in
a like position. But you are arbitrary and not inclined to respect
womanhood. Therefore but one course is open to us--to submit under
protest to the unwelcome attentions you desire to thrust upon us."

They listened silently to this frank speech, and some of their faces
wore crestfallen expressions by the time she had finished. Indeed,
one of the older men turned on his heel and walked away, disappearing
among the buildings. After a brief hesitation a delicate young
fellow--almost a boy--followed this man, his face flaming red with
shame. But the others stood their ground.

"Very good, Miss Doyle," remarked Tobey, with forced cheerfulness.
"You are quite sensible to submit to the inevitable. Bring out your
friends and introduce them, and then we'll all go in to luncheon and
prepare for the dance."

"I won't submit to this!" cried the Major, stamping his foot angrily.

"Yes, you will," said Uncle John, with a motion preventing his irate
brother-in-law from drawing a revolver, "Patsy is quite right, and we
will submit with as much dignity as we can muster, being overpowered
by numbers."

He beckoned to Beth, who stepped out of the car and assisted Myrtle
to follow her. A little cheer of bravado had arisen from the group,
inspired by their apparent victory; but when Myrtle's crutches
appeared and they saw the fair, innocent face of the young girl who
rested upon them, the shout died away in a hush of surprise.

"This is my cousin, Elizabeth De Graf," announced Patsy, with cold
deliberation, determined that the proprieties should be observed in
all intercourse with these people. "And I present our friend, Myrtle
Dean. Under ordinary circumstances I believe Myrtle would be excused
from dancing, but I suppose no brute in the form of a man would have
consideration for her infirmity."

This time even Tobey flushed.

"You've a sharp tongue, Miss Doyle, and it's liable to lead you into
trouble," he retorted, losing for the moment his suave demeanor. "We
may be brutes--and I imagine we are--but we're not dangerous unless
provoked."

It was savagely said, and Uncle John took warning and motioned Patsy
to be silent.

"Lead the way, sir," he said. "Our chauffeur will of course remain
with the car."

Wampus had kept his seat, motionless and silent. He only nodded in
answer to Mr. Merrick's instructions and was entirely disregarded by
the remittance men.

The man called "Stubby," who had a round, good-humored face, stepped
eagerly to Myrtle's side and exclaimed: "Let me assist you, please."

"No," she said, shaking her head with a wan smile; "I am quite able to
walk alone."

He followed her, though, full of interest and with an air of deep
respect that belied his former actions. Tobey, content with his
present success, walked beside Mr. Merrick and led the procession
toward the ranch house. The Major followed, his tall form upright, his
manner bellicose and resentful, with Beth and Patsy on either side of
him. The remittance men followed in a straggling crowd, laughing and
boisterously talking among themselves. Just as they reached the house
a horseman came clattering down the road and all paused involuntarily
to mark the new arrival. The rider was a handsome, slim young fellow,
dressed as were the other cowboys present, and he came on at a
breakneck speed that seemed only warranted by an errand of life and
death.

In front of him, tied to the saddle, appeared a huge bundle, and as
the horse dashed up to the group standing by the ranch house the rider
gracefully threw himself off and removed his hat with a sweeping
gesture as he observed the young ladies.

"I've got him, Algy!" he cried merrily.

"Dan'l?" asked Tobey.

"Dan'l himself." He pointed to the bundle, which heaved and wriggled
to show it was alive. "He refused to come willingly, of course; so
I brought him anyhow. Never yet was there a fiddler willing to be
accommodating."

"Good for you, Tim!" shouted a dozen voices. And Stubby added in his
earnest way; "Dan'l was never more needed in his life."

Tobey was busy unwinding a long lariat that bent the captive nearly
double and secured him firmly to the panting horse. When the bonds
were removed Dan'l would have tumbled prone to the ground had not
willing hands caught him and supported him upon his feet. Our friends
then observed that he was an aged man with a face thickly furrowed
with wrinkles. He had but one eye, small and gray and very shrewd in
expression, which he turned contemptuously upon the crowd surrounding
him. Numb and trembling from his cramped position upon the horse and
the terrible jouncing he had endured, the fiddler could scarcely stand
at first and shook as with a palsy; but he made a brave effort to
control his weakness and turned smilingly at the murmur of pity and
indignation that came from the lips of the girls.

"Where's the fiddle?" demanded Tobey, and Tim unhooked a calico bag
from the saddlebow and held it out. A laugh greeted the gesture.

"Dan'l said he be hanged if he'd come," announced Tim, with a grim
appreciation of the humorous side of the situation; "so I hung him and
brought him along--and his fiddle to boot. But don't boot it until
after the dance."

"What do you mean, sir, by this rebellious attitude?" questioned
Tobey, sticking his damaged face close to that of the fiddler.

Dan'l blinked with his one eye but refused to answer.

"I've a good mind to skin you alive," continued the leader, in a
savage tone. "You'll either obey my orders or I'll throw you into the
snake pit."

"Let him alone, Algy," said Tim, carelessly. "The old scoundrel has
been tortured enough already. But I see we have partners for the
dance," looking critically at the girls, "and I claim first choice
because I've brought the fiddler."

At this a roar of protest arose and Tobey turned and said sullenly:

"Come in, all of you. We'll settle the order of dancing later on."

The interior of the ranch house was certainly picturesque. A great
living room ran all across the front, with an immense fireplace
built of irregular adobe bricks. The floor was strewn with skins of
animals--mostly coyotes, a few deer and one or two mountain lions--and
the walls were thickly hung with weapons and trophies of the chase.
A big table in one corner was loaded with bottles and glasses,
indicating the intemperate habits of the inmates, while on the chimney
shelf were rows of pipes and jars of tobacco. An odor similar to that
of a barroom hung over the place which the air from the open windows
seemed unable to dissipate.

There were plenty of benches and chairs, with a long mess table
occupying the center of the room. In a corner was an old square piano,
which a Mexican was trying to dust as the party entered.

"Welcome to Hades!" exclaimed Tobey, with an absurd gesture. "Be good
enough to make yourselves at home and I'll see if those devils of
Chinamen are getting luncheon ready."

Silently the prisoners sat down. The crowd poured in after them and
disposed themselves in various attitudes about the big room, all
staring with more or less boldness at the three girls. Dan'l the
fiddler was pushed in with the others and given a seat, while two or
three of the imitation cowboys kept guard over him to prevent any
possible escape. So far the old man had not addressed a word to
anyone.

With the absence of the leader the feeling of restraint seemed to
relax. The cowboys began whispering among themselves and chuckling
with glee, as if they were enjoying some huge joke. Stubby had placed
himself near the three young ladies, whom he eyed with adoring
glances, and somehow none of the prisoners regarded this childish
young fellow in exactly the same light as they did his comrades. Tim,
his attitude full of grace as he lounged against a settle, was also
near the group. He seemed a bit thoughtful since his dramatic arrival
and had little to say to anyone.

Mr. Merrick engaged Stubby in conversation.

"Does Mr. Tobey own this place?" he asked.

"By proxy, yes," was the reply. "It isn't in his name, you know,
although that doesn't matter, for he couldn't sell his desert ranch if
he had a title to it. I suppose that is what his folks were afraid
of. Algy is the fourth son of old Lord Featherbone, and got into a
disgraceful mess in London some years ago. So Featherbone shipped
him over here, in charge of a family solicitor who hunted out this
sequestered spot, bought a couple of thousand acres and built this
hut. Then he went home and left Algy here to keep up the place on a
paltry ten pounds--fifty dollars--a month."

"Can he manage to do that?" asked Uncle John.

"Why, he has to, you see. He's got together a few cattle, mostly
stolen I imagine; but he doesn't try to work the land. Moreover he's
established this community, composed of his suffering fellow exiles,
the secret of which lies in the fact that we work the cooperative
plan, and all chip in our remittances to boil the common pot. We can
keep more servants and buy more food and drink, that way, than if each
one of us lived separately."

"Up in Oregon," said Mr. Merrick, "I've known of some very successful
and prosperous ranchmen among the remittance men."

"Oh, we're all kinds, I suppose, good and bad," admitted Stubby. "This
crew's mostly bad, and they're moderately proud of it. It's a devil
of a life, sir, and Hades Ranch is well named. I've only been here a
month. Had a little property up North; but the sheriff took it for
debt, and that forced me to Algy, whom I detest. I think I'll move on,
before long. But you see I'm limited. Can't leave Arizona or I'll get
my remittance cut off."

"Why were you sent here into exile?" asked Myrtle artlessly.

He turned red and refused to meet her eyes.

"Went wrong, Miss," he said, "and my folks wouldn't stand for
it. We're all in the same boat," sweeping his arm around, "doing
punishment for our misdeeds."

"Do none of you ever reform?" inquired Patsy.

"What's the use? We're so far away from home no one there would ever
believe in our reformation. Once we become outcasts, that's the end
of our careers. We're buried in these Western wilds and allowed just
enough to keep alive."

"I would think," said Uncle John musingly, "that the manly way would
be to cut yourself off entirely from your people at home and go to
some city in the United States where honesty and industry would win a
new name for you. Then you could be respected and happy and become of
use to the world."

Stubby laughed.

"That has been tried," he replied; "but few ever made a success of it.
We're generally the kind that prefers idleness to work. My family is
wealthy, and I don't mind taking from them what little they give me
willingly and all that I can screw out of them besides. I'm in for
life, as the saying is, and I've no especial ambition except to drink
myself to death as soon as possible."

Patsy shuddered. It seemed a horrible thing to be so utterly hopeless.
Could this young fellow have really merited his fate?




CHAPTER XIII

THE FIDDLER


Tim had listened carelessly to the conversation until now, when he
said listlessly:

"Don't think us all criminals, for we're not. In my own case I did
nothing to deserve exile except that I annoyed my elder brother by
becoming more popular with our social set than he was. He had all the
property and I was penniless, so he got rid of me by threatening to
cut off my allowance unless I went to America and stayed there."

"And you accepted such a condition?" cried Patsy, scornfully. "Why
were you not independent enough to earn your own living?"

He shrugged his shoulders, yet seemed amused.

"I simply couldn't," said he. "I was not educated to work, you know,
and to do so at home would be to disgrace my noble family. I've too
much respect for my lineage to labor with my hands or head."

"But here in America no one would know you," suggested Beth.

"I would only humiliate myself by undertaking such a task. And why
should I do so? While I am in America my affectionate brother, the
head of the family, supports me, as is his duty. Your philosophy is
pretty enough, but it is not practical. The whole fault lies in our
old-fashioned system of inheritance, the elder male of a family
getting all the estate and the younger ones nothing at all. Here, in
this crude and plebeian country, I believe it is the custom to provide
for all one's children, and a father is at liberty to do so because
his estate is not entailed."

"And he earns it himself and can do what he likes with it," added
Uncle John, impatiently. "Your system of inheritance and entail may
be somewhat to blame, but your worst fault is in rearing a class of
mollycoddles and social drones who are never of benefit to themselves
or the world at large. You, sir, I consider something less than a
man."

"I agree with you," replied Tim, readily. "I'm only good to cumber the
earth, and if I get little pleasure out of life I must admit that it's
all I'm entitled to."

"And you can't break your bonds and escape?" asked Patsy.

"I don't care to. People who are ambitious to do things merely bore
me. I don't admire them or care to imitate them."

From that moment they took no further interest in the handsome
outcast. His world was not their world.

And now Tobey came in, driving before him a lot of Mexicans bearing
trays of food. The long table was laid in a moment, for everything
was dumped upon it without any attempt at order. Each of the cowboys
seized a plate from a pile at one end and helped himself to whatever
he wanted.

Two or three of the men, however, were courteous enough to attend to
their unwilling guests and see they were served as well as conditions
would permit The food was plentiful and of good quality, but although
none of Uncle John's party was squeamish or a stickler for form, all
more or less revolted from the utter disregard of all the proprieties.

"I'm sorry we have no wine; but there's plenty of whiskey, if you like
it," remarked Tobey.

The girls were silent and ate little, although they could not help
being interested in observing the bohemianism of these gently reared
but decadent sons of respectable English families. As soon as they
could they left the table, and Tobey, observing their uneasiness in
spite of his damaged and nearly useless optics, decided to send them
to another room where they could pass the afternoon without further
annoyance. Stubby escorted the party and ushered them into a good
sized room which he said was "Algy's study," although no one ever
studied there.

"Algy's afraid you'll balk at the dance; so he wants to please you
however he can," remarked the round faced youth. "You won't mind being
left alone, will you?"

"We prefer it, sir," answered the Major, stiffly.

"You see, we're going to have a rare lark this afternoon," continued
Stubby, confidentially. "Usually it's pretty dull here, and all we
can do is ride and hunt--play cards and quarrel. But your coming has
created no end of excitement and this dance will be our red-letter day
for a long time to come. The deuce of if is, however, that there are
only two girls to dance with thirteen men. We limit our community to
fifteen, you know; but little Ford and old Rutledge have backed down
and won't have anything to do with this enterprise. I don't know why,"
he continued, thoughtfully.

"Perhaps they still have some gentlemanly instincts," suggested Patsy.

"That must be it," he replied in a relieved tone. "Well, anyhow,
to avoid quarrels and bloodshed we've agreed to throw dice for the
dances. Every one is to have an equal chance, you see, and when you
young ladies open the dance the entire programme will be arranged for
you."

"Are we to have no choice in the matter of partners?" inquired Beth
curiously.

"None whatever. There would surely be a row, in that case, and we
intend to have everything; pass off pleasantly if we have to kill a
few to keep the peace."

With this Stubby bowed low and retreated toward the door, which
suddenly opened to admit old Dan'l the fiddler, who was thrust in
so violently that his body collided with that of Stubby and nearly
knocked him over.

"That's all right," laughed the remittance man, recovering from the
shock. "You mustn't escape, you know, Dan'l, for we depend on you for
the music."

He closed the door as he went out and they all heard a bolt shoot into
place. Yet the broad window, scarcely six feet from the ground, stood
wide open to admit the air.

Dan'l stood in the middle of the room, motionless for a moment. Then
he raised his wrinkled face and clinched his fists, shaking them in
the direction of the living-room.

"Me!" he muttered; "me play for dese monkeys to dance--me! a
maestro--a composer--a artiste! No; I vill nod! I vill die before I
condescention to such badness, such mockery!"

They were the first words he had spoken since his arrival, and they
seemed to hold all his pentup indignation. The girls pitied the old
man and, recognizing in him a fellow prisoner, sought to comfort him.

"If the dance depends upon us, there will be no dance," said Patsy,
firmly.

"I thought you advised submitting to the whim of these ruffians," said
Uncle John in surprise.

"Only to gain time, Uncle. And the scheme has succeeded. Now is our
time to plot and plan how to outwit our enemies."

"Goot!" cried Dan'l approvingly. "I help you. Dey are vermin--pah! I
vould kill dem all mitout mercifulness, unt be glad!"

"It won't be necessary to kill them, I hope," said Beth, smiling. "All
we wish is to secure our escape."

"Vot a time dey make me!" said Dan'l, more calmly. "You see, I am
living peacefulness in mine bungalow by der river--ten mile away. Dot
brute Tim, he come unt ask me to fiddle for a dance. I--fiddle! Ven I
refuse me to do it, he tie me up unt by forcibleness elope mit me. Iss
id nod a crime--a vickedness--eh?"

"It certainly is, sir," said Uncle John. "But do not worry. These
girls have some plan in their heads, I'm sure, and if we manage to
escape we will carry you home in safety. Now, my dears, what is it?"

"Oh, we've only begun to think yet," said Patsy, and walked to the
window. All but Myrtle and Dan'l followed her.

Below the window was a jungle of cactus, with hundreds of spines as
slender and sharp as stilettos sticking in every direction.

"H-m; this room is burglar proof," muttered Uncle John, with marked
disappointment.

"It also makes an excellent prison," added Patsy. "But I suspected
something of this sort when I saw they had left the window open. We
can't figure on getting out that way, you see."

"Id vould be suiciding," Dan'l said, mournfully shaking his head. "If
dese fiends were as goot as dey are clefer, dey vould be angels."

"No argument seems to prevail with them," remarked Beth. "They are
lawless and merciless, and in this far-away country believe they may
do as they please."

"They're as bad as the bandits of Taormina," observed Patsy, smiling
at the recollection of an adventure they had abroad; "but we must find
some way to evade them."

Dan'l had gone over to Myrtle's corner and stood staring at her with
his one shrewd eye. Uncle John looked thoughtfully out of the window
and saw Wampus busy in the road before the house. He had his coat off
and was cutting the bars of barbed wire and rolling them out of the
way, while Mumbles, who had been left with him, ran here and there at
his heels as if desiring to assist him.

From the big hall, or living room, at the right came a dull roar of
voices, subdued shouts and laughter, mingled with the clinking of
glasses. All the remittance men were gathered there deep in the game
of dice which was to determine the order in which they were to dance
with Beth and Patsy. The servants were out of sight. Wampus had the
field to himself.

"Come here," said Uncle John to the girls, and when they stood beside
him pointed to the car. "Wampus is making ready for the escape," he
continued. "He has cleared the road and the way is now open if we can
manage to get to the machine. Has your plan matured yet?"

Patsy shook her head.

"Not yet, Uncle," she replied.

"Couldn't Wampus throw us a rope?" inquired the Major.

"He could," said Uncle John; "but we would be unable to use it. Those
terrible cactus spines are near enough to spear anyone who dared try
to slide down a rope. Think of something else."

They all tried to do that, but no practical idea seemed forthcoming.

"Oh, no," Dan'l was saying to Myrtle; "dey are nod afraid to shoot;
bud dey vill nod shoot ladies, belief me. Always dey carry refolfers
in deir belts--or deir holsterses. Dey eat mit refolfers; dey schleep
mit refolfers; dey hunt, dey quarrel, unt sometimes dey shoot each
odder--de best enactionment vot dey do. Bud dey do nod shoot at
ladies--nefer."

"Will they wear their revolvers at the dance?" asked Beth, overhearing
this speech.

"I belief id," said Dan'l, wagging his ancient head. "Dey like to be
ready to draw quick like, if anybody shteps on anybody's toes. Yes; of
course."

"What a horrible idea!" exclaimed Patsy.

"They're quite liable to dance and murder in the same breath," the
Major observed, gloomily.

"I don't like it," said Beth. "It's something awful just to think of.
Haven't they any gallantry?"

"No," answered Patsy. "But I wouldn't dance with a lot of half drunken
men wearing revolvers, if they burned me at the stake for refusing."

"Ah! shtick to dat fine expressionment," cried Dan'l, eagerly. "Shtick
to id! Say you won't dance if dey wear de refolfers--unt den we win de
schweepstakes!"

Patsy looked at him critically, in the instant catching a part of his
idea.

"What do you mean?" she asked.

Dan'l explained, while they all listened carefully, absorbed in
following in thought his unique suggestions.

"Let's do it!" exclaimed Beth. "I'm sure the plan will succeed."

"It's leaving a good deal to chance," objected Uncle John, with a
touch of nervousness.

"There is an element of chance in everything," declared Patsy. "But
I'm sure we shall escape, Uncle. Why it's a regular coup!"

"We take them by surprise, you know," explained the Major, who
heartily favored the idea.

They talked it over for a time, perfecting the details, and then
became as calm and composed as a group of prisoners might. Uncle John
waved his handkerchief to attract the attention of Wampus, who stole
softly around the corner of the house and approached the window,
taking care to keep at a respectful distance from the dangerous
cactus.

"Is everything ready?" inquired Uncle John in a subdued voice.

"To be sure all is ready. Why not? I am Wampus!" was the reply, in
cautious tones.

"Go back to the machine and guard it carefully, Wampus," commanded Mr.
Merrick. "We expect to escape soon after dark, so have the headlights
going, for we shall make a rush for it and there mustn't be a moment's
delay."

"All right," said the chauffeur. "You may depend on me. I am Wampus,
an' not 'fraid of a hundred coward like these. Is not Mister Algy his
eye mos' beautiful blacked?"

"It is," agreed Uncle John. "Go back to the car now, and wait for us.
Don't get impatient. We don't know just when we will join you, but it
will be as soon as we can manage it. What is Mumbles doing?"

"Mumble he learn to be good automobilist. Jus' now he sit on seat an'
watch wheel to see nobody touch. If anybody touch, Mumble he eat him
up."

They all laughed at this whimsical notion and it served to relieve the
strain of waiting. Wampus, grinning at the success of his joke, went
back to the limousine to inspect it carefully and adjust it in every
part until it was in perfect order.

Now that a definite plan of action had been decided upon their spirits
rose considerably, and they passed the afternoon in eager anticipation
of the crisis.

Rather earlier than expected Stubby and Tim came to say "they had been
appointed a committee to escort their guests to the banquet hall,
where dinner would at once be served."

"We shall have to clear away for the dance," added Stubby, "so we want
to get the feast over with as quickly as possible. I hope you are all
hungry, for Algy has spread himself on this dinner and we are to
have every delicacy the ranch affords, regardless of expense. We can
economize afterward to make up for it."

Elaborate preparations were not greatly in evidence, however. The
Mexican servants had washed themselves and the floor of the big room
had been swept and cleared of some of its rubbish; but that was all.
The remittance men were in their usual rough costumes and the air was
redolent with the fumes of liquor.




CHAPTER XIV

THE ESCAPE


As the prisoners quietly took their places at the table Tobey, who
had been drinking hard, decided to make a speech. His face was badly
swollen and he could only see through a slit in one eye, so severe had
been the beating administered by Wampus earlier in the day; but the
fellow had grit, in spite of his other unmanly qualities, and his
imperturbable good humor had scarcely been disturbed by the punishment
the Canadian had inflicted upon him.

"Ladies," said he, "and gentlemen--which of course includes our
respected male guests--I am happy to inform you that the programme for
the First Annual Hades Ranch Ball has finally been arranged, and the
dances apportioned in a fair and impartial manner. The Grand March
will take place promptly at seven o'clock, led by Miss Doyle and
Knuckles, who has won the privilege by throwing four sixes. I am to
follow with Miss De Graf, and the rest will troop on behind with the
privilege of looking at the ladies. If anyone dares to create disorder
his dances with the young ladies will be forfeited. Dan'l will play
the latest dance music on his fiddle, and if it isn't spirited
and up-to-date we'll shoot his toes off. We insist upon plenty of
two-steps and waltzes and will wind up with a monney-musk in the
gray light of dawn. This being fully understood, I beg you, my good
friends, to fall to and eat and be merry; but don't linger unduly over
the dainties, for we are all anxious, like good soldiers, to get into
action."

The remittance men applauded this oratory, and incidentally attacked
the eatables with evident determination to obey their leader's
injunction.

"We can eat any time," remarked Stubby, with his mouth full; "but
his Satanic majesty only knows when Hades Ranch will see another
dance--with real ladies for partners."

The Chinese cooks and the Mexican servants had a lively time during
this meal, for the demands made upon them were incessant. Uncle John,
whose even disposition was seldom ruffled, ate with a good appetite,
while even the Major, glum and scowling, did not disdain the numerous
well-prepared dishes. As for Dan'l, he took full advantage of the
occasion and was the last one to leave the table. Our girls, however,
were too excited to eat much and little Myrtle, especially, was pallid
and uneasy and had a startled look in her eyes whenever anyone made a
sudden motion.

As soon as the repast was concluded the servants cleared the long
table in a twinkling and pushed it back against the wall at one end of
the long room. A chair was placed for Dan'l on top of this expansive
board, which thus became a stage from whence he could overlook the
room and the dancers, and then two of the remittance men tossed the
old fiddler to his elevated place and commanded him to make ready.

Dan'l said nothing and offered no resistance. He sat plaintively
sawing upon his ancient but rich-toned violin while the floor was
brushed, the chairs and benches pushed against the wall and the room
prepared for action. Behind the violinist was a low, broad window
facing a grass plot that was free from the terrifying cactus, and the
old man noted with satisfaction that it stood wide open.

Uncle John's party had pressed close to the table and stood watching
the proceedings.

"Ready now!" called Tobey; "the Grand March is about to begin. Take
your partners, boys. Look sharp, there, Dan'l, and give us a martial
tune that will lift our feet."

Dan'l meekly set the violin underneath his chin and raised the bow as
if in readiness. "Knuckles," a brawny fellow with a florid face and a
peculiar squint, approached Patsy and bowed.

"You're to lead with me, Miss," he said. "Are you ready?"

"Not quite," she returned with dignified composure; "for I perceive
you are not quite ready yourself."

"Eh? Why not?" he inquired, surprised.

"You are still wearing your firearms," she replied. "I cannot and will
not dance with a man who carries a revolver."

"That's nothing," he retorted. "We always do."

"Always?"

"Of course. And if I shed my gun what's to prevent some one else
getting the drop on me?"

"That's it," said Patsy, firmly. "The weapons must all be surrendered
before we begin. We positively refuse to dance if rioting and shooting
are likely to occur."

A murmur of protest arose at this speech, for all the remittance men
had gathered around to listen to the argument.

"That's all tommy-rot," observed Handsome Tim, in a sulky tone. "We're
not spoiling for a row; it's the dance we're after."

"Then give up the revolvers," said Beth, coming to her cousin's
assistance. "If this is to be a peaceful entertainment you will not
need to be armed, and it is absurd to suppose a lady will dance with a
gentleman who is a walking arsenal."

They looked into one another's faces uncertainly. Dan'l sat softly
tuning his violin, as if uninterested in the controversy. Uncle John
and the Major looked on with seeming indifference.

"You must decide which you prefer--the revolvers or the dance,"
remarked Patsy, staring coolly into the ring of faces.

"Would your English ladies at home consent to dance with armed men?"
asked Beth.

"They're quite right, boys," said Stubby, nodding his bullethead.
"Let's agree to deposit all the shooting irons 'til the dance is
over."

"I won't!" cried Knuckles, his scowl deepening.

"By Jove, you will!" shouted Tobey, with unexpected vehemence. "You're
delaying the programme, old man, and it's a nuisance to dance in this
armor, anyway. Here--pile all your guns in this corner; every one of
you, mind. Then we shall all stand on an equal footing."

"Put them on the table there, by the old fiddler," said Patsy; "then
we will know we are perfectly safe."

Rather unwillingly they complied, each man walking up to the table and
placing his revolver at Dan'l's feet. The girls watched them intently.

"That man over there is still armed," called Beth, pointing to a
swarthy Mexican who squatted near the door.

"That's all right," said Tobey, easily. "He's our guard, Pedro. I've
stationed him there so you won't attempt to escape till we get ready
to let you go."

Patsy laughed.

"There's little danger of that," she said.

"All ready, now!" exclaimed Knuckles, impatiently. "We're all as
harmless as doves. Let 'er go, Dan'l!"

The old man was just then assisting Uncle John to lift Myrtle to the
top of the table, where the Major had placed a chair for her. Knuckles
growled, but waited until the girl was seated near the window. Then
Dan'l drew his bow and struck up a spirited march. Patsy took the arm
of Knuckles and paraded down the long room. Beth followed with Tobey,
and behind them tramped the remittance men in files of two. At the far
end were grouped the servants, looking curiously upon the scene, which
was lighted by lamps swung from the ceiling and a row of candles upon
the edge of the mantelshelf.

To carry out the idea of a grand march Patsy drew her escort here and
there by sharp turns and half circles, the others trailing behind like
a huge snake until she had passed down the length of the room and
started to return up the other side to the starting point. So
engrossed had been the cowboys that they did not observe the Major and
Uncle John clamber upon the table and stand beside Myrtle.

The procession was half way up the hall on its return when Patsy said
abruptly: "Now, Beth!" and darted away from her partner's side and
toward the table. Beth followed like a streak, being an excellent
runner, and for a moment Knuckles and Tobey, thus deserted by their
partners, stopped to watch them in amazement. Then their comrades
bumped into them and recalled them to their senses.

By that time the two girls had reached the table and leaped upon it.
Uncle John was waving his handkerchief from the window as a signal
to Wampus; Dan'l had laid aside his fiddle and seized a revolver in
either hand, and the Major had caught up two more of the discarded
weapons.

As Beth and Patsy turned, panting, and from their elevation looked up
the room, the cowboys gave a bellow of rage and rushed forward.

"Keep back!" shouted the Major, in stentorian tones, "I'll shoot the
first man that interferes."

Noting the grim determination in the old soldier's eye, they hesitated
and came to a halt.

"What do you mean by this infernal nonsense?" cried Tobey, in disgust.

"Why, it's just checkmate, and the game is up," replied Uncle John
amiably. "We've decided not to hold the proposed dance, but to take
our departure at once."

He turned and passed Myrtle out of the window where Wampus took her
in his arms, crutches and all, and carried her to the automobile. The
remittance men, unarmed and confronted by their own revolvers, stood
gaping open-mouthed and seemingly dazed.

"Let's rush 'em, boys!" shouted Handsome Tim, defiantly.

"Rush 'em alone, if you like," growled Knuckles. "I'm not ready for
the graveyard yet."

"You are vot iss called cowardices," said Dan'l, flourishing the
revolvers he held. "Come on mit der courage, somebotty, so I can shoot
holes in you."

"You're building your own coffin just now, Dan'l," retorted Tobey,
in baffled rage. "We know where to get you, old boy, and we'll have
revenge for this night's work."

"I vill take some popguns home mit me," was the composed reply. "Den,
ven you come, I vill make a receptioning for you. Eh?"

Uncle John, Patsy and Beth had followed Myrtle through the window and
disappeared.

"Now, sir," said the Major to the old fiddler, "make your escape while
I hold them at bay."

"Nod yet," replied Dan'l. "Ve must gif ourselves de most
protectionment ve can."

With this he gathered up the firearms, one by one, and tossed them
through the window. Then he straightened up and a shot flashed down
the hall and tumbled the big Mexican guard to the floor just as he was
about to glide through the doorway.

"Dit ve say shtand still, or dit ve nod say shtand still?" asked
Dan'l, sternly. "If somebody gets hurt, it iss because he don'd obey
de orderations."

"Go, sir!" commanded the Major.

"I vill; bud I go last," declared the old man. "I follow you--see? Bud
you take my violin, please--unt be very tender of id, like id vas your
sveetheardt."

The Major took the violin and climbed through the window, proceeding
to join the others, who were by now seated in the car. When he had
gone Dan'l prepared to follow, first backing toward the window and
then turning to make an agile leap to the ground below. And now with a
shout the cowboys made their rush, only to halt as Dan'l reappeared at
the window, covering them again with his revolvers.

"So, you defils--make a listen to me," he called. "I am experiencing
a goot-bye to you, who are jackals unt imitation men unt haf no goot
right to be alive. Also if I see any of you de next time, I vill shoot
first unt apologise at der funeral. I haf no more monkey business mit
you voteffer; so keep vere you are until I am gone, unt you vill be
safeness."

He slowly backed away from the window, and so thoroughly cowed was the
group of ruffians that the old fiddler had been lifted hastily into
the automobile before the cowboys mustered courage to leap through
the window and search in the darkness for their revolvers, which lay
scattered widely upon the ground.

Wampus, chuckling gleefully, jerked the hoods off his glaring
searchlights, sprang to his seat and started the machine down the road
before the crack of a single revolver was heard in protest. The shots
came thicker after that, but now the automobile was bowling merrily
along the road and soon was out of range.

"De road iss exceptionalment goot," remarked Dan'l. "Dere iss no
dangerousness from here to der rifer."

"Danger?" said the chauffeur, scornfully. "Who cares for danger? I am
Wampus, an' I am here!"

"We are all here," said Patsy, contentedly nestling against the
cushions; "and I'm free to confess that I'm mighty glad of it!"




CHAPTER XV

THE ROMANCE OF DAN'L


It did not take them very long to reach the river, a muddy little
stream set below high banks. By Dan'l's direction they turned to
the left and followed the wind of the river for a mile or so until
suddenly out of the darkness loomed a quaint little bungalow which the
old German claimed to be his home.

"I haf architectured it mineself, unt make it built as I like it. You
vill come in unt shtop der night mit me," he said, as Wampus halted
the machine before the door.

There was a little murmur of protest at this, for the house appeared
to be scarcely bigger than the automobile. But Uncle John pointed out,
sensibly enough, that they ought not to undertake an unknown road at
nighttime, and that Spotville, the town for which they were
headed, was still a long way off. The Major, moreover, had a vivid
recollection of his last night's bed upon the roof of the limousine,
where he had crept to escape rattlesnakes, and was in no mood to again
camp out in the open while they traveled in Arizona. So he advocated
accepting Dan'l's invitation. The girls, curious to know how so many
could be accommodated in the bungalow, withdrew all further objections
and stood upon the low, pergola-roofed porch while their host went
inside to light the lamps.

They were really surprised at the cosy aspect of the place. Half the
one-story dwelling was devoted to a living room, furnished simply but
with modest taste. A big square table was littered with music, much
being in manuscript--thus proving Dan'l's assertion that he was
a composer. Benches were as numerous as chairs, and all were
well-cushioned with tanned skins as coverings. A few good prints were
on the walls and the aspect of the place was entirely agreeable to the
old man's guests.

As the room was somewhat chilly he made a fire in the ample fireplace
and then with an air of pride exhibited to his visitors his tiny
kitchen, his own bedroom and a storeroom, which occupied the remainder
of the space in the bungalow. He told them he would prepare beds in
the living room for the girls, give his own room to Mr. Merrick and
Major Doyle, while he and Wampus would bunk in the storeroom.

"I haf much blankets," he said; "dere vill be no troubles to keep
varm."

Afterward they sat before the fire and by the dim lights of the
kerosene lamps chatted together of the day's adventures.

Uncle John asked Dan'l what had brought him to this deserted,
out-of-the-way spot, and the old man told his story in a manner that
amused them all greatly.

"I haf been," said he, "much famous in my time, unt had a
individualness pointed out whereeffer I went. I vas orchestra leader
at the Theater Royal in Stuttgart, unt our king haf complimented me
many times. But I vas foolish. I vas foolish enough to think that ven
a man iss great he can stay great. I married me to a clefer prima
donna, unt composed a great opera, which vas finer as anything
Herr Wagner has efer done. Eh? But dere vas jealousness at work to
opposition me. Von day ven my fine opera vas all complete I vent
to the theater to lead mine orchestra. To my surprisement der Herr
Director tells me I can retire on a pension; I am too old unt he has
hired a younger man, who iss Herr Gabert. I go home bewildered unt
mishappy, to find that Herr Gabert has stole the score of mine opera
unt run avay mit mine vife. Vot I can do? Nothing. Herr Gabert he lead
my orchestra tint all der people applauds him. I am forgot. One day I
see our king compliment Herr Gabert. He produces my opera unt say he
compositioned it. Eferybody iss crazy aboud id, unt crown Herr Gabert
mit flowers. My vife sings in der opera. The people cheer her unt she
rides avay mit Herr Gabert in his carriage to a grand supper mit der
nobility unt der Herr Director.

"I go home unt say: 'Who am I?' I answer: 'Nobody!' Am I now great?
No; I am a speck. Vot can I do? Veil, I go avay. I haf some money--a
leedle. I come to America. I do not like crowds any more. I like to be
alone mit my violin. I find dis place; I build dis house; I lif here
unt make happiness. My only neighbors are de remittance men, who iss
more mischiefing as wicked. Dey vill nod bother me much. So after a
time I die here. Vy nod? I am forgot in Stuttgart."

There was pathos in the tale and his way of telling it. The old man
spoke cheerfully, but they could see before them the tragedy depicted
by his simple words. His hearers were all silent when he had
concluded, feeling they could say nothing to console him or lighten
his burden. Only Wampus, sitting in the background, looked scornfully
upon the man who had once been the idol of his townspeople.

Dan'l took a violin from a shelf and began to play, softly but with
masterly execution. He caught their mood instantly. The harmony was
restful and contented. Patsy turned down the lamps, to let the flicker
of the firelight dominate the room, and Dan'l understood and blended
the flickering light into his melody.

For a long time he continued to improvise, in a way that fairly
captivated his hearers, despite their varied temperaments, and made
them wonder at his skill. Then without warning he changed to a
stirring, martial air that filled the room with its rich, resonant
tones. There was a fugue, a wonderful finale, and while the concluding
notes rang in their ears the old man laid his violin in his lap,
leaned back against his cushions and heaved a deep sigh.

They forebore disturbing him for a while. How strange it seemed that
this really talented musician should be banished to a wilderness while
still possessing power to stir the souls of men with his marvelous
execution. Truly he was a "maestro," as he had said; a genius whose
star had risen, flashed across the sky and suddenly faded, leaving his
future a blank.

Wampus moved uneasily in his chair.

"I like to know something," he remarked.

Dan'l roused himself and turned to look at the speaker.

"You have one bad eye," continued Wampus, reflectively. "What make him
so? You stick violin bow in eye some day?"

"No," grunted Dan'l.

"Bad eye he no make himself," persisted the little chauffeur. "What
make him, then?"

For a moment there was an awkward silence. The girls considered this
personal inquiry offensive and regretted admitting Wampus to the room.
But after a time the old German answered the question, quietly and in
a half amused tone.

"Can you nod guess?" he said. "Herr Gabert hurt mine eye."

"Oh!" exclaimed Wampus, nodding approvingly "You fight duel with him?
Of course. It mus' be."

"I haf one goot eye left, howefer," continued Dan'l. "It vill do me
fery well. Dere iss nod much to see out here."

"I know," said Wampus. "But Herr Gabert. What happen to him?"

Again there was a pause. Then the German said slowly:

"I am nod rich; but efery year I send a leetle money to Stuttgart to
put some flowers on Herr Gabert's grave."

The chauffeur's face brightened. He got up from his chair and solemnly
shook Dan'l's hand.

"You are great musician," he announced. "You can believe it, for it is
true. An' you have shake the hand of great chauffeur. I am Wampus."

Dan'l did not answer. He had covered his good eye with his hand.




CHAPTER XVI

THE LODGING AT SPOTVILLE


"Wake up, Patsy: I smell coffee!" called Beth, and soon the two girls
were dressed and assisting Myrtle to complete her toilet. Through the
open windows came the cool, fragrant breath of morning; the sky was
beginning to blush at the coming of the sun.

"To think of our getting up at such unearthly hours!" cried Patsy
cheerfully. "But I don't mind it in the least, Beth; do you?"

"I love the daybreak," returned Beth, softly. "We've wasted the best
hours of morning abed, Patsy, these many years."

"But there's a difference," said Myrtle, earnestly. "I know the
daybreak in the city very well, for nearly all my life I have had to
rise in the dark in order to get my breakfast and be at work on time.
It is different from this, I assure you; especially in winter, when
the chill strikes through to your bones. Even in summer time the air
of the city is overheated and close, and the early mornings cheerless
and uncomfortable. Then I think it is best to stay in bed as long as
you can--if you have nothing else to do. But here, out in the open, it
seems a shame not to be up with the birds to breathe the scent of the
fields and watch the sun send his heralds ahead of him to proclaim his
coming and then climb from the bottomless pit into the sky and take
possession of it."

"Why, Myrtle!" exclaimed Patsy, wonderingly; "what a poetic notion.
How did it get into your head, little one?"

Myrtle's sweet face rivaled the sunrise for a moment. She made no
reply but only smiled pathetically.

Uncle John's knock upon the door found them ready for breakfast, which
old Dan'l had skilfully prepared in the tiny kitchen and now placed
upon a round table set out upon the porch. By the time they had
finished the simple meal Wampus had had his coffee and prepared the
automobile for the day's journey. A few minutes later they said
good-bye to the aged musician and took the trail that led through
Spotville.

The day's trip was without event. They encountered one or two Indians
on the way, jogging slowly along on their shaggy ponies; but the
creatures were mild and inoffensive. The road was fairly good and
they made excellent time, so that long before twilight Spotville
was reached and the party had taken possession of the one small and
primitive "hotel" the place afforded. It was a two-story, clapboarded
building, the lower floor being devoted to the bar and dining room,
while the second story was divided into box-like bedrooms none too
clean and very cheaply furnished.

"I imagine we shall find this place 'the limit'," remarked Uncle John
ruefully. "But surely we shall be able to stand it for one night," he
added, with a philosophic sigh.

"Want meat fer supper?" asked the landlord, a tall, gaunt man who
considered himself dressed when he was in his shirt sleeves.

"What kind of meat?" inquired Uncle John, cautiously.

"Kin give yeh fried pork er jerked beef. Ham 'a all out an' the
chickens is beginnin' to lay."

"Eggs?"

"Of course, stranger. Thet's the on'y thing Spotville chickens lay,
nowadays. I s'pose whar yeh come from they lay biscuits 'n' pork
chops."

"No. Door knobs, sometimes," said Mr. Merrick, "but seldom pork chops.
Let's have eggs, and perhaps a little fried pork to go with them. Any
milk?"

"Canned er fresh?"

"Fresh preferred."

The landlord looked at him steadily.

"Yeh've come a long-way, stranger," he said, "an' yeh must 'a' spent a
lot of money, here 'n' there. Air yeh prepared to pay fer thet order
in solid cash?"

Uncle John seemed startled, and looked at the Major, who smiled
delightedly.

"Are such things expensive, sir?" the latter asked the landlord.

"Why, we don't eat 'em ourselves, 'n' thet's a cold fact. Eggs is
eggs, an' brings forty cents a dozen to ship. There's seven cows
in town, 'n' forty-one babies, so yeh kin figger what fresh milk's
worth."

"Perhaps," said Uncle John mildly, "we can stand the expense--if we
won't rob the babies."

"Don't worry 'bout thet. The last autymobble folks as come this way
got hot because I charged 'em market prices fer the truck they et. So
I'm jest inquirin' beforehand, to save hard feelin's. I've found out
one thing 'bout autymobble folks sense I've ben runnin' this hoe-tel,
an' thet is thet a good many is ownin' machines thet oughter be payin'
their bills instid o' buyin' gasoline."

The Major took him aside. He did not tell the cautious landlord that
Mr. Merrick was one of the wealthiest men in America, but he exhibited
a roll of bills that satisfied the man his demands would be paid in
full.

The touring; party feasted upon eggs and fresh milk, both very
delicious but accompanied by odds and ends of food not so palatable.
The landlord's two daughters, sallow, sunken cheeked girls, waited on
the guests and the landlord's wife did the cooking.

Beth, Patsy and Myrtle retired early, as did Uncle John. The Major,
smoking his "bedtime cigar," as he called it, strolled out into the
yard and saw Wampus seated in the automobile, also smoking.

"We get an early start to-morrow, Wampus," said the Major. "Better get
to bed."

"Here is my bed," returned the chauffeur, quietly.

"But there's a room reserved for you in the hotel."

"I know. Don't want him. I sleep me here."

The Major looked at him reflectively.

"Ever been in this town before, Wampus?" he asked.

"No, sir. But I been in other towns like him, an' know this kind of
hotel. Then why do I sleep in front seat of motor car?"

"Because you are foolish, I suppose, being born that way and unable
to escape your heritage. For my part, I shall sleep in a bed; like a
Christian," said the Major rather testily.

"Even Christian cannot sleep sometime," returned Wampus, leaning back
in his seat and puffing a cloud of smoke into the clear night air.
"For me, I am good Christian; but I am not martyr."

"What do you mean by that?" demanded the Major.

"Do you sometime gamble?" inquired Wampus softly.

"Not often, sir."

"But sometime? Ah! Then I make you a bet. I bet you ten dollar to one
cent you not sleep in your bed to-night."

The Major coughed. Then he frowned.

"Is it so bad as that?" he asked.

"I think he is."

"I'll not believe it!" exclaimed Major Doyle. "This hotel isn't what
you might call first-class, and can't rank with the Waldorf-Astoria;
but I imagine the beds will be very comfortable."

"Once," said Wampus, "I have imagination, too. Now I have experience;
so I sleep in automobile."

The Major walked away with an exclamation of impatience. He had never
possessed much confidence in the Canadian's judgment and on this
occasion he considered the fellow little wiser than a fool.

Wampus rolled himself in a rug and was about to stretch his moderate
length upon the broad double seat when a pattering of footsteps was
heard and Beth came up to the car. She was wrapped in a dark cloak
and carried a bundle of clothing under one arm and her satchel in the
unoccupied hand. There was a new moon which dimly lighted the scene,
but as all the townspeople were now in bed and the hotel yard deserted
there was no one to remark upon the girl's appearance.

"Wampus," she said, "let me into the limousine, please. The night is
so perfect I've decided to sleep here in the car."

The chauffeur jumped down and opened the door.

"One moment an' I make up the beds for all," he said.

"Never mind that," Beth answered. "The others are all asleep, I'm
sure."

Wampus shook his head.

"They all be here pretty soon," he predicted, and proceeded to deftly
prepare the interior of the limousine for the expected party. When
Beth had entered the car Wampus pitched the lean-to tent and arranged
the cots as he was accustomed to do when they "camped out."

Scarcely had he completed this task when Patsy and Myrtle appeared.
They began to explain their presence, but Wampus interrupted them,
saying:

"All right, Miss Patsy an' Miss Myrtle. Your beds he made up an' Miss
'Lizbeth already asleep in him."

So they crept inside with sighs of relief, and Wampus had just mounted
to the front seat again and disposed himself to rest when Uncle John
trotted up, clad in his trousers and shirt, with the balance of his
apparel clasped in his arms. He looked at the tent with pleased
approval.

"Good boy, Wampus!" he exclaimed. "That room they gave me is an
inferno. I'm afraid our young ladies won't sleep a wink."

"Oh, yes," returned Wampus with a nod; "all three now inside car, safe
an' happy."

"I'm glad of it. How was your own room, Wampus?"

"I have not seen him, sir. But I have suspect him; so I sleep here."

"You are a wise chauffeur--a rare genus, in other words. Good night,
Wampus. Where's the Major?"

Wampus chuckled.

"In hotel. Sir, do the Major swear sometime?"

Uncle John crept under the tent.

"If he does," he responded, "he's swearing this blessed minute.
Anyhow, I'll guarantee he's not asleep."

Wampus again mounted to his perch.

"No use my try to sleep 'til Major he come," he muttered, and settled
himself to wait.

It was not long.

Presently some one approached on a run, and a broad grin overspread
the chauffeur's features. The Major had not delayed his escape long
enough to don his trousers even; he had grabbed his belongings in both
arms and fled in his blue and white striped undergarments.

Wampus leaped down and lifted the flap of the tent. The Major paused
long enough in the moonlight to stare at the chauffeur and say
sternly:

"If you utter one syllable, you rascal, I'll punch your head!"

Wampus was discreet. He said not a word.




CHAPTER XVII

YELLOW POPPIES


"So this is California!" exclaimed Patsy gleefully, as the automobile
left Parker and crossed the Arizona line.

"But it doesn't look any different," said Myrtle, peering out of the
window.

"Of course not," observed Uncle John. "A State boundary is a man-made
thing, and doesn't affect the country a bit. We've just climbed a
miniature mountain back in Arizona, and now we must climb a mate to
it in California. But the fact is, we've entered at last the Land of
Enchantment, and every mile now will bring us nearer and nearer to the
roses and sunshine."

"There's sunshine here now," declared the Major. "We've had it right
along. But I haven't seen the roses yet, and a pair of ear muffs
wouldn't be uncomfortable in this cutting breeze."

"The air _is_ rather crisp," admitted Uncle John. "But we're still in
the mountainous district, and Haggerty says--"

The Major coughed derisively and Mumbles barked and looked at Uncle
John sagaciously.

"Haggerty says--"

"Is that a rabbit or a squirrel? Something has caught the eye of our
Mumbles," interrupted the Major, pointing vaguely across the mesa.

"Haggerty says--"

"I wonder if Mumbles could catch 'em," remarked the Major, with
complacence.

"He says that every mile we travel brings us nearer the scent of the
orange blossoms and the glare of the yellow poppies," persisted Uncle
John. "You see, we've taken the Southern route, after all, for soon we
shall be on the Imperial road, which leads to San Diego--in the heart
of the gorgeous Southland."

"What is the Imperial road?" inquired Beth.

"The turnpike through Imperial Valley, said to be the richest bit of
land in all the world, not excepting the famous Nile banks of Egypt.
There is no railway there yet, but the Valley is settling very fast,
and Haggerty says--"

"How remarkable!" exclaimed the Major, gazing straight ahead. And
again Mumbles, curled in Patsy's lap, lifted his shaggy head and gave
a wailing bark.

Uncle John frowned, but was loyal to Haggerty.

"He says that if America was now unknown to all the countries of the
world, Imperial would soon make it famous. They grow wonderful crops
there--strawberries and melons the year around, as well as all the
tropical and semi-tropical fruits and grains, flowers and vines known
to any country yet discovered."

"Do we go to Imperial?" asked Myrtle, eagerly.

"I think not, my dear; we just skirt the edge of the Valley. It's
rather wild and primitive there yet; for although many settlers are
flocking to that favored district Imperial is large enough to be an
empire by itself. However, we shall find an ideal climate at Coronado,
by the edge of the blue Pacific, and there and at Los Angeles we shall
rest from our journey and get acquainted with the wonders of the
Golden State. Has the trip tired you, girls?"

"Not me," answered Beth, promptly. "I've enjoyed every mile of the
way."

"And so have I," added Patsy; "except perhaps the adventure with the
remittance men. But I wouldn't care to have missed even that, for it
led to our acquaintance with old Dan'l."

"For my part," said Myrtle softly, "I've been in a real fairyland. It
has seemed like a dream to me, all this glorious journey, and I shall
hate to wake up, as I must in time."

"Don't worry just yet about the awakening, dear," returned Patsy,
leaning over to kiss her little friend. "Just enjoy it while you can.
If fairylands exist, they were made for just such as you, Myrtle."

"One of the greatest marvels of our trip," said the Major, with a
smile, "is the improvement in our dear little invalid. It isn't the
same Myrtle who started out with us, believe me. Can't you all see the
change?"

"I can _feel_ it," returned Myrtle, happily. "And don't you notice how
well I walk, and how little use I have now for the crutches?"

"And can you feel the rosy cheeks and bright eyes, too?" asked Uncle
John, regarding her with much satisfaction.

"The trip was just the thing for Myrtle," added Patsy. "She has grown
stronger every day; but she is not quite well yet, you know, and I
depend a good deal upon the genial climate of California to insure her
complete recovery."

Uncle John did not reply. He remembered the doctor's assertion that a
painful operation would be necessary to finally restore Myrtle to a
normal condition, and his kindly heart disliked to reflect upon the
ordeal before the poor girl.

Haggerty proved a prophet, after all. Each mile they covered opened
new vistas of delight to the eager travelers. The air grew more balmy
as they left the high altitudes and came upon the level country to
the north, of the San Bernardino range of mountains, nor was it
long before they sighted Imperial and sped through miles of country
carpeted with the splendid yellow poppies which the State has adopted
as the emblems of California. And behind this golden robe loomed the
cotton fields of Imperial, one of the most fascinating sights the
traveler may encounter. They made a curve to the right here, and
headed northerly until they came to Salton. Skirting the edge of the
curious Salton Sea they now headed directly west toward Escondido,
finding the roads remarkably good and for long stretches as smooth and
hard as an asphalt boulevard. The three days it took them to cross the
State were days of wonder and delight.

It was not long before they encountered the roses and carnations
growing on every side, which the Major had persistently declared to be
mythical.

"It seems all wrong," asserted Patsy's father, moodily, "for such
delicate flowers to be growing out of doors in midwinter. And look at
the grass! Why, the seasons are changed about. It's Springtime just
now in California."

"The man at the last stop we made told me his roses bloomed the year
round," said Patsy, "And just smell the orange blossoms, will you!
Aren't they sweet, and don't they remind you of brides?"

From Escondido it was a short run to the sea and their first glimpse
of the majestic Pacific was from a high bluff overhanging the water.
From this point the road ran south to San Diego, skirting the coast
along a mountain trail that is admitted to be one of the most
picturesque rides in America.

Descending the hills as they neared San Diego they passed through
fields of splendid wild flowers so extensive and beautiful that
our girls fairly gasped in wonder. The yellow and orange poppies
predominated, but there were acres of wild mustard throwing countless
numbers of gorgeous saffron spikes skyward, and vistas of blue
carconnes, white daisies and blood-red delandres. The yucca was in
bloom, too, and added its mammoth flower to the display.

They did not halt at San Diego, the southernmost city of California,
from whence the Mexican line is in plain sight, but drove to the bay,
where Wampus guided the limousine on to the big ferryboat bound for
Coronado. They all left the car during the brief voyage and watched
the porpoises sporting in the clear water of the bay and gazed
abstractedly at the waving palms on the opposite shore, where lies
nestled "the Crown of the Pacific"--Coronado.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE SILENT MAN


Even the Major smiled benignantly when he reached his appointed room
in the magnificent Hotel del Coronado, which is famed throughout the
world.

"This," said he, "reminds me of New York; and it's the first thing
that has, since I left home."

"Why, Daddy, it isn't like New York at all," protested Patsy, standing
beside him at the broad window overlooking the ocean. "Did you ever
see a palm tree waving in New York; or daisy bushes as tall as a man;
or such masses of roses and flowering vines? And then just notice the
mountains over there--they're in Mexico, I'm told--and this great
headland in the other direction; it's called Point Loma. Oh, I never
imagined any place could be so beautiful!"

The others were equally excited, and Uncle John said, smiling broadly:

"Well, we're here at last, my dears, and I'm sure we are already well
paid for our trip across the continent. What pleasant rooms these are.
If the hotel table is at all to be compared with the house itself we
shall have a happy time here, which means we will stay as long as
possible."

But the table was another surprise, for the meals were equal to any
served in the great Eastern metropolis. Uncle John complimented the
landlord, a cheery faced, fat little man who had at one time managed
a famous New York hotel and had brought his talents and experience to
far California.

"I'm sorry," said this gentle boniface, "that I could not reserve
better rooms for you--for there are some choice views from some
locations. I had a corner suite saved for your party, a suite I
consider the most desirable in the hotel; but an eccentric individual
arrived yesterday who demanded the entire suite, and I had to let him
have it. He will not stay long, and as soon as he goes you shall have
the rooms."

"Who is he?" asked Uncle John.

"A rich miner; a most melancholy and peculiar person, by the way,"
replied landlord Ross. "I believe his name is Jones."

Mr. Merrick started.

"Jones, and a miner?" he said. "What's his other name--Anson?"

"We'll look and see," replied Mr. Ross, turning to the hotel register.
"No; not Anson. He is registered as C.B. Jones, of Boston."

"Oh; that's not the Jones at all," said Uncle John, disappointed.

"It's the Jones who is our guest," replied the landlord, smiling.

Meantime the three girls had gone for a walk along the coast. The
beach is beautiful at Coronado. There is a high sea wall of rock, and
the path runs along its edge almost the length of the promontory. The
rocks are sloping, however, and it is not very difficult to climb down
them to where the waves break against the wall.

Near the hotel they met straggling groups, strolling in either
direction, but half a mile away the promenade was practically
deserted. It was beginning to grow dark, and Beth said, regretfully:

"We must get back, girls, and dress for dinner--an unusual luxury,
isn't it? Our trunks arrived at the hotel two weeks ago, and are now
in our rooms, doubtless, awaiting us to unpack them."

"Don't let's return just yet," begged Myrtle. "I want to see the sun
set."

"It will be gorgeous," said Patsy, glancing at the sky; "but we can
see it from our windows, and as we're a long way from the hotel now I
believe Beth's suggestion is wise."

So they began to retrace their steps. Myrtle still walked with some
difficulty, and they had not proceeded far when Beth exclaimed:

"Look at that man down there!"

Her companions followed her direction and saw standing upon a huge
pile of rocks at the water's edge a slight, solitary figure. Something
in the poise, as he leaned forward staring at the darkened waves--for
the sun was low and cast shadows aslant the water--struck Myrtle as
familiar.

"Oh, girls!" she exclaimed; "it's the Grand Canyon man."

"Why, I believe it is," agreed Patsy. "What is he doing?"

"Nothing," said Beth, briefly. "But he is going to do something, I
think."

While they stared at him from their elevation the man straightened an
instant and cast a hasty glance to either side. The place seemed to
him deserted, for he failed to observe the group of three intently
watching his motions from the high bank overhead. Next moment he
turned back to the water and leaned over the edge of rock again.

"Don't!" cried Myrtle, her clear voice ringing over the lap of the
waves; "please don't!"

He swung around and turned his gaunt features upward to where the
young girl leaned upon her crutches, with clasped hands and a look of
distress upon her sweet face.

"Don't!" she repeated, pleadingly.

He passed his hand over his eyes with a very weary gesture and looked
at Myrtle again--this time quite steadily. She was trembling in every
limb and her cheeks were white with fear.

Slowly--very slowly--the man turned and began to climb the rocks; not
directly upward to where the girls stood, but diagonally, so as to
reach the walk some distance ahead of them. They did not move until he
had gained the path and turned toward the hotel. Then they followed
and kept him in sight until he reached the entrance to the court and
disappeared within.

"I wonder," said Patsy, as they made their way to their rooms,
"whether he really was thinking of plunging into the ocean; or whether
that time at the Grand Canyon he had a notion of jumping into the
chasm."

"If so," added Beth, "Myrtle has saved his life twice. But she can't
be always near to watch the man, and if he has suicidal intentions,
he'll make an end of himself, sooner or later, without a doubt."

"Perhaps," said Myrtle, hesitatingly, "I am quite wrong, and the
strange man had no intention of doing himself an injury. But each time
I obeyed an impulse that compelled me to cry out; and afterward I have
been much ashamed of my forwardness."

They did not see the melancholy man at dinner; but afterward, in the
spacious lobby, they discovered him sitting in a far corner reading a
magazine. He seemed intent on this occupation and paid no attention to
the life around him. The girls called Uncle John's attention to him,
and Mr. Merrick at once recognized him as the same individual they had
met at the Grand Canyon.

"But I am not especially pleased to encounter him again," he said with
a slight frown; "for, if I remember aright, he acted very rudely to
Myrtle and proved unsociable when I made overtures and spoke to him."

"I wonder who he is?" mused Patsy, watching the weary, haggard
features as his eyes slowly followed the lines of his magazine.

"I'll inquire and find out," replied her uncle.

The cherubic landlord was just then pacing up and down the lobby,
pausing here and there to interchange a word with his guests. Uncle
John approached him and said:

"Can you tell me, Mr. Ross, who the gentleman is in the corner?"

The landlord looked around at the corner and smiled.

"That," said he, "is the gentleman we spoke of this afternoon--Mr.
C.B. Jones--the man who usurped the rooms intended for you."

"Rooms?" repeated Uncle John. "Has he a large party, then?"

"He is alone; that is the queer part of it," returned the landlord.
"Nor has he much baggage. But he liked the suite--a parlor with five
rooms opening out of it--and insisted upon having them all, despite
the fact that it is one of the most expensive suites in the hotel. I
said he was eccentric, did I not?"

"You were justified," said Mr. Merrick, thought fully. "Thank you,
sir, for the information."

Even as he rejoined the girls, who were seated together upon a broad
divan, the man arose, laid down his magazine and came slowly down
the room, evidently headed for the elevator. But with a start he
recognized the girl who had accosted him on the beach, and the others
with her, and for an instant came to a full stop before the group, his
sad eyes fixed intently upon Myrtle's face.

The situation was a bit awkward, and to relieve it Uncle John remarked
in his cheery voice:

"Well, Mr. Jones, we meet again, you see."

The man turned slowly and faced him; then bowed in a mechanical way
and proceeded to the elevator, into which he disappeared.

Naturally Uncle John was indignant.

"Confound the fellow!" he exclaimed. "He's worse than a boor. But
perhaps his early education was neglected."

"Did you call him Mr. Jones, sir?" asked Myrtle in a voice that
trembled with excitement.

"Yes, my dear; but it is not your Uncle Anson. I've inquired about
him. The Joneses are pretty thick, wherever you go; but I hope not
many are like this fellow."

"Something's wrong with him," declared Patsy. "He's had some sad
bereavement--a great blow of some sort--and it has made him somber and
melancholy. He doesn't seem to know he acts rudely. You can tell by
the man's eyes that he is unhappy."

"His eyes have neither color nor expression," remarked Beth. "At his
best, this Mr. Jones must have been an undesirable acquaintance."

"You can't be sure of that," returned Patsy; "and I'm positive my
theory is correct. More and more am I inclined to agree with Myrtle
that he is disgusted with life, and longs to end it."

"Let him, then," retorted Uncle John. "I'm sure such a person is of no
use to the world, and if he doesn't like himself he's better out of
it."

That kindly Mr. Merrick should give vent to such a heartless speech
proved how much annoyed he had been by Mr. Jones' discourtesy.

"He might be reclaimed, and--and comforted," said Myrtle, softly.
"When I think of the happiness you have brought into my life, sir, I
long to express my gratitude by making some one else happy."

"You're doing it, little one," he answered, pinching her cheek. "If
we've brought a bit of sunshine into your life we've reaped an ample
reward in your companionship. But if you can find a way to comfort
that man Jones, and fetch him out of his dumps, you are certainly a
more wonderful fairy than I've given you credit for."

Myrtle did not reply to this, although it pleased her. She presently
pleaded weariness and asked permission to return to her room. Beth
and Patsy wanted to go into the great domed ballroom and watch the
dancing; so Myrtle bade them good night and ascended by the elevator
to her floor.




CHAPTER XIX

"THREE TIMES"


Softly stepping over the thick carpets, which deadened the sound of
the crutches--now becoming scarcely necessary to her--the young girl
passed along the corridor, passing angles and turns innumerable on her
way to her room. Some erratic architect certainly concocted the
plan of the Hotel del Coronado. It is a very labyrinth of passages
connecting; its nine hundred rooms, and one has to have a good bump of
location to avoid getting lost in its mazes.

Near one of the abrupt turns a door stood ajar, and in passing Myrtle
glanced in, and then paused involuntarily. It was a small parlor,
prettily furnished, and in a big chair reclined a man whose hands were
both pressed tight against his face, thus covering it completely. But
Myrtle knew him. The thin frame, as well as the despairing attitude,
marked him as the man who had come so strangely into her life and
whose personality affected her so strangely. She now stood in the
dimly lighted corridor looking in upon him with infinite pity, and as
she looked her glance fell upon the table beside him, where something
bright glittered beneath the electric lamps.

Her heart gave a sudden thump of mingled fear and dismay. She knew
intuitively what that "something" was. "Let him," Uncle John had said;
but Myrtle instantly determined _not_ to let him.

She hesitated a moment; but seeing that the man remained motionless,
his eyes still covered, as if lost to all his surroundings, she softly
crept forward and entered the room. She held the crutches under her
arms, but dared not use them for fear of making a noise. Step by step
she stole forward until the table was within reach. Then she stretched
out her hand, seized the revolver, and hid it in the folds of her
blouse.

Turning for a final glance at the man she was startled to find he had
removed his hands and was steadfastly regarding her.

Myrtle leaned heavily on her crutches. She felt faint and miserable,
like a criminal caught in the act. As her eyes fell before the intent
gaze her face turned scarlet with humiliation and chagrin. Still, she
did not attempt to escape, the idea not occurring to her; so for a
time the tableau was picturesque--the lame girl standing motionless
with downcast eyes and the man fixedly staring at her.

"Three times!" he slowly said, in a voice finally stirred by a trace
of emotion. "Three times. My child, why are you so persistent?"

Myrtle tried to be brave and meet his gaze. It was not quite so
difficult now the silent man had spoken.

"Why do you force me to be persistent?" she asked, a tremor in her
voice. "Why are you determined to--to--"

Words failed her, but he nodded to show he understood.

"Because," said he, "I am tired; very tired, my child. It's a big
world; too big, in fact; but there's nothing in it for me any more."

There was expression enough in his voice now; expression of utter
despondency.

"Why?" asked Myrtle, somewhat frightened to find herself so bold.

He did not answer for a long time, but sat reading her mobile face
until a gentler look came into his hard blue eyes.

"It is a story too sad for young ears," he finally replied. "Perhaps,
too, you would not understand it, not knowing or understanding me. I'm
an odd sort of man, well along in years, and I've lived an odd sort
of life. But my story, such as it is, has ended, and I'm too weary to
begin another volume."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Myrtle, earnestly. "Surely this cannot be the
fulfillment and end of your life. If it were, why should _I_ come into
your life just now?"

He stared at her with a surprised--an even startled--look.

"Have you come into my life?" he inquired, in a low, curious tone.

"Haven't I?" she returned. "At the Grand Canyon--"

"I know," he interrupted hastily. "That was your mistake; and mine.
You should not have interfered. I should not have let you interfere."

"But I did," said Myrtle.

"Yes. Somehow your voice sounded like a command, and I obeyed it;
perhaps because no living person has a right to command me. You--you
took me by surprise."

He passed his hand over his eyes with that weary gesture peculiar to
him, and then fell silent.

Myrtle had remained standing. She did not know what to do in this
emergency, or what more to say. The conversation could not be ended in
this summary fashion. The hopeless man needed her in some way; how,
she did not know. Feeling weak and very incompetent to meet the
important crisis properly, the girl crept to a chair opposite the man
and sank into it. Then she leaned her chin upon her hand and looked
pleadingly at her strange acquaintance. He met her eyes frankly.
The hard look in his own seemed to have disappeared, dispelled by a
sympathy that was new to him.

And so they sat, regarding one another silently yet musingly, for a
long time.

"I wish," said Myrtle once, in her softest, sweetest tones, "I could
help you. Some one helped me when I was in great trouble, so I want to
help you."

He did not reply, and another period of silence ensued. But his next
speech showed he had been considering her words.

"Because you have suffered," he said, "you have compassion for others
who suffer. But your trouble is over now?"

"Almost," she said, smiling brightly.

He sighed, but questioned her no farther.

"A while ago," she volunteered, "I had neither friends nor relatives."
He gave her a queer look, then. "I had no money. I had been hurt in an
accident and was almost helpless. But I did not despair, sir--and I am
only an inexperienced girl.

"In my darkest hour I found friends--kind, loving friends--who showed
me a new world that I had not suspected was in existence. I think
the world is like a great mirror," she continued, meditatively, "and
reflects our lives just as we ourselves look upon it. Those who turn
sad faces toward the world find only sadness reflected. But a smile is
reflected in the same way, and cheers and brightens our hearts. You
think there is no pleasure to be had in life. That is because you are
heartsick and--and tired, as you say. With one sad story ended you are
afraid to begin another--a sequel--feeling it would be equally sad.
But why should it be? Isn't the joy or sorrow equally divided in
life?"

"No," he replied.

"A few days ago," she continued earnestly, "we were crossing the
Arizona deserts. It was not pleasant, but we did not despair, for
we knew the world is not all desert and that the land of roses and
sunshine lay just beyond. Now that we're in California we've forgotten
the dreary desert. But you--Why, sir, you've just crossed your desert,
and you believe all the world is bitter and cruel and holds no joy for
you! Why don't you step out bravely into the roses and sunshine of
life, and find the joy that has been denied you?"

He looked into her eyes almost fearfully, but it seemed to her that
his own held a first glimmer of hope.

"Do you believe there can be joy for me anywhere in the world?" he
asked.

"Of course. I tell you there's just as much sweet as there is bitter
in life. Don't I know it? Haven't I proved it? But happiness doesn't
chase people who try to hide from it. It will meet you halfway, but
you've got to do your share to deserve it. I'm not preaching; I've
lived this all out, in my own experience, and know what I'm talking
about. Now as for you, sir, I can see very plainly you haven't been
doing your duty. You've met sorrow and let it conquer you. You've
taken melancholy by the hand and won't let go of it. You haven't tried
to fight for your rights--the rights God gave to every man and expects
him to hold fast to and take advantage of. No, indeed!"

"But what is the use?" he asked, timidly, yet with an eager look in
his face. "You are young, my child; I am nearly old enough to have
been your father. There are things you have not yet learned; things I
hope you will never learn. An oak may stand alone in a field, and be
lonely because it cannot touch boughs with another. A flower may bloom
alone in a garden, and wither and die for want of companionship. God's
wisdom grouped every living thing. He gave Adam a comrade. He created
no solitary thing. But see, my child: although this world contains
countless thousands, there is not one among them I may call my
friend."

"Oh, yes; just one!" said Myrtle quickly. "I am your friend. Not
because you want me, but because you need me. And that's a beginning,
isn't it? I can find other friends for you, among _my_ friends, and
you will be sure to like them because I like them."

This naive suggestion did not affect him as much as the fact that this
fair young girl had confessed herself his friend. He did not look at
Myrtle now; he stared straight ahead, at the wall paper, and his brow
was furrowed as if he was thinking deeply.

Perhaps any other man would have thanked the girl for her sympathy and
her proffered friendship, or at the least have acknowledged it. But
not so this queer Mr. Jones; eccentric, indeed, as the shrewd landlord
had described him. Nor did Myrtle seem to expect an acknowledgment.
It was enough for her that her speech had set him thinking along new
lines.

He sat musing for so long that she finally remembered it was growing
late, and began to fear Patsy and Beth would seek their rooms, which
connected with her own, and find her absent. That would worry them. So
at last she rose softly, took her crutches and turned to go.

"Good night, my--friend," she said.

"Good night, my child," he answered in a mechanical tone, without
rousing from his abstraction.

Myrtle went to her room and found it was not so late as she had
feared. She opened a drawer and placed the revolver in it, not without
a little shudder.

"At any rate," she murmured, with satisfaction, "he will not use this
to-night."




CHAPTER XX

ON POINT LOMA


Next morning a beautiful bunch of roses was brought to Myrtle's
room--roses so magnificent that it seemed impossible they could be
grown out of doors. But there are few hothouses in California, and the
boy who brought the flowers confided to her the information that they
were selected from more than five hundred blooms. She ran to show them
to Patsy and Beth, who were amazed not only by the roses but by the
fact that the queer Mr. Jones had sent them to Myrtle. There was no
card or note accompanying the gift, but after the younger girl had
related her conversation with Mr. Jones the previous evening, they
could not doubt but he had sent the flowers.

"Perhaps," reflected Patsy, "we've been misjudging him. I never beheld
such a stolid, unimpressive countenance in my life; but the man must
have a soul of some sort, or he would not think of sending flowers to
his new friend."

"It's a pretty idea," said Beth. "He wanted to assure Myrtle that he
appreciated her kindness."

"I'm sure he likes me," declared Myrtle, simply. "He wasn't a bit
cross when I ran in and took away his pistol, or when I preached to
him. I really gave him a good talking to, and he didn't object a bit."

"What he needs," commented Beth, "is to get away from himself, and
mingle with people more. I wonder if we could coax him to join us in
our ride to Point Loma."

"Would we care to ask him?" said Patsy. "He's as sour and crabbed in
looks as he is in disposition, and has treated Uncle John's advances
shamefully. I'd like to help Myrtle bring the old fellow back to life;
but perhaps we can find an easier way than to shut him up with us in
an automobile."

"He wouldn't go, I'm sure," declared Myrtle. "He has mellowed a
little--a very little--as these roses prove. But he treated me last
night just as he does Mr. Merrick, even after our conversation. When
I said 'Good night' I had to wait a long time for his answer. But I'd
like you to meet him and help cheer him up; so please let me introduce
him, if there's a chance, and do be nice to him."

"I declare," cried Patsy, laughing, "Myrtle has assumed an air of
proprietorship over the Sad One already."

"She has a right to, for she saved his life," said Beth.

"Three times," Myrtle added proudly. "He told me so himself."

Uncle John heard the story of Myrtle's adventure with considerable
surprise, and he too expressed a wish to aid her in winning Mr. Jones
from his melancholy mood.

"Every man is queer in one way or another," said he, "and I'd say the
women were, too, if you females were not listening. I also imagine a
very rich man has the right to be eccentric, if it pleases him."

"Is Mr. Jones rich, then?" inquired Beth.

"According to the landlord he's rich as Croesus. Made his money in
mining--manipulating stocks, I suppose. But evidently his wealth
hasn't been a comfort to him, or he wouldn't want to shuffle off his
mortal coil and leave it behind"

They did not see the object of this conversation before leaving for
the trip to Point Loma--a promontory that juts out far into the
Pacific. It is reached by a superb macadamized boulevard, which passes
down the north edge of the promontory, rounds the corner where stands
the lighthouse, and comes back along the southern edge, all the time a
hundred feet or more in elevation above the ocean.

The view from the Point is unsurpassed. Wampus stopped his car beside
a handsomely appointed automobile that was just then deserted.

"Some one is here before us," remarked Patsy. "But that is not
strange. The wonder is that crowds are not here perpetually."

"It is said," related the Major, who had really begun to enjoy
California, "that the view from this Point includes more varied
scenery than any other that is known in the world. Here we see the
grand San Bernardino range of mountains; the Spanish Bight on the
Mexican shore; the pretty city of San Diego climbing its hills, with
the placid bay in front, where float the warships of the Pacific
Squadron; the broad stretch of orange and lemon groves, hedged with
towering palm trees; Santa Catalina and the Coronado Islands; the blue
Pacific rolling in front and rugged Loma with its rocky cliffs behind.
What more could we ask to see from any one viewpoint?"

"Don't forget the monster hotel, with its hundred towers and gables,
dominating the strip of land between the bay and the ocean," added
Beth. "How near it seems, and yet it is many miles away."

Some one had told them that moonstones were to be found on the beach
at the base of the cliff; so they all climbed down the steep path,
followed by Mumbles, who had not perceptibly grown in size during the
trip but had acquired an adventurous disposition which, coupled with
his native inquisitiveness, frequently led him into trouble.

Now, when they had reached the narrow beach, Mumbles ran ahead, passed
around the corner of a cliff that almost touched the water, and was
presently heard barking furiously.

"Sounds as if he scented game," said Patsy.

"A turtle, perhaps, or a big fish washed ashore," suggested the Major.

But now the small dog's voice changed suddenly and became a succession
of yelps expressing mingled pain and terror.

"Oh, he's hurt!" cried Myrtle; and they all hurried forward, Uncle
John leading them on a run, and passed around the big rock to rescue
their pet.

Some one was before them, however. The foolish dog had found a huge
crab in the sand and, barking loudly, had pushed his muzzle against
the creature, with the result that the crab seized his black nose in
a gripping claw and pinched as hard as it was able. Mumbles tried to
back away, madly howling the while; but the crab, although the smaller
antagonist, gripped a rock with its other claw and held on, anchoring
the terrified dog to the spot.

But help was at hand. A tall, thin man hurried to the rescue, and just
as Uncle John came in sight, leading his procession, a knife severed
the crab's claw and Mumbles was free. Seeing his mistress, the puppy,
still whining with pain, hurried to her for comfort, while Uncle John
turned to the man and said:

"Thank you, Mr. Jones, for assisting our poor beast. Mumbles is an
Eastern dog, you know, and inexperienced in dealing with crabs."

Mr. Jones was examining the claw, the despoiled owner of which had
quickly slid into the water.

"It is a species of crawfish," he observed, meditatively. Then, seeing
the girls approach, he straightened up and rather awkwardly lifted his
hat.

The gesture surprised them all. Heretofore, when they had met, the man
had merely stared and turned away, now his attempt at courtesy was
startling because unexpected.

Myrtle came close to his side.

"How nice to find you here, Mr. Jones," she said brightly. "And oh, I
must thank you for my lovely roses."

He watched her face with evident interest and it seemed that his own
countenance had become less haggard and sad than formerly.

"Let me introduce my friends," said the girl, with sudden recollection
of her duty. "This is Mr. Merrick, my good friend and benefactor; and
this is Major Doyle and his daughter Miss Patricia Doyle, both of whom
have the kindest hearts in the world; Miss Beth De Graf, Mr. Merrick's
niece, has watched over and cared for me like a sister, and--oh, I
forgot; Miss Patsy is Mr. Merrick's niece, too. So now you know them
all."

The man nodded briefly his acknowledgment.

"You--you are Mr. Jones, I believe, of--of Boston?"

"Once of Boston," he repeated mechanically. Then he looked at her and
added: "Go on."

"Why--what--I don't understand," she faltered. "Have I overlooked
anyone?"

"Only yourself," he said.

"Oh; but I--I met you last night."

"You did not tell me your name," he reminded her.

"I'm Myrtle," she replied, smiling in her relief. "Myrtle Dean."

"Myrtle Dean!" His voice was harsh; almost a shout.

"Myrtle Dean. And I--I'm from Chicago; but I don't live there any
more."

He stood motionless, looking at the girl with a fixed expression that
embarrassed her and caused her to glance appealingly at Patsy. Her
friend understood and came to her rescue with some inconsequent remark
about poor Mumbles, who was still moaning and rubbing; his pinched
nose against Patsy's chin to ease the pain.

Mr. Jones paid little heed to Miss Doyle's observation, but as Myrtle
tried to hide behind Beth Mr. Merrick took the situation in hand by
drawing the man's attention to the scenery, and afterward inquiring if
he was searching for moonstones.

The conversation now became general, except that Mr. Jones remained
practically silent He seemed to try to interest himself in the chatter
around him, but always his eyes would stray to Myrtle's face and hold
her until she found an opportunity to turn away.

"We've luncheon in the car," announced Uncle John, after a time.
"Won't you join us, Mr. Jones?"

"Yes," was the unconventional reply. The man was undoubtedly
abstracted and did not know he was rude. He quietly followed them up
the rocks and when they reached the automobile remained by Myrtle's
side while Wampus brought out the lunch basket and Beth and Patsy
spread the cloth upon the grass and unpacked the hamper.

Mr. Jones ate merely a mouthful, but he evidently endeavored to follow
the conversation and take an interest in what was said. He finally
became conscious that his continuous gaze distressed Myrtle, and
thereafter strove to keep his eyes from her face. They would creep
back to it, from time to time; but Beth, who was watching him
curiously, concluded he was making a serious effort to deport himself
agreeably and credited him with a decided improvement in manners as
their acquaintance with him progressed.

After luncheon, when their return by way of Old Town and the Spanish
Mission was proposed, Mr. Jones said, pointing to the car that stood
beside their own:

"This is my automobile. I drive it myself. I would like Myrtle Dean to
ride back with me."

The girl hesitated, but quickly deciding she must not retreat, now she
had practically begun the misanthrope's reformation, she replied:

"I will be very glad to. But won't you take one of my friends, also?
That will divide the party more evenly."

He looked down at his feet, thoughtfully considering the proposition.

"I'll go with you," said Beth, promptly. "Get into the front seat with
Mr. Jones, Myrtle, and I'll ride behind."

The man made no protest. He merely lifted Myrtle in his arms and
gently placed her in the front seat. Beth, much amused, took the seat
behind, unassisted save that the Major opened the door for her. Mr.
Jones evidently understood his car. Starting the engines without
effort he took his place at the wheel and with a nod to Mr. Merrick
said:

"Lead on, sir; I will follow."

Wampus started away. He was displeased with the other car. It did
not suit him at all. And aside from the fact that the sour-faced
individual who owned it had taken away two of Wampus' own passengers,
the small shaggy Mumbles, who had been the established companion of
Uncle John's chauffeur throughout all the long journey, suddenly
deserted him. He whined to go with the other car, and when Patsy
lifted him aboard he curled down beside the stranger as if thoroughly
satisfied. Patsy knew why, and was amused that Mumbles showed his
gratitude to Mr. Jones for rescuing him from the crab; but Wampus
scowled and was distinctly unhappy all the way to Old Town.

"Him mebbe fine gentleman," muttered the Canadian to the Major; "but
if so he make a disguise of it. Once I knew a dog thief who resemble
him; but perhaps Mumble he safe as long as Miss Myrtle an' Miss Beth
they with him."

"Don't worry," said the Major, consolingly. "I'll keep my eye on the
rascal. But he's a fine driver, isn't he?"

"Oh, _that_!" retorted Wampus, scornfully. "Such little cheap car like
that he drive himself."

At Old Town Mr. Jones left them, saying he had been to the Mission and
did not care for it. But as he drove his car away there was a gentler
and more kindly expression upon his features than any of them had ever
seen there before, and Myrtle suspected her charm was working and the
regeneration really begun.




CHAPTER XXI

A TALE OF WOE


That evening after dinner, as Mr. Merrick sat alone in the hotel
lobby, the girls having gone to watch the Major bowl tenpins, Mr.
Jones approached and sat down in the chair beside him.

Uncle John greeted the man with an attempt at cordiality. He could not
yet bring himself to like his personality, but on Myrtle's account and
because he was himself generous enough to wish to be of service to
anyone so forlorn and unhappy, he treated Mr. Jones with more respect
than he really thought he deserved.

"Tell me, Mr. Merrick," was the abrupt request, "where you found
Myrtle Dean."

Uncle John told him willingly. There was no doubt but Myrtle had
interested the man.

"My girls found her on the train between Chicago and Denver," he
began. "She was on her way to join her uncle in Leadville."

"What is her uncle's name?"

"Anson Jones. But the child was almost helpless, ill and without
friends or money. She was not at all sure her uncle was still in
Leadville, in which case she would be at the mercy of a cold world. So
I telegraphed and found that Anson Jones had been gone from the mining
camp for several months. Do you know, sir, I at first suspected you
might be the missing uncle? For I heard you were a miner and found
that your name is Jones. But I soon discovered you are not Anson
Jones, but C.B. Jones--which alters the case considerably."

Mr. Jones nodded absently.

"Tell me the rest," he said.

Uncle John complied. He related the manner in which Beth and Patsy
had adopted Myrtle, the physician's examination and report upon her
condition, and then told the main points of their long but delightful
journey from Albuquerque to San Diego in the limousine.

"It was one of the most fortunate experiments we have ever tried," he
concluded; "for the child has been the sweetest and most agreeable
companion imaginable, and her affection and gratitude have amply
repaid us for anything we have done for her. I am determined she shall
not leave us, sir. When we return to New York I shall consult the best
specialist to be had, and I am confident she can be fully cured and
made as good as new."

The other man had listened intently, and when the story was finished
he sat silent for a time, as if considering and pondering over what he
had heard. Then, without warning, he announced quietly:

"I am Anson Jones."

Uncle John fairly gasped for breath.

"_You_ Anson Jones!" he exclaimed. Then, with plausible suspicion he
added: "I myself saw that you are registered as C.B. Jones."

"It is the same thing," was the reply. "My name is Collanson--but my
family always called me 'Anson', when I had a family--and by that name
I was best known in the mining camps. That is what deceived you."

"But--dear me!--I don't believe Myrtle knows her uncle's name is
Collanson."

"Probably not. Her mother, sir, my sister, was my only remaining
relative, the only person on earth who cared for me--although I
foolishly believed another did. I worked for success as much on
Kitty's account--Kitty was Myrtle's mother--as for my own sake. I
intended some day to make her comfortable and happy, for I knew her
husband's death had left her poor and friendless. I did not see her
for years, nor write to her often; it was not my way. But Kitty always
knew I loved her."

He paused and sat silent a moment. Then he resumed, in his quiet, even
tones:

"There is another part of my story that you must know to understand
me fully; to know why I am now a hopeless, desperate man; or was
until--until last night, perhaps. Some years ago, when in Boston, I
fell in love with a beautiful girl. I am nearly fifty, and she was not
quite thirty, but it never occurred to me that I was too old to win
her love, and she frankly confessed she cared for me. But she said she
could not marry a poor man and would therefore wait for me to make a
fortune. Then I might be sure she would marry me. I believed her. I do
not know why men believe women. It is an absurd thing to do. I did it;
but other men have been guilty of a like folly. Ah, how I worked and
planned! One cannot always make a fortune in a short time. It took me
years, and all the time she renewed her promises and kept my hopes and
my ambitions alive.

"At last I won the game, as I knew I should do in time. It was a big
strike. I discovered the 'Blue Bonnet' mine, and sold a half interest
in it for a million. Then I hurried to Boston to claim my bride....
She had been married just three months, after waiting, or pretending
to wait, for me for nearly ten years! She married a poor lawyer, too,
after persistently refusing me because _I_ was poor. She laughed at
my despair and coldly advised me to find some one else to share my
fortune."

He paused again and wearily passed his hand over his eyes--a familiar
gesture, as Myrtle knew. His voice had grown more and more dismal as
he proceeded, and just now he seemed as desolate and unhappy as when
first they saw him at the Grand Canyon.

"I lived through it somehow," he continued; "but the blow stunned me.
It stuns me yet. Like a wounded beast I slunk away to find my sister,
knowing she would try to comfort me. She was dead. Her daughter
Myrtle, whom I had never seen, had been killed in an automobile
accident. That is what her aunt, a terrible woman named Martha Dean,
told me, although now I know it was a lie, told to cover her own
baseness in sending an unprotected child to the far West to seek an
unknown uncle. I paid Martha Dean back the money she claimed she had
spent for Myrtle's funeral; that was mere robbery, I suppose, but not
to be compared with the crime of her false report. I found myself
bereft of sweetheart, sister--even an unknown niece. Despair claimed
me. I took the first train for the West, dazed and utterly despondent.
Some impulse led me to stop off at the Grand Canyon, and there I saw
the means of ending all my misery. But Myrtle interfered."

Uncle John, now thoroughly interested and sympathetic, leaned over and
said solemnly:

"The hand of God was in that!"

Mr. Jones nodded.

"I am beginning to believe it," he replied. "The girl's face won me
even in that despairing mood. She has Kitty's eyes."

"They are beautiful eyes," said Uncle John, earnestly. "Sir, you have
found in your niece one of the sweetest and most lovely girls that
ever lived. I congratulate you!"

Mr. Jones nodded again. His mood had changed again since they began
to speak of Myrtle. His eyes now glowed with pleasure and pride. He
clasped Mr. Merrick's hand in his own as he said with feeling:

"She has saved me, sir. Even before I knew she was my niece I began to
wonder if it would not pay me to live for her sake. And now--"

"And now you are sure of it," cried Uncle John, emphatically. "But who
is to break the news to Myrtle?"

"No one, just yet," was the reply. "Allow me, sir, if you please, to
keep her in ignorance of the truth a little longer. I only made the
discovery myself today, you see, and I need time to think it all out
and determine how best to take advantage of my good fortune."

"I shall respect your wish, sir," said Mr. Merrick.

The girls came trooping back then, and instead of running away Anson
Jones remained to talk with them.

Beth and Patsy were really surprised to find the "Sad One" chatting
pleasantly with Uncle John. The Major looked at the man curiously, not
understanding the change in him. But Myrtle was quite proud of the
progress he was making and his improved spirits rendered the girl very
happy indeed. Why she should take such an interest in this man she
could not have explained, except that he had been discouraged and
hopeless and she had succeeded in preventing him from destroying his
life and given him courage to face the world anew. But surely that was
enough, quite sufficient to give her a feeling of "proprietorship," as
Patsy had expressed it, in this queer personage. Aside from all this,
she was growing to like the man who owed so much to her. Neither Patsy
nor Beth could yet see much to interest them or to admire in his
gloomy character; but Myrtle's intuition led her to see beneath the
surface, and she knew there were lovable traits in Mr. Jones' nature
if he could only be induced to display them.




CHAPTER XXII

THE CONFESSION


After that evening the man attached himself to the party on every
possible occasion. Sometimes in their trips around Coronado he rode
in their automobile, at other times he took Myrtle, and perhaps one
other, in his own car. Every day he seemed brighter and more cheerful,
until even Major Doyle admitted he was not a bad companion.

Three weeks later they moved up to Los Angeles, taking two days for
the trip and stopping at Riverside and Redlands on the way. They
established their headquarters at one of the handsome Los Angeles
hotels and from there made little journeys through the surrounding
country, the garden spot of Southern California. One day they went to
Pasadena, which boasts more splendid residences than any city of its
size in the world; at another time they visited Hollywood, famed as
"the Paradise of Flowers." Both mountains and sea were within easy
reach, and there was so much to do that the time passed all too
swiftly.

It was on their return from such a day's outing that Myrtle met with
her life's greatest surprise. Indeed, the surprise was shared by all
but Uncle John, who had religiously kept the secret of Mr. Jones'
identity.

As they reached the hotel this eventful evening Mr. Merrick said to
the girls:

"After you have dressed for dinner meet us on the parlor floor. We
dine privately to-night."

They were mildly astonished at the request, but as Uncle John was
always doing some unusual thing they gave the matter little thought.
However, on reaching the parlor floor an hour later they found Mr.
Merrick, the Major and Mr. Jones in a group awaiting them, and
all were garbed in their dress suits, with rare flowers in their
buttonholes.

"What is it, then?" asked Patsy. "A treat?"

"I think so," said Uncle John, smiling. "Your arm, please, Miss
Doyle."

The Major escorted Beth and Mr. Jones walked solemnly beside Myrtle,
who still used crutches, but more as a matter of convenience than
because they were necessary. At the end of a corridor a waiter threw
open the door of a small but beautiful banquet room, where a round
table, glistening with cut glass and silver, was set for six. In the
center of the table was a handsome centerpiece decorated with vines
of myrtle, while the entire room was filled with sprays of the dainty
vines, alive with their pretty blue flowers.

"Goodness me!" exclaimed Patsy, laughing gleefully. "This seems to be
our little Myrtle's especial spread. Who is the host, Uncle John?"

"Mr. Jones, of course," announced Beth, promptly.

Myrtle blushed and glanced shyly at Mr. Jones. His face was fairly
illumined with pleasure. He placed her in the seat of honor and said
gravely:

"This is indeed Myrtle's entertainment, for she has found something.
It is also partly my own thanksgiving banquet, my friends; for I, too,
have found something."

His tone was so serious that all remained silent as they took their
seats, and during the many courses served the conversation was less
lively than on former occasions when there had been no ceremony.
Myrtle tried hard to eat, but there was a question in her eyes--a
question that occupied her all through the meal. When, finally, the
dessert was served and the servants had withdrawn and left them to
themselves, the girl could restrain her curiosity no longer.

"Tell me, Mr. Jones," she said, turning to him as he sat beside her;
"what have you found?"

He was deliberate as ever in answering.

"You must not call me 'Mr. Jones,' hereafter," said he.

"Why not? Then, what _shall_ I call you?" she returned, greatly
perplexed.

"I think it would be more appropriate for you to call me 'Uncle
Anson.'"

"Uncle Anson! Why, Uncle Anson is--is--"

She paused, utterly bewildered, but with a sudden suspicion that made
her head whirl.

"It strikes me, Myrtle," said Uncle John, cheerfully, "that you have
never been properly introduced to Mr. Jones. If I remember aright you
scraped acquaintance with him and had no regular introduction. So I
will now perform that agreeable office. Miss Myrtle Dean, allow me to
present your uncle, Mr. Collanson B. Jones."

"Collanson!" repeated all the girls, in an astonished chorus.

"That is my name," said Mr. Jones, the first smile they had seen
radiating his grim countenance. "All the folks at home, among them my
sister Kitty--your mother, my dear--called me 'Anson'; and that is
why, I suppose, old Martha Dean knew me only as your 'Uncle Anson.'
Had she told you my name was Collanson you might have suspected
earlier that 'C.B. Jones' was your lost uncle. Lost only because he
was unable to find you, Myrtle. While you were journeying West in
search of him he was journeying East. But I'm glad, for many reasons,
that you did not know me. It gave me an opportunity to learn the
sweetness of your character. Now I sincerely thank God that He led you
to me, to reclaim me and give me something to live for. If you will
permit me, my dear niece, I will hereafter devote my whole life to
you, and earnestly try to promote your happiness."

During this long speech Myrtle had sat wide eyed and white, watching
his face and marveling at the strangeness of her fate. But she was
very, very glad, and young enough to quickly recover from the shock.

There was a round of applause from Patsy, Beth, the Major and
Uncle John, which served admirably to cover their little friend's
embarrassment and give her time to partially collect herself. Then she
turned to Mr. Jones and with eyes swimming with tears tenderly kissed
his furrowed cheek.

"Oh, Uncle Anson; I'm _so_ happy!" she said.

Of course Myrtle's story is told, now. But it may be well to add that
Uncle Anson did for her all that Uncle John had intended doing, and
even more. The consultation with a famous New York specialist, on
their return a month later, assured the girl that no painful operation
was necessary. The splendid outing she had enjoyed, with the fine air
of the far West, had built up her health to such an extent that nature
remedied the ill she had suffered. Myrtle took no crutches back to New
York--a city now visited for the first time in her life--nor did she
ever need them again. The slight limp she now has will disappear
in time, the doctors say, and the child is so radiantly happy that
neither she nor her friends notice the limp at all.

Patsy Doyle, as owner of the pretty flat building on Willing Square,
has rented to Uncle Anson the apartment just opposite that of the
Doyles, and Mr. Jones has furnished it cosily to make a home for his
niece, to whom he is so devoted that Patsy declares her own doting and
adoring father is fairly outclassed.

The Major asserts this is absurd; but he has acquired a genuine
friendship for Anson Jones, who is no longer sad but has grown lovable
under Myrtle's beneficent influence.



CHAPTER I.

UNCLE JOHN'S FARM.

"How did I happen to own a farm?" asked Uncle John, interrupting his
soup long enough to fix an inquiring glance upon Major Doyle, who
sat opposite.

"By virtue of circumstance, my dear sir," replied the Major, composedly.
"It's a part of my duty, in attending to those affairs you won't look
afther yourself, to lend certain sums of your money to needy and
ambitious young men who want a start in life."

"Oh, Uncle! Do you do that?" exclaimed Miss Patricia Doyle, who sat
between her uncle and father and kept an active eye upon both.

"So the Major says," answered Uncle John, dryly.

"And it's true," asserted the other. "He's assisted three or four score
young men to start in business in the last year, to my certain
knowledge, by lending them sums ranging from one to three thousand
dollars. And it's the most wasteful and extravagant charity I ever
heard of."

"But I'm so glad!" cried Patsy, clapping her hands with a delighted
gesture. "It's a splendid way to do good--to help young men to get a
start in life. Without capital, you know, many a young fellow would
never get his foot on the first round of the ladder."

"And many will never get it there in any event," declared the Major,
with a shake of his grizzled head. "More than half the rascals that John
helps go to the dogs entirely, and hang us up for all they've borrowed."

"I told you to help _deserving_ young men," remarked Uncle John, with a
scowl at his brother-in-law.

"And how can I tell whether they're desarving or not?" retorted Major
Doyle, fiercely. "Do ye want me to become a sleuth, or engage detectives
to track the objects of your erroneous philanthropy? I just have to form
a judgment an' take me chances; and whin a poor devil goes wrong I
charge your account with the loss."

"But some of them must succeed," ventured Patsy, in a conciliatory tone.

"Some do," said John Merrick; "and that repays me for all my trouble."

"All _your_ throuble, sir?" queried the Major; "you mane all _my_
throuble--well, and your money. And a heap of throuble that confounded
farm has cost me, with one thing and another."

"What of it?" retorted the little round faced millionaire, leaning back
in his chair and staring fixedly at the other. "That's what I employ
you for."

"Now, now, gentlemen!" cried Patsy, earnestly. "I'll have no business
conversation at the table. You know my rules well enough."

"This isn't business," asserted the Major.

"Of course not," agreed Uncle John, mildly. "No one has any business
owning a farm. How did it happen. Major?"

The old soldier had already forgotten his grievance. He quarreled
persistently with his wealthy employer and brother-in-law--whom he
fairly adored--to prevent the possibility (as he often confided to
Patsy) of his falling down and worshiping him. John Merrick was a
multi-millionaire, to be sure; but there were palliating circumstances
that almost excused him. He had been so busily occupied in industry that
he never noticed how his wealth was piling up until he discovered it by
accident. Then he promptly retired, "to give the other fellows a
chance," and he now devoted his life to simple acts of charity and the
welfare and entertainment of his three nieces. He had rescued Major
Doyle and his daughter from a lowly condition and placed the former in
the great banking house of Isham, Marvin & Company, where John Merrick's
vast interests were protected and his income wisely managed. He had
given Patsy this cosy little apartment house at 3708 Willing Square and
made his home with her, from which circumstance she had come to be
recognized as his favorite niece.

John Merrick was sixty years old. He was short, stout and chubby-faced,
with snow-white hair, mild blue eyes and an invariably cheery smile.
Simple in his tastes, modest and retiring, lacking the education and
refinements of polite society, but shrewd and experienced in the affairs
of the world, the little man found his greatest enjoyment in the family
circle that he had been instrumental in founding. Being no longer
absorbed in business, he had come to detest its every detail, and so
allowed his bankers to care for his fortune and his brother-in-law to
disburse his income, while he himself strove to enjoy life in a shy and
boyish fashion that was as unusual in a man of his wealth as it was
admirable. He had never married.

Patricia was the apple of Uncle John's eye, and the one goddess
enshrined in her doting father's heart. Glancing at her, as she sat here
at table in her plain muslin gown, a stranger would be tempted to wonder
why. She was red-haired, freckled as a robin's egg, pug-nosed and
wide-mouthed. But her blue eyes were beautiful, and they sparkled with a
combination of saucy mischief and kindly consideration for others that
lent her face an indescribable charm.

Everyone loved Patsy Doyle, and people would gaze longer at her
smiling-lips and dancing eyes than upon many a more handsome but less
attractive face. She was nearly seventeen years old, not very tall, and
her form, to speak charitably, was more neat than slender.

"A while ago," said the Major, resuming the conversation as he carved
the roast, "a young fellow came to me who had invented a new sort of
pump to inflate rubber tires. He wanted capital to patent the pump and
put it on the market. The thing looked pretty good, John; so I lent him
a thousand of your money."

"Quite right," returned Uncle John, nodding.

"But pretty soon he came back with a sad tale. He was in a bad fix.
Another fellow was contesting his patent and fighting hard to head him
off. It would take a lot of money to fight back--three thousand, at
least. But he was decent about it, after all. His father had left him a
little farm at Millville. He couldn't say what it was worth, but there
were sixty acres and some good buildings, and he would deed it to you as
security if you would let him have three thousand more."

"So you took the farm and gave him the money?"

"I did, sir. Perhaps I am to blame; but I liked the young fellow's
looks. He was clean-cut and frank, and believed in his pump. I did more.
At the climax of the struggle I gave another thousand, making five
thousand in all."

"Well?"

"It's gone, John; and you've got the farm. The other fellows were too
clever for my young friend, Joseph Wegg, and knocked out his patent."

"I'm so sorry!" said Patsy, sympathetically.

The Major coughed.

"It's not an unusual tale, my dear; especially when John advances the
money," he replied.

"What became of the young man?" asked the girl.

"He's a competent chauffeur, and so he went to work driving an
automobile."

"Where is Millville?" inquired Uncle John, thoughtfully.

"Somewhere at the north of the State, I believe."

"Have you investigated the farm at all?"

"I looked up a real estate dealer living at Millville, and wrote him
about the Wegg farm. He said if any one wanted the place very badly it
might sell for three thousand dollars."

"Humph!"

"But his best information was to the effect that no one wanted it at
all."

Patsy laughed.

"Poor Uncle John!" she said.

The little man, however, was serious. For a time he ate with great
deliberation and revolved an interesting thought in his mind.

"Years ago." said he, "I lived in a country town; and I love the smell
of the meadows and the hum of the bees in the orchards. Any orchards at
my farm, Major?"

"Don't know, sir."

"Pretty soon," continued Uncle John, "it's going to be dreadfully hot in
New York, and we'll have to get away."

"Seashore's the place," remarked the Major. "Atlantic City, or
Swampscott, or--"

"Rubbish!" growled the other man, impatiently. "The girls and I have
just come from Europe. We've had enough sea to last us all _this_
season, at least. What we pine for is country life--pure milk, apple
trees and new mown hay."

"We, Uncle?" said Patsy.

"Yes, my dear. A couple of months on the farm will do all of my nieces
good. Beth is still with Louise, you know, and they must find the city
deadly dull, just now. The farm's the thing. And the Major can run up to
see us for a couple of weeks in the hot weather, and we'll all have a
glorious, lazy time."

"And we can take Mary along to do the cooking," suggested Patsy,
entering into the idea enthusiastically.

"And eat in our shirt-sleeves!" said Uncle John, with a glowing face.

"And have a cow and some pigs!" cried the girl.

"Pah!" said the Major, scornfully. "You talk as if it were a real farm,
instead of a place no one would have as a gift."

Uncle John looked sober again.

"Anyone live on the place, Major?" he inquired.

"I believe not. It's gone to ruin and decay the last few years."

"But it could be put into shape?"

"Perhaps so; at an expense that will add to your loss."

"Never mind that."

"If you want farm life, why don't you rent a respectable farm?" demanded
the Major.

"No; this is my farm. I own it, and it's my bounded duty to live on it,"
said Uncle John, stubbornly. "Write to that real estate fellow at
Millville tomorrow and tell him to have the place fixed up and put into
ship-shape order as quickly as possible. Tell him to buy some cows and
pigs and chickens, and hire a man to look after them. Also a horse and
buggy, some saddle horses----"

"Go slow, John. Don't leave such a job to a country real estate dealer.
If I remember right the fellow wrote like a blacksmith. If you want
horses and rigs, let Hutchinson send you down the right sort, with an
experienced groom and stable hands. But I'm not sure there will be a
place to put them."

"Oh, Uncle!" exclaimed Patsy; "don't let us have all those luxuries. Let
us live a simple life on the farm, and not degrade its charms by adding
city fixin's. The cow and the chickens are all right, but let's cut out
the horses until we get there. Don't you know, dear, that a big
establishment means lots of servants, and servants mean worry and
strife? I want to let down the bars for the cow when she moos, and milk
her myself."

"It takes a skilled mechanic to milk a cow," objected the Major.

"But Patsy's right!" cried her uncle, with conviction. "We don't want
any frills at all. Just tell your man, Major, to put the place into good
living condition."

"Patrichia," softly remarked the Major, with an admiring glance at his
small daughter, "has more sinse in her frizzled head than both of us put
together."

"If she hadn't more than you," retorted Uncle John, with a grin, "I'd
put a candle inside her noodle and call her a Jack-Lantern."



CHAPTER II.

THE AGENT.

The Major hunted up the real estate dealer's former letter as soon as he
reached his office next morning. The printed letter-head, somewhat
blurred, because too much ink had been used, read as follows:

  Marshall McMahon McNutt,
  Real Estate Dealer & Horses to Pasture
  by the week or month.

  Also Plymouth Rock Hens & Road Commissioner
  Agent for Radley's Lives of the Saints
  Insurance and Watermelons My Specialty

  Millville, Mount County, N.Y.

The Major shook his head doubtfully as he read the above announcement;
but Mr. McNutt was the only known person to whom he could appeal to
carry out John Merrick's orders. So he dictated the following letter:


_Dear Sir_:

_Mr. John Merrick, the present owner of the Wegg farm at Millville,
desires to spend his summer vacation on the premises, and therefore
requests you to have the house and grounds put in first-class shape as
soon as possible, and to notify me directly the work is done. Have the
house thoroughly cleaned, the grass mowed around it and the barns and
outbuildings repaired wherever it may be necessary. You are also
instructed to procure for Mr. Merrick's use a good Jersey cow, some pigs
and a dozen or so barnyard fowls. As several ladies will accompany the
owner and reside with him on the place, he would like you to report what
necessary furniture, if any, will be required for their comfort. Send
your bill to me and it will receive prompt attention_.

After several days this reply came:

_Mister Doyle you must be crazy as a loon. Send me fifty cold dollars as
an evvidence of good fayth and I wull see what can be done. Old Hucks is
livin on the place yit do you want him to git out or what? Yours fer a
square deal Marshall McMahon McNutt_.

"John," said the Major, exhibiting this letter, "you're on the wrong
tack. The man is justified in thinking we're crazy. Give up this idea
and think of something else to bother me."

But the new proprietor of the Wegg farm was obdurate. During the past
week he had indulged in sundry sly purchases, which had been shipped, in
his name to Chazy Junction, the nearest railway station to Millville.
Therefore, the "die had been cast," as far as Mr. Merrick was concerned,
for the purchases were by this time at the farm, awaiting him, and he
could not back out without sacrificing them. They included a set of
gardening tools, several hammocks, croquet and tennis sets, and a
remarkable collection of fishing tackle, which the sporting-goods man
had declared fitted to catch anything that swam, from a whale to a
minnow. Also, Uncle John decided to dress the part of a rural gentleman,
and ordered his tailor to prepare a corduroy fishing costume, a suit of
white flannel, one of khaki, and some old-fashioned blue jean overalls,
with apron front, which, when made to order by the obliging tailor, cost
about eighteen dollars a suit. To forego the farm meant to forego all
these luxuries, and Mr. Merrick was unequal to the sacrifice. Why, only
that same morning he had bought a charming cottage piano and shipped it
to the Junction for Patsy's use. That seemed to settle the matter
definitely. To be balked of his summer vacation on his own farm was a
thing Mr. Merrick would not countenance for a moment.

"Give me that letter, Major," he said; "I'll run this enterprise
myself."

The Major resigned with a sigh of relief.

Uncle John promptly sent the real estate agent a draft for five hundred
dollars, with instructions to get the farm in shape for occupancy at the
earliest possible day.

"If Old Hucks is a farm hand and a bachelor," he wrote, "let him stay
till I come and look him over. If he's a married man and has a family,
chuck him out at once. I'm sure you are a man of good taste and
judgment. Look over the furniture in the house and telegraph me what
condition it is in. Everything about the place must be made cozy and
comfortable, but I wish to avoid an appearance of vulgarity or
extravagance."

The answer to this was a characteristic telegram:

_Furniture on the bum, like everything else. Will do the best I can.
McNutt_.

Uncle John did not display this discouraging report to Patsy or her
father. A little thought on the matter decided him to rectify the
deficiencies, in so far as it lay in his power. He visited a large
establishment making a specialty of "furnishing homes complete," and
ordered a new kitchen outfit, including a modern range, a mission style
outfit for a dining-room, dainty summer furniture for the five chambers
to be occupied by his three nieces, the Major and himself, and a variety
of lawn benches, chairs, etc.

"Look after the details," he said to the dealer. "Don't neglect anything
that is pretty or useful."

"I won't, sir," replied the man, who knew his customer was "the great
John Merrick," who could furnish a city "complete," if he wished to, and
not count the cost.

Everything was to be shipped in haste to the Junction, and Uncle John
wrote McNutt to have it delivered promptly to the farm and put in order.

"As soon as things are in shape," he wrote, "wire me to that effect and
I'll come down. But don't let any grass grow under your feet. I'm a man
who requires prompt service."

The days were already getting uncomfortably warm, and the little man was
nervously anxious to see his farm. So were the nieces, for that matter,
who were always interested in the things that interested their eccentric
uncle. Besides Patricia Doyle, whom we have already introduced, these
nieces were Miss Louise Merrick, who had just celebrated her eighteenth
birthday, and Miss Elizabeth--or "Beth"--De Graf, now well past fifteen.
Beth lived in a small town in Ohio, but was then visiting her city
cousin Louise, so that both girls were not only available but eager to
accompany Uncle John to his new domain and assist him to enjoy his
summer outing.



CHAPTER III.

MILLVILLE HEARS EXCITING NEWS.

Millville is rather difficult to locate on the map, for the railroads
found it impossible to run a line there, _Chazy_ Junction, the nearest
station, is several miles away, and the wagon road ascends the foothills
every step of the distance. Finally you pass between Mount Parnassus
(whoever named it that?) and Little Bill Hill and find yourself on an
almost level plateau some four miles in diameter, with a placid lake in
the center and a fringe of tall pines around the edge. At the South,
where tower the northern sentries of the Adirondacks, a stream called
Little Bill Creek comes splashing and dashing over the rocks to force
its way noisily into the lake. When it emerges again it is humble and
sedate, and flows smoothly to Hooker's Falls, from whence it soon joins
a tributary that leads it to far away Champlain.

Millville is built where the Little Bill rushes into the lake. The old
mill, with its race and sluice-gates, still grinds wearily the scanty
dole of grain fed into its hoppers and Silas Caldwell takes his toll and
earns his modest living just as his father did before him and "Little
Bill" Thompson did before him.

Above the mill a rickety wooden bridge spans the stream, for here the
highway from Chary Junction reaches the village of Millville and passes
the wooden structures grouped on either side its main street on the way
to Thompson's Crossing, nine miles farther along. The town boasts
exactly eleven buildings, not counting the mill, which, being on the
other side of the Little Bill, can hardly be called a part of Millville
proper. Cotting's Store contains the postoffice and telephone booth, and
is naturally the central point of interest. Seth Davis' blacksmith shop
comes next; Widow Clark's Emporium for the sale of candy, stationery and
cigars adjoins that; McNutt's office and dwelling combined is next, and
then Thorne's Livery and Feed Stables. You must understand they are not
set close together, but each has a little ground of its own. On the
other side of the street is the hardware store, with farm machinery
occupying the broad platform before it, and then the Millville House, a
two-storied "hotel" with a shed-like wing for the billiard-room and card
tables. Nib Corkins' drug store, jewelry store and music store combined
(with sewing machines for a "side line"), is the last of the "business
establishments," and the other three buildings are dwellings occupied by
Sam Cotting, Seth Davis and Nick Thorne.

Dick Pearson's farm house is scarcely a quarter of a mile up the
highway, but it isn't in Millville, for all that. There's a cross lane
just beyond Pearson's, leading east and west, and a mile to westward is
the Wegg Farm, in the wildest part of the foothills.

It is a poor farming country around Millville. Strangers often wonder
how the little shops of the town earn a living for their proprietors;
but it doesn't require a great deal to enable these simple folk to live.
The tourist seldom penetrates these inaccessible foothills; the roads
are too rough and primitive for automobiles; so Millville is shamefully
neglected, and civilization halted there some half a century ago.

However, there was a genuine sensation in store for this isolated
hamlet, and it was the more welcome because anything in the way of a
sensation had for many years avoided the neighborhood.

Marshall McMahon McNutt, or, as he was more familiarly called by those
few who respected him most highly, "Marsh" McNutt (and sundry other
appellations by those who respected him not at all), became the
recipient of a letter from New York announcing the intention of a
certain John Merrick, the new owner of the Wegg Farm, to spend the
summer on the place. McNutt was an undersized man of about forty, with a
beardless face, scraggly buff-colored hair, and eyes that were big,
light blue and remarkably protruding. The stare of those eyes was
impenetrable, because observers found it embarrassing to look at them.
"Mac's" friends had a trick of looking away when they spoke to him, but
children gazed fascinated at the expressionless blue eyeballs and
regarded their owner with awe.

The "real estate agent" was considered an enterprising man by his
neighbors and a "poor stick" by his wife. He had gone to school at
Thompson's Crossing in his younger days; had a call to preach, but
failed because he "couldn't get religion"; inherited a farm from his
uncle and married Sam Cotting's sister, whose tongue and temper were so
sharp that everyone marveled at the man's temerity in acquiring them.
Finally he had lost one foot in a mowing machine, and the accident
destroyed his further usefulness to the extent of inducing him to
abandon the farm and move into town. Here he endeavored to find
something to do to eke out his meagre income; so he raised "thoroughbred
Plymouth Rocks," selling eggs for hatching to the farmers; doctored sick
horses and pastured them in the lot back of his barn, the rear end of
which was devoted to "watermelons in season"; sold subscription books to
farmers who came to the mill or the village store; was elected "road
commissioner" and bossed the neighbors when they had to work out their
poll-tax, and turned his hand to any other affairs that offered a
penny's recompense. The "real estate business" was what Seth Davis
labeled "a blobbering bluff," for no property had changed hands in the
neighborhood in a score of years, except the lot back of the mill, which
was traded for a yoke of oxen, and the Wegg farm, which had been sold
without the agent's knowledge or consent.

The only surprising thing about the sale of the Wegg farm was that
anyone would buy it. Captain Wegg had died three years before, and his
son Joe wandered south to Albany, worked his way through a technical
school and then disappeared in the mazes of New York. So the homestead
seemed abandoned altogether, except for the Huckses.

When Captain Wegg died Old Hucks, his hired man, and Hucks' blind wife
Nora were the only dependents on the place, and the ancient couple had
naturally remained there when Joe scorned his inheritance and ran away.
After the sale they had no authority to remain but were under no
compulsion to move out, so they clung to their old quarters.

When McNutt was handed his letter by the postmaster and storekeeper he
stared at its contents in a bewildered way that roused the loungers to
amused laughter.

"What's up, Peggy?" called Nick Thorne from his seat on the counter.
"Somebody gone off'n me hooks an' left ye a fortun'?"

"Peggy" was one of McNutt's most popular nicknames, acquired because he
wore a short length of pine where his absent foot should have been.

"Not quite," was the agent's slow reply; "but here's the blamedest
funniest communicate a man ever got! It's from some critter that knows
the man what bought the Wegg farm."

"Let's hear it," remarked Cotting, the store-keeper, a fat individual
with a bald head, who was counting matches from a shelf into the public
match-box. He allowed "the boys" just twenty free matches a day.

So the agent read the letter in an uncertain halting voice, and when he
had finished it the little group stared at one another for a time in
thoughtful silence.

"Wall, I'll be plunked," finally exclaimed the blacksmith. "Looks like
the feller's rich, don't it?"

"Ef he's rich, what the tarnation blazes is he comin' here for?"
demanded Nib Corkins, the dandy of the town. "I was over t' Huntingdon
las' year, 'n' seen how the rich folks live. Boys, this h'ain't no place
for a man with money."

"That depends," responded Cotting, gravely. "I'm sure we'd all be better
off if we had a few real bloods here to squander their substance."

"Well, here's a perposal to squander, all right," said McNutt. "But the
question is, Does he know what he's runnin' up agin', and what it'll
cost to do all the idiotic things as he says?"

"Prob'ly not," answered the storekeeper.

"It's the best built farm house 'round thest parts," announced the
miller, who had been silent until now. "Old Wegg were a sea-cap'n once,
an' rich. He dumped a lot o' money inter that place, an' never got it
out agin', nuther."

"'Course not. Sixty acres o' cobble-stone don't pay much divvydends,
that I ever hearn tell on," replied Seth.

"There's some good fruit, though," continued Caldwell, "an' the berries
allus paid the taxes an' left a little besides. Ol' Hucks gits along
all right."

"Jest lives, 'n' that's all."

"Well, thet's enough," said the miller. "It's about all any of us do,
ain't it?"

"Do ye take it this 'ere Merrick's goin' to farm, er what?" asked Nib,
speculatively.

"I take it he's plumb crazy," retorted the agent, rubbing the fringe of
hair behind his ears. "One thing's certain boys, I don't do nuthin'
foolish till I see the color of his money."

"Make him send you ten dollars in advance," suggested Seth.

"Make him send fifty," amended the store-keeper. "You can't buy a cow,
an' pigs, an' chickens, an' make repairs on much less."

"By jinks, I will!" cried McNutt, slapping his leg for emphasis. "I'll
strike him fer a cool fifty, an' if the feller don't pay he kin go to
blazes. Them's my sentiments, boys, an' I'll stand by 'em!"

The others regarded him admiringly, so the energetic little man stumped
away to indite his characteristic letter to Major Doyle.

If the first communication had startled the little village, the second
fairly plunged it into a panic of excitement. Peggy's hand trembled as
he held out the five hundred dollar draft and glared from it to his
cronies with a white face.

"Suff'rin' Jehu!" gasped Nick Thorne. "Is it good?"

The paper was passed reverently around, and examined with a succession
of dubious head-shakes.

"Send for Bob West," suggested Cotting. "He's seen more o' that sort o'
money than any of us."

The widow Clarke's boy, who was present, ran breathlessly to fetch the
hardware dealer, who answered the summons when he learned that Peggy
McNutt had received a "check" for five hundred dollars.

West was a tall, lean man with shrewd eyes covered by horn spectacles
and a stubby gray mustache. He was the potentate of the town and reputed
to be worth, at a conservative estimate, in the neighborhood of ten
thousand dollars--"er more, fer that matter; fer Bob ain't tellin' his
business to nobody." Hardware and implements were acknowledged to be
paying merchandise, and West lent money on farm mortgages, besides. He
was a quiet man, had a good library in his comfortable rooms over the
store, and took the only New York paper that found its way into
Millville. After a glance at the remittance he said:

"It's a draft on Isham, Marvin & Company, the New York bankers. Good as
gold, McNutt. Where did you get it?"

"A lunitic named John Merrick, him that's bought the Cap'n Wegg farm,
sent it on. Here's his letter, Bob."

The hardware dealer read it carefully and gave a low whistle.

"There may be more than one John Merrick," he said, thoughtfully. "But
I've heard of one who is many times a millionaire and a power in the
financial world. What will you do for him, McNutt, to expend this money
properly?"

"Bless't if I know!" answered the man, his eyes bulging with a helpless
look. "What 'n thunder _kin_ I do, Bob?"

West smiled.

"I don't wish to interfere in business matters," said he, "but it is
plainly evident that the new owner wishes the farm house put into such
shape that it will be comfortable for a man accustomed to modern
luxuries. You don't know much about such things, Mac, and Mr. Merrick
has made a blunder in employing your services in such a delicate matter.
But do the best you can. Ride across to the Wegg place and look it over.
Then get Taft, the carpenter, to fix up whatever is necessary. I'll sell
you the lumber and nails, and you've got more money than you can
probably use. Telegraph Mr. Merrick frankly how you find things; but
remember the report must not be based upon your own mode of life but
upon that of a man of wealth and refinement. Especially he must be
posted about the condition of the furniture, which I can guess is
ill-suited to his needs."

"How 'bout Hucks?" asked the agent.

They all hung eagerly on West's reply, for Old Hucks was a general
favorite. The fact that the old retainer of the Weggs had a blind wife
to whom he was tenderly devoted made the proposition of his leaving the
farm one of intense interest. Old Hucks and his patient wife had not
been so much "hired help" as a part of the Wegg establishment, and it
was doubtful if they had ever received any wages. It was certain that
Hucks had not a dollar in the world at the present time, and if turned
out of their old home the ancient couple must either starve or go to the
poorhouse.

"Say nothing further about Old Hucks or his wife to Mr. Merrick,"
advised West, gravely. "When the owner comes he will need servants, and
Hucks is a very capable old fellow. Let that problem rest until the time
comes for solution. If the old folks are to be turned out, make John
Merrick do it; it will put the responsibility on his shoulders."

"By dum, yer right, Bob!" exclaimed McNutt. slapping the counter with
his usual impulsiveness. "I'll do the best I kin for the rich man, an'
let the poor man alone."

After an examination of the farm house and other buildings (which seemed
in his eyes almost palatial), and a conference with Alonzo Taft, the
carpenter, the agent began to feel that his task was going to prove an
easy one. He purchased a fine Jersey cow of Will Johnson, sold his own
flock of Plymouth Rocks at a high price to Mr. Merrick, and hired Ned
Long to work around the yard and help Hucks mow the grass and "clean up"
generally.

But now his real trouble and bewilderment began. A carload of new
furniture and "fixin's" was sidetracked at the junction, and McNutt was
ordered to get it unloaded and carted to the farm without delay. There
were four hay-rack loads of the "truck," altogether, and when it was all
dumped into the big empty barn at the Wegg farm the poor agent had no
idea what to do with it.

"See here," said Nick Thorne, who had done the hauling, "you've got to
let a woman inter this deal, Peggy."

"That's what my wife says, gum-twist her."

"Keep yer ol' woman out'n it. She'd spile a rotten apple."

"Who then, Nick?"

"Why, school-teacher's the right one, I guess. They've got a vacation
now, an' likely she'll come over here an' put things to rights. Peggy,
that air new furniture's the rambunctionest stuff thet ever come inter
these parts, an' it'll make the ol' house bloom like a rose in Spring.
But folks like us hain't got no call to tech it. You fetch
school-teacher."

Peggy sighed. He was keeping track of his time and charging John Merrick
at the rate of two dollars a day, being firmly resolved to "make hay
while the sun was shining" and absorb as much of the money placed in his
hands as possible. To let "school-teacher" into this deal and be obliged
to pay her wages was an undesirable thing to do; yet he reflected that
it might be wise to adopt Nick Thorne's suggestion.

So next morning he drove the liveryman's sorrel mare out to Thompson's
Crossing, where the brick school-house stood on one corner and Will
Thompson's residence on another. A mile away could be seen the spires of
the little church at Hooker's Falls.

McNutt hitched his horse to Thompson's post, walked up the neat pebbled
path and knocked at the door.

"Ethel in?" he asked of the sad-faced woman who, after some delay,
answered his summons.

"She's in the garden, weedin'."

"I'll go 'round," said the agent.

The garden was a bower of roses. Among them stood a slender girl in a
checked gingham, tying vines to a trellis.

"Morn'n', Ethel," said the visitor.

The girl smiled at him. She was not very pretty, because her face was
long and wan, and her nose a bit one-sided. But her golden hair sparkled
in the sun like a mass of spun gold, and the smile was winning in its
unconscious sweetness. Surely, such attractions were enough for a mere
country girl.

Ethel Thompson had, however, another claim to distinction. She had been
"eddicated," as her neighbors acknowledged in awed tones, and "took a
diploma from a college school at Troy." Young as she was, Ethel had
taught school for two years, and might have a life tenure if she cared
to retain the position. As he looked at her neat gown and noted the
grace and ease of her movements the agent acknowledged that he had
really "come to the right shop" to untangle his perplexing difficulties.

"New folks is comin' to the Cap'n Wegg farm," he announced, as a
beginning.

She turned and looked at him queerly.

"Has Joe sold the place?" she asked.

"Near a year ago. Some fool rich man has bought it and is comin' down
here to spend his summer vacation, he says. Here, read his letters.
They'll explain it better 'n I can."

Her hand trembled a little as she took the letters McNutt pulled from
his pocket. Then she sat upon a bench and read them all through. By that
time she had regained her composure.

"The gentleman is somewhat eccentric," she remarked; "but he will make
no mistake in coming to this delightful place, if he wishes quiet
and rest."

"Don't know what he's after, I'm sure," replied the man. "But he's sent
down enough furniture an' truck to stock a hotel, an' I want to know ef
you'll go over an' put it in the rooms, an' straighten things out."

"Me!"

"Why, yes. You've lived in cities some, an' know how citified things go.
Con-twist it, Ethel, there's things in the bunch that neither I ner Nick
Thorne ever hearn tell of, much less knowin' what they're used for."

The girl laughed.

"When are the folks coming?" she asked.

"When I git things in shape. They've sent some money down to pay fer
what's done, so you won't have to work fer nuthin'."

"I will, though," responded the girl, in a cheery tone. "It will delight
me to handle pretty things. Are Nora and Tom still there?"

"Oh, yes. I had orders to turn the Huckses out, ye see; but I didn't do
it."

"I'm glad of that," she returned, brightly "Perhaps we may arrange it so
they can stay. Old Nora's a dear."

"But she's blind."

"She knows every inch of the Wegg house, and does her work more
thoroughly than many who can see. When do you want me, Peggy?"

"Soon's you kin come."

"Then I'll be over tomorrow morning."

At that moment a wild roar, like that of a beast, came from the house.
The sad faced woman ran down a passage; a door slammed, and then all was
quiet again.

McNutt hitched uneasily from the wooden foot to the good one.

"How's ol' Will?" he enquired, in a low voice.

"Grandfather's about as usual," replied the girl, with trained
composure.

"Still crazy as a bedbug?"

"At times he becomes a bit violent; but those attacks never last long."

"Don't s'pose I could see him?" ventured the agent, still in hesitating
tones.

"Oh, no; he has seen no visitor since Captain Wegg died."

"Well, good-bye, Ethel. See you at the farm in the mornin'."

The girl sat for a long time after McNutt had driven away, seemingly
lost in revery.

"Poor Joe!" she sighed, at last. "Poor, foolish Joe. I wonder what has
become of him?"



CHAPTER IV.

ETHEL MAKES PREPARATION.

The Wegg homestead stood near the edge of a thin forest of pines through
which Little Bill Creek wound noisily on its way to the lake. At the
left was a slope on which grew a neglected orchard of apple and pear
trees, their trunks rough and gnarled by the struggle to outlive many
severe winters. There was a rude, rocky lane in front, separated from
the yard by a fence of split pine rails, but the ground surrounding the
house was rich enough to grow a profusion of June grass.

The farm was of very little value. Back of the yard was a fairly good
berry patch, but aside from that some two acres of corn and a small
strip of timothy represented all that was fertile of the sixty acres the
place contained.

But the house itself was the most imposing dwelling for many miles
around. Just why that silent old sea-dog, Jonas Wegg, had come into this
secluded wilderness to locate was a problem the Millville people had
never yet solved. Certainly it was with no idea of successfully farming
the land he had acquired, for half of it was stony and half covered by
pine forest. But the house he constructed was the wonder of the
country-side in its day. It was a big, two-story building, the lower
half being "jest cobblestones," as the neighbors sneeringly remarked,
while the upper half was "decent pine lumber." The lower floor of this
main building consisted of a single room with a great cobble-stone
fireplace in the center of the rear wall and narrow, prison-like windows
at the front and sides. There was a small porch in front, with a great
entrance door of carved dark wood of a foreign look, which the Captain
had brought from some port in Massachusetts. A stair in one corner of
the big living room led to the second story, where four large
bed-chambers were arranged. These had once been plastered and papered,
but the wall-paper had all faded into dull, neutral tints and in one of
the rooms a big patch of plaster had fallen away from the ceiling,
showing the bare lath. Only one of the upstairs rooms had ever been
furnished, and it now contained a corded wooden bedstead, a cheap pine
table and one broken-legged chair. Indeed, the main building, which I
have briefly described, had not been in use for many years. Sometimes,
when Captain Wegg was alive, he would build a log fire in the great
fireplace on a winter's evening and sit before it in silent mood until
far into the night. And once, when his young wife had first occupied the
new house, the big room had acquired a fairly cosy and comfortable
appearance. But it had always been sparsely furnished, and most of the
decadent furniture that now littered it was useless and unlovely.

The big wooden lean-to at the back, and the right wing, were at this
time the only really habitable parts of the mansion. The lean-to had an
entrance from the living room, but Old Hucks and Nora his wife used the
back door entirely. It consisted of a large and cheerful kitchen and two
rooms off it, one used as a store room and the other as a sleeping
chamber for the aged couple.

The right wing was also constructed of cobble-stone, and had formerly
been Captain Wegg's own chamber. After his death his only child, Joe,
then a boy of sixteen, had taken possession of his father's room; but
after a day or two he had suddenly quitted the house where he was born
and plunged into the great outside world--to seek his fortune, it was
said. Decidedly there was no future for the boy here; in the cities
lurks opportunity.

When Ethel Thompson arrived in the early morning that followed her
interview with McNutt she rode her pony through the gap in the rail
fence, across the June grass, and around to the back door. On a bench
beside the pump an old woman sat shelling peas. Her form was thin but
erect and her hair snowy white. She moved with alertness, and as the
girl dismounted and approached her she raised her head and turned a
pleasant face with deep-set, sightless gray eyes upon her visitor.

"Good morning, Ethel, dear," she said. "I knew the pony's whinney.
You're up early today."

"Good morning, Nora," responded the schoolteacher, advancing to kiss the
withered cheek. "Are you pretty well?"

"In body, dear. In mind both Tom 'n' me's pretty bad. I s'pose we
couldn't 'a 'spected to stay here in peace forever; but the blow's come
suddin-like, an' it hurts us."

"Where is Tom?"

"In the barn, lookin' over all the won'erful things the rich nabob has
sent here. He says most things has strips o' wood nailed over 'em; but
some hasn't; an' Tom looks 'em over keerful an' then tells me 'bout 'em.
He's gone to take another look at a won'erful new cook-stove, so's he
kin describe it to me right pertickler."

"Is he worried, Nora?"

"We's both worried, Ethel. Our time's come, an' no mistake. Peggy McNutt
says as he had real orders to turn Hucks out if he was a married man;
an' there's no disclaimin' he's married, is there? Peggy's a kind man,
an' tol' us to keep stayin' 'til the nabobs arrove. Then I guess we'll
git our walkin'-papers, mighty quick."

"I'm not sure of that," said the girl, thoughtfully. "They must be
hard-hearted, indeed, to turn you out into the world; and you are both
capable people, and would serve the city folks faithfully and well."

"It's my eyes," replied the other, in a simple, matter-of-fact tone.
"Hucks might wait on the nabobs all right, but they won't tol'rate a
blind woman a minute, I'm sure. An' Hucks 'd ruther be with me in the
poor-house than to let me go alone."

"Right y' air, Nora girl!" cried a merry voice, and as the blind woman
looked up with a smile Ethel turned around to face "Old Hucks."

A tall man, but much bent at the shoulders and limping in one leg from
an old hurt aggravated by rheumatism. His form was as gnarled as the
tree-trunks in the apple-orchard, and twisted almost as fantastically.
But the head, uplifted from the stooped shoulders and held a little to
one side, was remarkable enough to attract attention. It had scanty
white locks and a fringe of white whiskers under the chin, and these
framed a smiling face and features that were extremely winning in
expression. No one could remember ever seeing Old Hucks when he was not
smiling, and the expression was neither set nor inane, but so cheery and
bright that you were tempted to smile with him, without knowing why. For
dress he wore a much patched pair of woolen trousers and a "hickory"
shirt of faded blue, with rough top boots and a dilapidated straw hat
that looked as if it might have outlived several generations.

As Ethel greeted the man she looked him over carefully and sighed at the
result; for certainly, as far as personal appearances went, he seemed as
unlikely a person to serve a "nabob" as could well be imagined. But the
girl knew Thomas' good points, and remembering them, took courage.

"If the worst comes," she said, brightly, "you are both to come to us to
live. I've arranged all that with grandmother, you know. But I'm not
much afraid of your being obliged to leave here. From all accounts this
Mr. Merrick is a generous and free-hearted man, and I've discovered that
strangers are not likely to be fearsome when you come to know them. The
unknown always makes us childishly nervous, you see, and then we forget
it's wrong to borrow trouble."

"True's gospil," said Old Hucks. "To know my Nora is to love her.
Ev'body loves Nora. An' the good Lord He's took'n care o' us so long, it
seems like a sort o' sacrelidge to feel that all thet pretty furn'ture
in the barn spells on'y poor-house to us. Eh, Ethel?"

McNutt arrived just then, with big Ned Long, Lon Taft the carpenter, and
Widow Clark, that lady having agreed to "help with the cleanin'." She
didn't usually "work out," but was impelled to this task as much through
curiosity to see the new furniture as from desire to secure the wages.

At once the crowd invaded the living room, and after a glance around
Ethel ordered every bit of the furniture, with the exception of two
antique but comfortable horse-hair sofas, carried away to the barn and
stored in the loft. It did not take long to clear the big room, and then
the Widow Clark swept out and began to scrub the floor and woodwork,
while school-teacher took her men into the right wing and made another
clearing of its traps.

This room interested the girl very much. In it Joe was born and frail
Mrs. Wegg and her silent husband had both passed away. It had two broad
French windows with sash doors opening on to a little porch of its own
which was covered thickly with honeysuckle vines. A cupboard was built
into a niche of the thick cobble-stone wall, but it was locked and the
key was missing.

Upstairs the girl had the rubbish removed for the first time in a
generation. The corded bedstead in the north room was sent to join its
fellows in the barn loft, and Ned Long swept everything clean in
readiness for the scrubbers.

Then, while Widow Clark and Nora cleaned industriously--for the blind
woman insisted on helping and did almost as much work as her
companion--the "men folks" proceeded to the barn and under the
school-teacher's directions uncrated the new furniture and opened the
bales of rugs and matting. Lon Taft was building new steps to the front
porch, but Old Hucks and Ned and McNutt reverently unpacked the "truck"
and set each piece carefully aside. How they marveled at the enameled
beds and colored wicker furniture, the easy chairs for lounging, the
dainty dressers and all the innumerable pretty things discovered in
boxes, bales and barrels, you may well imagine. Even Ethel was amazed
and delighted at the thoughtfulness of the dealer in including
everything that might be useful or ornamental in a summer home.

The next few days were indeed busy ones, for the girl entered
enthusiastically upon her task to transform the old house, and with the
material John Merrick had so amply provided she succeeded admirably. The
little maid was country bred, but having seen glimpses of city life and
possessing much native good taste, she arranged the rooms so charmingly
that they would admit of scant improvement. The big living room must
serve as a dining room as well as parlor; but so spacious was it that
such an arrangement proved easy. No especial furniture for the living
room had been provided, but by stealing a few chairs and odd pieces from
the ample supply provided for the bedrooms, adding the two quaint sofas
and the upright piano and spreading the rugs in an artistic fashion,
Ethel managed to make the "parlor part" of the room appear very cosy.
The dining corner had a round table and high-backed chairs finished in
weathered oak, and when all was in order the effect was not
inharmonious. Some inspiration had induced Mr. Merrick to send down a
batch of eighteen framed pictures, procured at a bargain but from a
reliable dealer. He thought they might "help out," and Ethel knew they
would, for the walls of the old house were quite bare of ornament. She
made them go as far as possible, and Old Hucks, by this time thoroughly
bewildered, hung them where she dictated and made laughable attempts to
describe the subjects to blind Nora.

A telegram, telephoned over from the junction, announced the proposed
arrival of the party on Thursday morning, and the school-teacher was
sure that everything would be in readiness at that time. The paint on
Lon's repairs would be dry, the grass in the front yard was closely
cropped, and the little bed of flowers between the corn-crib and the
wood-shed was blooming finely. The cow was in the stable, the pigs in
the shed, and the Plymouth Rocks strutted over the yard with an absurd
assumption of pride.

Wednesday Ethel took Old Hucks over to Millville and bought for him from
Sam Cotting a new suit of dark gray "store clothes," together with
shirts, shoes and underwear. She made McNutt pay the bill with John
Merrick's money, agreeing to explain the case to "the nabob" herself,
and back up the agent in the unauthorized expenditure. Nora had a new
gingham dress, too, which the girl had herself provided, and on Thursday
morning Ethel was at the Wegg farm bright and early to see the old
couple properly attired to receive their new master. She also put a last
touch to the pretty furniture and placed vases of her own roses and
sweet peas here and there, to render the place homelike and to welcome
the expected arrivals.

"If they don't like it," said the girl, smiling, "they're rather hard to
please."

"They're sure to like it, dear," answered old Nora, touching with
sensitive fingers the flowers, the books and the opened piano. "If they
don't, they're heretics an' sinners, an' there's no good in 'em
whatever."

Then the little school-teacher bade good-bye to Hucks and his wife, told
them to keep brave hearts, and rode her pony cross-lots to
Thompson's Crossing.



CHAPTER V.

THE ARRIVAL OF THE NABOBS.

"Well," said Uncle John, looking out of the car window, "we're nearly
there."

He didn't look the millionaire, or nabob, or anything else but a modest
little man full of joy at getting into the country. His clothing was not
distinctive of wealth, his hands were hard and roughened by years of
toil, and his necktie had a plebeian trick of sliding under his left
ear. Uncle John was just a plain, simple, good-hearted fellow before he
acquired riches, and the possession of millions had in no way altered
his nature.

The three nieces and himself were the only passengers in the coach,
aside from rosy-cheeked Mary, Patricia's cook. Finding that the road did
not run a sleeper to Chazy Junction, Mr. Merrick had ordered one
attached to the train for his especial use; but he did not allow even
Patsy to suspect this extravagance.

"It seems to me," observed Beth, as she peered out while the train
puffed up the steep grade, "as if we'd arrived at the heart of a
wilderness, where farms are likely to be as scarce as Egyptian temples."

"The truth is," replied her uncle, with a cheerful smile, "that none of
us has an idea where we're going, or what that farm of mine looks like.
We're explorers, like Stanley in mid-Africa. That's the beauty of this
excursion."

"I'm glad I didn't bring any party dresses," said dainty Louise, shaking
her blonde head with a doubting expression toward the rock
covered hills.

"Why, you might need them for hay-rides," remarked Patsy, with a laugh;
"that is, if any hay grows in this land of quarries."

The train stopped with a jerk, started with another jerk, and stopped
again with a third that made them catch their breaths and hold fast to
the seats.

"Chazy Junction, seh," said the colored porter, entering in haste to
seize their bags.

They alighted on a small wooden platform and their hand baggage was
deposited beside them. Their trunks were being tumbled off a car
far ahead.

Then the whistle screamed, the train gave a jerk and proceeded on its
way, and Uncle John, his nieces and their maid, found themselves
confronting a solitary man in shirtsleeves, who yawned languidly, thrust
his hands in his pockets and stared at the strangers unmoved.

It was six o'clock. The July sun was set in a clear sky, but the air was
cool and pleasant. Uncle John glanced around with the eye of a practiced
traveler. Back of the station was a huddle of frame buildings set in a
hollow. The station-tender was the only person in sight.

"Isn't there a carriage to meet us?" asked Louise, in a slightly frigid
tone.

"Seems not," replied her uncle. Then he addressed the native. "Can you
tell us, sir, where Millville is?" he asked.

"Sev'n mile up the road."

"Thank you kindly. Is there any carriage to be had?"

The man smiled sardonically.

"Kerridges," he said, "don't grow in these parts. I take it you be the
party fer the Wegg farm."

"You're right," said Mr. Merrick. "I'm glad we are getting acquainted.
Folks all well?"

"Pretty fair."

"Now, sir, we want some breakfast, to begin with, and then some way to
get to my farm."

"Peggy orter 'a' looked after you," remarked the man, eyeing the dainty
gowns of the young ladies reflectively.

"Who's Peggy?"

"That's McNutt, the man you hired to do things."

"Ah, yes; he surely ought to have sent some sort of a team to meet us,"
agreed Uncle John. "What's that group of houses yonder?"

"Thet's the Junction."

"Any hotel?"

"Sure."

"And a livery stable?"

"'Course there is."

"Then we'll get along," said Uncle John, assuming a sudden brisk manner.
"Just keep your eye on our baggage till we get back, my good fellow.
There are no people to interfere with it, but some bears or tigers might
come out of the hills and eat it up. Now, girls, away we go!"

Uncle John's nieces were not so greatly dismayed at this experience as
might have been expected. They had recently accompanied their erratic
relative on a European trip and had learned to be patient under
difficulties.

A quarter of a mile down the dusty road they came to the hotel, a
dismal, unclean looking place that smelled of stale beer. Uncle John
routed out the proprietor.

"Folks up?" he inquired.

"Long ago," said the man.

"Get us some boiled eggs, bread and butter and plenty of fresh
milk--right away," ordered Mr. Merrick. "The quicker it comes the more
I'll pay you. Bring a table out here on the porch and we'll eat in the
open air. Where's the livery stable--eh? Oh, I see. Now, step lively, my
man, and your fortune's made. I'll add a quarter of a dollar for every
five minutes you save us in time."

The fellow stared, then woke up with a start and disappeared within.

"By gum, I'll bet a hen it's thet air nabob!" he muttered.

Leaving his girls and Mary to sit on the wooden benches of the porch
Uncle John crossed the road to the livery stable, where he discovered a
man and a boy engaged in cleaning the half dozen sorry looking nags the
establishment contained. A three-seated democrat wagon was engaged to
carry the party to the Wegg farm at Millville, and a rickety lumber
wagon would take the baggage. The liveryman recognized his customer as
soon as the Wegg farm was mentioned, and determined to "do the city guy
up brown."

"Road's bad an' up hill, an' my time's vallyble," he said in a surly
voice. "I'll hev to charge ye three dollars."

"For what?" asked Uncle John, quietly.

"Fer the two teams to Millville."

"Get them harnessed right away, load up the baggage, and have the
democrat at the hotel in twenty minutes. Here's five dollars, and if
you'll look pleasant you may keep the change."

"Blame my thick skull!" muttered the livery-man, as he watched the
little man depart. "What a cussed fool I were not to say four dollars
instead o' three!"

But he called to his boy to hurry up, and in the stipulated time the
teams were ready.

Uncle John and his nieces were just finishing their eggs, which were
fresh and delicious. The milk was also a revelation. Through the windows
of the hotel several frowsy looking women and an open mouthed boy were
staring hard at the unconscious city folk.

Even Louise was in a mood for laughter as they mounted to the high seats
of the democrat. The glorious air, the clear sunshine and a satisfactory
if simple breakfast had put them all in a good humor with the world.

They stopped at the station for their hand baggage, and saw that the
trunks were properly loaded on the lumber wagon. Then, slowly, they
started to mount the long hill that began its incline just across
the tracks.

"Sure this is the way?" inquired Uncle John, perched beside the driver.

"I were horned here," answered the man, conclusively.

"That seems to settle it. Pretty big hill, that one ahead of us."

"It's the Little Bill. When we cross it, we're at Millville."

Seven miles of desolate country could not dampen the spirits of the
girls. Secretly each one was confident that Uncle John's unknown farm
would prove to be impossible, and that in a day or so at the latest they
would retrace their steps. But in the meantime the adventure was novel
and interesting, and they were prepared to accept the inevitable with
all graciousness.

When, after the long climb up the hill, they saw the quaint mill and the
town lying just across rushing Little Bill Creek; when from their
elevation they beheld the placid lake half hidden by its stately pines
and gazed up the rugged and picturesque foot-hills to the great
mountains beyond, then indeed they drew in deep breaths and began, as
Patsy exclaimed, to be "glad they came."

"That Millville?" asked Uncle John, eagerly.

"Yes, sir."

"And which of those houses belongs to the Wegg farm?"

"Ye can't see the Wegg house from here; the pines hide it," said the
man, urging his horses into a trot as they approached the bridge.

"Pretty good farm?" inquired Uncle John, hopefully.

"Worst in the county," was the disconcerting reply. "Half rocks an' half
trees. Ol' Cap'n Wegg wasn't no farmer. He were a sea-cap'n; so it's no
wonder he got took in when he bought the place."

Uncle John sighed.

"I've just bought it myself," he observed.

"There's a ol' addige," said the man, grinning, "'bout a fool an' his
money. The house is a hunker; but w'at's the use of a house without
a farm?"

"What is a 'hunker,' please?" inquired Louise, curiously.

The liveryman ventured no reply, perhaps because he was guiding his
horses over the rickety bridge.

"Want to stop at the village?" he asked.

"No; drive on to the farm."

The scene was so rude and at the same time so picturesque that it
impressed them all very agreeably. Perhaps they were the more delighted
because they had expected nothing admirable in this all but forsaken
spot. They did not notice the people who stared after them as they
rattled through the village, or they would have seen Uncle John's
"agent" in front of his office, his round eyes fairly bulging from
his head.

It had never occurred to McNutt to be at the Junction to welcome his
patron. He had followed his instructions and set Mr. Merrick's house in
order, and there he considered that his duty ended. He would, of course,
call on the nabob, presently, and render an account of the money he
had received.

Sam Cotting, the store-keeper, gazed after the livery team with a sour
countenance, he resented the fact that five big-boxes of groceries had
been forwarded from the city to the Wegg farm. "What'n thunder's the use
havin' city folks here, ef they don't buy nothin'?" he asked the boys;
and they agreed it was no use at all.

Proceeding at a smart trot the horses came to the Pearson farm, where
they turned into the Jane at the left and straightway subsided to a slow
walk, the wheels bumping and jolting over the stony way.

"What's this?" exclaimed Uncle John, who had narrowly escaped biting his
tongue through and through. "Why did you turn down here?"

"It's the road," returned the driver, with a chuckle; "it's the
cobble-stone lane to yer farm, an' the farm's 'bout the same sort o'
land as the lane."

For a few moments the passengers maintained a dismal silence.

"The country's lovely," said Patsy, glancing at the panorama as they
mounted a slight elevation.

"Are you sure, Uncle, that there is a house, or any place of refuge, on
your farm?" asked Louise, in a mischievous tone.

"Why, there's a rumor of a house, and the rumor says it's a hunker,"
replied Mr. Merrick, in a voice that betrayed a slight uneasiness.

"Doubtless the house matches the farm," said Beth, calmly. "I imagine it
has two rooms and a leaky roof. But never mind, girls. This has been a
pleasant trip, and we can seek shelter elsewhere if the worst comes to
the worst."

"I guess the worst has come a'ready," observed the driver; "for the
house is by odds the best part o' the Wegg farm. It's big enough fer a
hotel, an' cost a lot o' money in its day. Seems like the lunatics all
crowd to thet place--fust ol' Cap'n Wegg wasted of his substance on it,
an' now----"

He paused, perhaps fearing he might become personal in his remarks, and
Uncle John coughed while the girls shrieked with laughter.

Expecting nothing, they were amazed when they passed the orchard and the
group of pines that had concealed the house and suddenly drew up beside
the old-fashioned stile built into the rail fence. Every eye was
instantly upon the quaint, roomy mansion, the grassy sward extending
between it and the road, and the cosy and home-like setting of the
outbuildings.

"Here's Wegg's," said the liveryman.

"Oh, Uncle," cried Beth; "how lovely!"

Louise's pretty face was wreathed with smiles. Patsy drew in a long
breath and scrambled out of the high seat.

On the corner of the front porch stood Nora, arrayed in her neat gray
gown and a cap. Her face was composed, but she felt herself trembling
a little.

Old Hucks came slowly down the steps to greet the company. Never in his
memory had his dress been so immaculate. The queer old fellow seemed to
appreciate this as he raised his smiling face from the stooped shoulders
and poised it on one side like a sparrow.

"Welcome home, sir," he said to Uncle John. "I'm Hucks, sir; Thomas
Hucks," and without more words he proceeded to remove the satchels from
the wagon.

"Ah, yes," returned Mr. Merrick, cheered by the welcome and the smile of
the old man. "I'd forgotten about you, but I'm glad you're here."

"And that is my wife Nora, on the porch. She's the housekeeper, sir."
And then, lowering his voice so that only the girls and Uncle John could
hear, he added simply: "She's blind."

Patsy walked straight up to the eager, pathetic figure of the woman and
took her hand in a warm clasp.

"I'm Patricia, Nora," she said, "and I'm sure we shall be friends."

Beth followed her cousin's lead.

"And I am Beth, Nora. Will you remember me?"

"Surely, miss; by your voice," returned the old woman, beaming
delightedly at these evidences of kindliness.

"Here is another, Nora," said their cousin, in gentle tones. "I am
Louise."

"Three young and pretty girls, Nora; and as good as they are pretty,"
announced Uncle John, proudly. "Will you show us in, Thomas, or will
your wife?"

"Nora will take the young ladies to their rooms, sir."

"Not now, Uncle!" they all protested, in nearly identical words; and
Louise added: "Let us drink in the delights of this pretty picture
before we shut ourselves up in the stuffy rooms. I hope they've
been aired."

Patsy ran to a chicken-coop on the side lawn, where a fussy hen was
calling to her children that strangers had arrived. Beth exclaimed at
the honeysuckle vines and Louise sank into a rustic chair with a sigh
of content.

"I'm so glad you brought us here. Uncle," she said. "What a surprise it
is to find the place so pretty!"

They could hear the rush of the Little Bill in the wood behind them and
a soft breeze stirred the pines and wafted their fragrance to the
nostrils of the new arrivals. Uncle John squatted on the shady steps and
fairly beamed upon the rustic scene spread out before him. Patsy had now
thrown aside her hat and jacket and lay outstretched upon the cool
grass, while the chickens eyed her with evident suspicion. Beth was
picking a bouquet of honeysuckles, just because they were so sweet
and homely.

"I'm almost sure I sent some hammocks and a croquet set," remarked Uncle
John.

"They're here, sir," said Old Hucks, who had watched each one with his
persistent smile and now stood awaiting his new master's commands. "But
we didn't know jest where ye wanted 'em put."

Mary came out. She had taken off her things and donned her white apron.

"The house is quite wonderful, Mr. Merrick," she said. "There is
everything we can possibly need, and all as neat as wax."

The report stirred the girls to explore. They all trooped into the big
living room and were at once captivated by its charm. Nora led them
upstairs to their chambers, finding the way as unerringly as if she
possessed perfect vision, and here a new chorus of delight was evoked.

"The blue room is mine!" cried Louise.

"Mine is the pink room," said Beth.

"And I choose the white room," declared Patsy. "The Major's is just
next, and it will please him because it is all green and gold. But where
will Uncle John room?"

"The master will use the right wing," said old Nora, who had listened
with real pleasure to the exclamations of delight. "It were Cap'n Wegg's
room, ye know, an' we've fitted it all new."

Indeed, Uncle John was at that moment inspecting his apartment, and he
sighed contentedly as he congratulated himself upon his foresight in
sending down the furnishings on the chance of their being needed. They
had effected a complete transformation of the old house.

But who had arranged everything? Surely the perfect taste and dainty
touch evidenced everywhere was not to be attributed to blind Nora. The
little man was thoughtful as he turned to Old Hucks.

"Who did it, Thomas?" he asked.

"Miss Ethel, sir; the school-ma'am."

"Oh. A city girl?"

"No, sir. Crazy Will Thompson's granddaughter. She lives 'bout nine mile
away."

"Is she here now?"

"Went home this mornin', sir. It were a great pleasure to her, she said,
an' she hoped as how you'd like everything, an' be happy here."

Undo John nodded.

"We must call on that girl," he remarked. "We owe her a good deal, I
imagine, and she's entitled to our grateful thanks."



CHAPTER VI.

PEGGY PRESENTS HIS BILL.

Millville waited in agonized suspense for three days for tangible
evidence that "the nabob was in their midst," as Nib Corkins poetically
expressed it; but the city folks seemed glued to the farm and no one of
them had yet appeared in the village. As a matter of fact, Patsy and
Uncle John were enthusiastically fishing in the Little Bill, far up in
the pine woods, and having "the time of their lives" in spite of their
scant success in capturing trout. Old Hucks could go out before
breakfast and bring in an ample supply of speckled beauties for Mary to
fry; but Uncle John's splendid outfit seemed scorned by the finny folk,
and after getting her dress torn in sundry places and a hook in the
fleshy part of her arm Patsy learned to seek shelter behind a tree
whenever her uncle cast his fly. But they reveled in the woods, and
would lie on the bank for hours listening to the murmur of the brook and
the songs of the birds.

The temper of the other two girls was different. Beth De Graf had
brought along an archery outfit, and she set up her target on the ample
green the day following her arrival. Here she practiced persistently,
shooting at sixty yards with much skill. But occasionally, when Louise
tired of her novel and her cushions in the hammock, the two girls would
play tennis or croquet together--Beth invariably winning.

Such delightful laziness could brook no interference for the first days
of their arrival, and it was not until Peggy McNutt ventured over on
Monday morning for a settlement with Mr. Merrick that any from the
little world around them dared intrude upon the dwellers at the
Wegg farm.

Although the agent had been late in starting from Millville and Nick
Thorne's sorrel mare had walked every step of the way, Peggy was obliged
to wait in the yard a good half hour for the "nabob" to finish his
breakfast. During that time he tried to decide which of the two
statements of accounts that he had prepared he was most justified in
presenting. He had learned from the liveryman at the Junction that Mr.
Merrick had paid five dollars for a trip that was usually made for two,
and also that the extravagant man had paid seventy-five cents more to
Lucky Todd, the hotel keeper, than his bill came to. The knowledge of
such reckless expenditures had fortified little McNutt in "marking up"
the account of the money he had received, and instead of charging two
dollars a day for his own services, as he had at first intended, he put
them down at three dollars a day--and made the days stretch as much as
possible. Also he charged a round commission on the wages of Lon Taft
and Ned Long, and doubled the liveryman's bill for hauling the goods
over from the Junction. Ethel Thompson had refused to accept any payment
for what she had done, but Peggy bravely charged it up at good round
figures. When the bill was made out and figured up it left him a
magnificent surplus for his private account; but at the last his heart
failed him, and he made out another bill more modest in its extortions.
He had brought them both along, though, one in each pocket, vacillating
between them as he thought first of the Merrick millions and then of the
righteous anger he might incur. By the time Uncle John came out to him,
smiling and cordial, he had not thoroughly made up his mind which
account to present.

"I must thank you for carrying out my orders so intelligently," began
the millionaire. "Without your assistance I might have found things in
bad shape, I fear."

McNutt was reassured. The nabob would stand for bill No. 1, without a
doubt.

"I tried fer to do my best, sir," he said.

"And you did very well," was the reply. "I hope you kept your
expenditures well within bounds?"

The agent's heart sank at the question and the shrewd, alert look that
accompanied it. Even millionaires do not allow themselves to be
swindled, if they can help it. Bill No. 2 would be stiff enough; he
might even have to knock a few dollars off from that.

"Most things is high in Millville," he faltered, "an' wages has gone up
jest terr'ble. The boys don't seem to wanter do nuthin' without
big pay."

"That is the case everywhere," responded Mr. Merrick, thoughtfully; "and
between us, McNutt, I'm glad wages are better in these prosperous times.
The man who works by the day should be well paid, for he has to pay well
for his living. Adequately paid labor is the foundation of all
prosperity."

Peggy smiled cheerfully. He was glad he had had the forethought to bring
Bill No. 1 along with him.

"Hosses is high, too," he remarked, complacently, "an' lumber an' nails
is up. As fer the live-stock I bought fer ye, I found I had to pay like
sixty for it."

"I suppose they overcharged you because a city man wanted the animals.
But of course you would not allow me to be robbed."

"Oh, 'course not, Mr. Merrick!"

"And that nag in the stable is a sorry old beast."

Peggy was in despair. Why in the world hadn't he charged for "the
beast"? As it was now too late to add it to the bill he replied,
grudgingly:

"The hoss you mention belongs to the place, sir. It went with the farm,
'long o' Old Hucks an' Nora."

"I'm glad you reminded me of those people," said Uncle John, seriously.
"Tell me their history."

Louise sauntered from the house, at this juncture, and sank gracefully
upon the grass at her uncle's feet. She carried a book, but did not
open it.

"Ain't much to tell, sir, 'bout them folks," replied the agent. "Cap'n
Wegg brung the Huckses with him when he settled here. Wegg were a
sea-cap'n, ye see, an' when he retired he Wanted to git as far from the
sea's he could."

"That was strange. A sailor usually loves to be near salt water all his
days," observed Uncle John.

"Wall, Wegg he were diff'rent. He come here when I were a boy, bringin'
a sad-faced young woman an' Ol' Hucks an' Nora. I s'pose Hucks were a
sailor, too, though he never says nuthin' 'bout that. The Cap'n bought
this no'count farm an' had this house built on it--a proceedin' that, ef
I do say it, struck ev'rybody as cur'ous."

"It _was_ curious," agreed Mr. Merrick.

"But the cur'ous'est thing was thet he didn't make no 'tempt at farmin'.
Folks said he had money to burn, fer he loaded it into this fool house
an' then sot down an' smoked all day an' looked glum. Ol' Hucks planted
the berry patch an' looked arter the orchard an' the stock; but Cap'n
Wegg on'y smoked an' sulked. People at Millville was glad to leave him
alone, an' the on'y friend he ever had were crazy Will Thompson."

"Crazy?"

"As a loon." The agent hitched uneasily on the lawn bench, where he was
seated, and then continued, hastily: "But thet ain't neither here ner
there. A baby was born arter a time, an' while he was young the
sad-faced mother sickened an' died. Cap'n Wegg give her a decent fun'ral
an' went right on smokin' his pipe an' sulkin', same as ever. Then
he--he--died," rather lamely, "an' Joe--thet's the boy--bein' then about
sixteen, dug out 'n' run away. We hain't seen him sense."

"Nice boy?" asked Uncle John.

"Joe were pretty well liked here, though he had a bit o' his dad's
sulkiness. He 'n' Ethel Thompson--crazy Will's gran'daughter--seemed
like to make up together; but even she don't know what drav him
off--'nless it were the Cap'n's suddint death--ner where he went to."

Uncle John seemed thoughtful, but asked no more questions, and McNutt
appeared to be relieved that he refrained. But the bill ought to be
forthcoming now, and the agent gave a guilty start as his
patron remarked:

"I want to settle with you for what you have done. I'm willing to pay a
liberal price, you understand, but I won't submit to being robbed
outrageously by you or any of your Millville people."

This was said so sternly that it sent McNutt into an ague of terror. He
fumbled for the smallest bill, tremblingly placed it in Mr. Merrick's
hand, and then with a thrill of despair realized he had presented the
dreadful No. 1!

"It's--it's--a--'count of what I spent out," he stammered.

Uncle John ran his eye over the bill.

"What are Plymouth Rocks?" he demanded.

"He--hens, sir."

"Hens at a dollar apiece?"

"Thoroughbreds, sir. Extry fine stock. I raised 'em myself."

"H-m. You've charged them twice."

"Eh?"

"Here's an item: 'Twelve Plymouth Rocks, twelve dollars;' and farther
down: 'Twelve Plymouth Rocks, eighteen dollars.'"

"Oh, yes; o' course. Ye see, I sold you a dozen first, of the dollar
kind. Then I thought as how, bein' fine young birds, you'd be tempted
fer to eat 'em, an' a dozen don't go fur on the table. So I up an' sold
ye another dozen, extry ol' stock an' remarkable high-bred, fer a
dollar-an'-a-half each. Which is dirt cheap because they's too old to
eat an' jest right fer layers."

"Are they here?"

"Every one of 'em."

"Very good. I'm glad to have them. The cow seems reasonably priced, for
a Jersey."

"It is. Jest extror'nary!" exclaimed Peggy, reassured.

"And your people have all done work of an unusual character in a
painstaking manner. I am very much pleased. There seems to be a hundred
and forty dollars my due, remaining from the five hundred I sent you."

"Here it is, sir," responded McNutt, taking the money from his
pocket-book. In another place he had more money, which he had intended
to pay if the smaller bill had been presented.

Uncle John took the money.

"You are an honest fellow, McNutt," said he. "I hadn't expected a dollar
back, for folks usually take advantage of a stranger if he gives them
half a chance. So I thank you for your honesty as well as for your
services. Good morning."

The agent was thoroughly ashamed of himself. To be "sech a duffer" as to
return that money, when by means of a little strategy he might have kept
it, made him feel both humiliated and indignant. A hundred and forty
dollars; When would he have a chance to get such a windfall again? Pah!
he was a fool--to copy his identical thoughts: "a gol dum
blithering idjit!"

All the way home he reflected dismally upon his lack of business
foresight, and strove to plan ways to get money "out'n thet easy mark."

"Didn't the man rob you, Uncle?" asked Louise, when the agent had
disappeared.

"Yes, dear; but I wouldn't give him the satisfaction of knowing I
realized it."

"That was what I thought. By the way, that Wegg history seems both
romantic and unusual," she said, musingly. "Don't you scent some mystery
in what the man said of it?"

"Mystery!" cried Uncle John. "Lordy, no, Louise. You've been readin' too
many novels. Romances don't grow in parts like these."

"But I think this is where they are most likely to grow, Uncle,"
persisted the girl, "just consider. A retired sea captain hides inland,
with no companions but a grinning sailor and his blind housekeeper
--except his pale wife, of course; and she is described as sad and
unhappy. Who was she, do you think?"

"I don't think," said Uncle John, smiling and patting the fair check of
his niece. "And it don't matter who she was."

"I'm sure it does. It is the key to the whole mystery. Even her baby
could not cheer the poor thing's broken heart. Even the fine house the
Captain built failed to interest her. She pined away and died, and----"

"And that finished the romance, Louise."

"Oh, no; that added to its interest. The boy grew up in this dismal
place and brooded on his mother's wrongs. His stern, sulky old father
died suddenly. Was he murdered?" in a low voice; "did the son revenge
his mother's wrongs?"

"Figglepiff, Louise! You're getting theatric--and so early in the
morning, too! Want to saddle my new farm with a murder, do you? Well,
it's rubbish. Joe Wegg ran away from here to get busy in the world.
Major Doyle helped him with my money, in exchange for this farm, which
the boy was sensible to get rid of--although I'm glad it's now mine. The
Major liked Joe Wegg, and says he's a clean-cut, fine young feller. He's
an inventor, too, even if an unlucky one, and I've no doubt he'll make
his way in the world and become a good citizen."

With these words Uncle John arose and sauntered around to the barn, to
look at the litter of new pigs that just then served to interest and
amuse him. The girl remained seated upon the grass, her hands clasped
over her knee and a look of deep retrospection upon her face.



CHAPTER VII.

LOUISE SCENTS A MYSTERY.

Louise Merrick was the eldest of Uncle John's nieces, having just passed
her eighteenth birthday. In the city she was devoted to the requirements
of fashionable society and--urged thereto by her worldly-minded
mother--led a mere butterfly existence. Her two cousins frankly agreed
that Louise was shallow, insincere and inclined to be affected; but of
the three girls she displayed the most equable and pleasant disposition
and under the most trying circumstances was composed and charming in
manner. For this reason she was an agreeable companion, and men usually
admired her graceful figure and her piquant, pretty face with its crown
of fluffy blonde hair and winning expression. There was a rumor that she
was engaged to be married to Arthur Weldon, a young man of position in
the city; but Uncle John ignored the possibility of losing one of his
cherished nieces and declared that Louise was still too young to think
of marriage.

When away from her frivolous mother and the inconsequent home
environments the girl was more unaffected and natural in her ways, and
her faults were doubtless more the result of education than of
natural tendency.

One thing was indisputable, however: Louise Merrick was a clever girl,
possessing a quick intellect and a keen insight into the character of
others. Her apparent shallowness was a blind of the same character as
her assumed graciousness, and while she would have been more lovable
without any pretence or sham she could not have been Louise Merrick and
allow others to read her as she actually was. Patsy and Beth thought
they knew her, and admired or liked rather than loved their cousin.
Uncle John thought he knew her, too, and was very proud of his eldest
niece in spite of some discovered qualities that were not wholly
admirable.

An extensive course of light literature, not void of "detective
stories," had at this moment primed Louise with its influence to the
extent of inducing her to scent a mystery in the history of Captain
Wegg. The plain folks around Millville might speculate listlessly upon
the "queer doin's" at the farm, and never get anywhere near the truth.
Indeed, the strange occurrences she had just heard were nearly forgotten
in the community, and soon would be forgotten altogether--unless the
quick ear of a young girl had caught the clue so long ignored.

At first she scarcely appreciated the importance of the undertaking. It
occurred to her that an effort to read to the bottom of the sea
captain's romance would be a charming diversion while she resided at
Millville, and in undertaking the task she laughingly accused herself of
becoming an amateur detective--an occupation that promised to be
thrilling and delightful.

Warned, however, by the rebuff she had met with from Uncle John, the
girl decided not to confide either her suspicions or her proposed
investigation to anyone for the present, but to keep her own counsel
until she could surprise them all with the denouement or required
assistance to complete her work.

Inspired by the cleverness and fascination of this idea, Louise set to
work to tabulate the information she had received thus far, noting the;
element of mystery each fact evolved. First, Captain Wegg must have been
a rich man in order to build this house, maintain two servants and live
for years in comfort without any income from his barren farm lands. What
became of his money after his death? Why was his only son obliged to fly
to the cities in order to obtain a livelihood? Secondly, the Captain, a
surly and silent man, had brought hither--perhaps by force--a young
woman as his wife who was so unhappy that she pined away and died. Who
was this woman? What had rendered her so unhappy and despairing?

Thirdly, the Captain's only friend had been a crazy man named Will
Thompson. Was he crazy before the Captain's death, or had he become
crazed at that time, some terrible tragedy unhinging his mind?

Fourthly, the granddaughter of Thompson, Ethel, and the son of Captain
Wegg had been in love with each other, and people expected they would
marry in time. But at his father's sudden death the boy fled and left
his sweetheart without a word. Why--unless something had occurred that
rendered their marriage impossible?

In the fifth place there was Old Hucks and his blind wife to be
considered. What did they know about their old master's secret history?
What tragic memories lurked beneath the man's perpetual smile and the
woman's composed and sightless face?

Surely there was enough here to excite the curiosity and warrant an
effort to untangle the mystery. And as instruments to the end there were
several people available who could be of use to her; McNutt, the agent,
who evidently knew more than he had cared to tell; Old Hucks and his
wife and Ethel Thompson, the school-teacher. There might be others, but
one or another of these four must know the truth, and it would be her
pleasant duty to obtain a full disclosure. So she was anxious to begin
her investigations at once.

When her uncle returned from his visit to the pigs Louise said to him:

"I've been thinking, dear, that we ought to call upon that young lady
who arranged our rooms, and thank her for her kindness."

"That's true," he replied.

"Can't we drive over to Thompson's this morning, Uncle?"

"Beth and Patsy have planned a tramp to the lake, and a row after
water-lilies."

"Then let us make our call together. We can invite the girl to come here
and spend a day with us, when Patsy and Beth will be able to meet her."

"That's a good idea, Louise. I was wondering what I'd do this morning.
Tell Old Hucks to get the nag harnessed."

The girl ran eagerly upon her errand. Old Hucks seemed surprised, and a
curious expression showed for an instant through his smile. But he
turned without a word to harness the horse.

Louise stood watching him.

"Your fingers are quite nimble, Thomas, considering the fact that you
were once a sailor," she said.

"But sailors have to be nimble, miss," he returned, buckling a strap
unmoved. "Who tol' ye I were once a sea-farin' man?"

"I guessed it."

As he appeared indisposed to say more on the subject she asked: "Did you
sail with Captain Wegg?"

"Partly, miss. Dan's already now. Don't jerk the bit, fer his mouth's
tender an' it makes him balky. Ef he balks jest let him rest a time, an'
then speak to him. Dan ain't vicious; he's jest ornery."

She climbed into the dilapidated old buggy and took the reins. Dan
groaned and ambled slowly around to where Uncle John stood awaiting
his niece.

"Let me drive, Uncle," she said; "I understand Dan."

"Well, I don't," returned Uncle John, in his whimsical way, as he
mounted to the seat beside her. "I don't understand how he's happened to
live since the landing of Columbus, or what he's good for, or why
someone don't knock him on the head."

Dan turned his long, lean face as if to give the speaker a reproachful
look; then he groaned again, leaned forward, and drew the buggy slowly
into the stony lane.

"Do you know where the Thompsons live?" inquired Uncle John.

"No. Whoa, Dan!"

That was the best thing the nag did. He knew how to whoa.

"Thomas!" called Uncle John, turning in his seat; and at the summons Old
Hucks came from the barn and approached them. "How do you get to Miss
Thompson's place?"

"Miss Ethel's?" Another fleeting expression of surprise.

"Yes; we're going over to thank her for her kindness to us."

"I--I'm 'most sure as she'll be here soon to call, sir. And--perhaps you
oughtn't to--to go to--Thompson's," stammered Hucks, glancing up at them
with his bright, elusive smile.

"Well, we're going, anyhow," growled Mr. Merrick.

"Then turn left at the main road an' keep straight ahead to Thompson's.
Ye can't miss it, sir. Brick schoolhouse on the other corner."

"Thank you, Thomas. Drive on, Louise."



CHAPTER VIII.

THE LITTLE SCHOOL-MA'AM.

Dan balked only twice on the journey, but even this moderate rebellion
so annoyed Uncle John that he declared he would walk back rather than
ride behind this "mulish antiquity" again.

When they came to the Thompson dwelling it at first sight seemed
deserted. A knock on the front door failed to produce any response.

"Perhaps they're away from home," suggested Louise.

"There's a path around to the back," said Uncle John. "Let's explore in
that direction."

They made their way leisurely toward the rear and had almost passed the
house, when a deep roar broke the stillness. It was succeeded by
another, and another, like the bellowing of a mad bull, and the
intruders stopped short and Louise clung to her uncle in sudden panic.

"Be still, Will! Stop, I say--stop!"

A sharp crack, as of a lash, accompanied the words, and a moan or two
was followed by absolute silence.

Uncle John and Louise looked at one another with startled eyes.

"He must be worse," said the old gentleman, mopping his forehead with a
handkerchief.

With one accord they started softly to retrace their steps when a new
sound halted them again. It was a clear, fresh young voice singing a
plaintive ditty in a nonchalant, careless tone.

"That's Ethel, I'm sure," exclaimed Louise, grasping her uncle's arm.

"Well, what shall we do?" he demanded.

"Mr.--the crazy man seems quiet now," she whispered. "Let us find the
girl, if we can."

So again they traversed the path and this time came to the pretty garden
behind the house. Ethel was tending a flower bed. She wore her gingham
dress and a sunbonnet, and, kneeling in the path, stretched out her slim
brown arm to uproot the weeds. But the crunching of the gravel aroused
her attention, and, observing her visitors, she sprang up and hastened
toward them.

Louise introduced her uncle and herself in her most pleasant and
gracious way, and the school teacher led them to a garden bench and
begged them to be seated.

"The day is lovely," she said, "and I always find my garden more
cheerful than the house. Grandfather's illness makes the house
unpleasant for strangers, too."

Louise was surprised at this frank reference, and Uncle John coughed to
hide his embarrassment.

"I--I hope the invalid is--is improving," he said, doubtful whether he
should say anything on the delicate subject or not.

"He is always the same, sir," was the quiet response. "I suppose they
have told you that grandfather is a madman? Our great trouble is well
known in this neighborhood."

"He is not dangerous. I suppose?" hazarded Uncle John, remembering the
brutal bellowing.

"Oh, not at all. He is fully paralyzed from his waist down, poor
grandfather, and can do no harm to anyone. But often his outbreaks are
unpleasant to listen to," continued the girl, deprecatingly, as if
suddenly conscious that they had overheard the recent uproar.

"Has he been--this way--for long?" inquired Louise.

"His mind has been erratic and unbalanced since I can remember,"
answered Ethel, calmly, "but he first became violent at the time Captain
Wegg died, some three years ago. Grandfather was very fond of the
Captain, and happened to be with him at the time of his sudden death.
The shock drove him mad."

"Was he paralyzed before that time?" asked Louise, earnestly.

"No; but the paralysis followed almost immediately. The doctor says that
a blood vessel which burst in the brain is responsible for both
afflictions."

The pause that followed was growing awkward when Uncle John said, with
an evident effort to change the subject:

"This is a fine old homestead."

"It is, indeed," responded Ethel, brightly, "and it enjoys the
distinction of being one of the first houses built in the foothills. My
great-grandfather was really the first settler in these parts and
originally located his cabin where the mill now stands. 'Little Bill
Thompson,' he was called, for he was a small, wiry man--very different
from grandfather, who in his prime was a powerful man of over six feet.
Little Bill Hill and Little Bill Creek were named after this pioneer
great-grandsire, who was quite successful raising flocks of sheep on the
plateau. Before he died he built this house, preferring the location to
his first one."

"The garden is beautiful," said Louise, enthusiastically. "And do you
teach in the little brick school-house across the way?"

"Yes. Grandfather built it years ago, without dreaming I would ever
teach there. Now the county supports the school and pays me my salary."

"How long have you taught?"

"For two years. It is necessary, now that grandfather is disabled. He
has a small income remaining, however, and with what I earn we get along
very nicely."

"It was very good of you to assist in getting our house ready for us,"
said Louise. "We might have found things in sorry condition but for your
kindness."

"Oh, I enjoyed the work, I assure you," replied Ethel. "As it is my
vacation, it was a real pleasure to me to have something to do. But I
fear my arrangement of your pretty furniture was very ungraceful."

"We haven't altered a single thing," declared Louise. "You must have
found it a tedious task, unpacking and getting everything in shape."

"Tom and Nora were good help, because they are fond of me and seem to
understand my wishes; and Peggy McNutt brought me some men to do the
lifting and rough work," explained Ethel.

"Have you known Hucks and his wife long?" asked Uncle John.

"Since I can remember, sir. They came here many years ago, with Captain
Wegg."

"And has Thomas always smiled?" Louise inquired.

"Always," was the laughing reply. "It's an odd expression--isn't it?--to
dwell forever on a man's face. But Tom is never angry, or hurt or
excited by anything, so there is no reason he should not smile. At the
time of Captain Wegg's death and poor grandfather's terrible affliction,
Old Hucks kept right on smiling, the same as ever; and perhaps his
pleasant face helped to cheer us all."

Louise drew a long breath.

"Then the smile is a mask," she said, "and is assumed to conceal the
man's real feelings."

"I do not think so," Ethel answered, thoughtfully. "The smile is
habitual, and dominates any other expression his features might be
capable of; but that it is assumed I do not believe. Thomas is a
simple-minded, honest-hearted old fellow, and to face the world
smilingly is a part of his religion. I am sure he has nothing to
conceal, and his devotion to his blind wife is very beautiful."

"But Nora--how long has she been blind?"

"Perhaps all her life; I cannot tell how long. Yet it is wonderful how
perfectly she finds her way without the aid of sight. Captain Wegg used
to say she was the best housekeeper he ever knew."

"Did not his wife keep house for him, when she was alive?"

"I do not remember her."

"They say she was most unhappy."

Ethel dropped her eyes and did not reply.

"How about Cap'n Wegg?" asked Uncle John. "Did you like him? You see,
we're mighty curious about the family, because we've acquired their old
home, and are bound to be interested in the people that used to
live there."

"That is natural," remarked the little school teacher, with a sigh.
"Captain Wegg was always kind to me; but the neighbors as a rule thought
him moody and bad-tempered." After a pause she added: "He was not as
kind to his son as to me. But I think his life was an unhappy one, and
we have no right to reprove his memory too severely for his faults."

"What made him unhappy?" asked Louise, quickly.

Ethel smiled into her eager face.

"No one has solved that problem, they say. The Captain was as silent as
he was morose."

The detective instinct was alive in Louise. She hazarded a startling
query:

"Who killed Captain Wegg?" she demanded, suddenly.

Another smile preceded the reply.

"A dreadful foe called heart disease. But come; let me show you my
garden. There are no such roses as these for miles around."

Louise was confident she had made progress. Ethel had admitted several
things that lent countenance to the suspicions already aroused; but
perhaps this simple country girl had never imagined the tragedy that had
been enacted at her very door.

She cordially urged Ethel Thompson to spend a day with them at the farm,
and Uncle John, who was pleased with the modesty and frankness of the
fair-haired little school teacher, earnestly seconded the invitation.

Then he thought of going home, and the thought reminded him of Dan.

"Do you know," he inquired, "where I could buy a decent horse?"

The girl looked thoughtful a moment; then glanced up with a bright
smile.

"Will you buy one off me?" she asked.

"Willingly, my dear, if you've an animal to sell."

"It's--it's our Joe. He was grandfather's favorite colt when his trouble
came upon him. We have no use for him now, for I always ride or drive my
pony. And grandmother says he's eating his head off to no purpose; so
we'd like to sell him. If you will come to the barn I'll introduce
you to him."

Joe proved on inspection to be an excellent horse, if appearances were
to be trusted, and Ethel assured Mr. Merrick that the steed was both
gentle and intelligent.

"Do you use that surrey?" inquired Uncle John, pointing to a neat
vehicle that seemed to be nearly new.

"Very seldom, sir. Grandmother would like to sell it with the horse."

"It's exactly what I need," declared Mr. Merrick. "How much for Joe and
his harness, and the surrey?"

"I'll go and ask what grandmother wants."

She returned after a few minutes, stating a figure that made Uncle John
lift his brows with a comical expression.

"A hundred dollars! Do you take me for a brigand, little girl? I know
what horses are worth, for I've bought plenty of 'em. Your Joe seems
sound as a dollar, and he's just in his prime. A hundred and fifty is
dirt cheap for him, and the surrey will be worth at least seventy-five.
Put in the harness at twenty-five, and I'll give you two-fifty for the
outfit, and not a cent more or less. Eh?"

"No, indeed," said Ethel. "We could not get more than a hundred dollars
from anyone else around here."

"Because your neighbors are countrymen, and can't afford a proper
investment. So when they buy at all they only give about half what a
thing is actually worth. But I'll be honest with you. The price I offer
is a good deal less than I'd have to pay in the city--Hutchinson would
charge me five hundred, at least--and I need just what you've got to
sell. What do you say, Miss Ethel?"

"The price is one hundred dollars, Mr. Merrick."

"I won't pay it. Let me talk with your grandmother."

"She does not see anyone, sir."

Louise looked up sharply, scenting another clue.

"Isn't she well, dear?" she asked in smooth tones.

"She looks after grandfather, and helps Aunt Lucy with the housework."

"Well, come, Louise; we'll go home," said Uncle John, sadly. "I'd hoped
to be able to drive this fine fellow back, but Dan'll have to groan an'
balk all the way to the farm."

Ethel smiled.

"Better buy at my price, Mr. Merrick," she suggested.

"Tell you what I'll do," he said, pausing. "I'll split the difference.
Take two hundred and well call it a bargain."

"But I cannot do that, sir."

"It will help pay you for the hard work of fixing up the house," he
rejoined, pleadingly. "Your bill wasn't half enough."

"My bill?" wonderingly.

"The one I paid McNutt for your services."

"I made no charge, sir. I could not accept anything for a bit of
assistance to a neighbor."

"Oh! Then McNutt got it, did he?"

"I'm awfully sorry, Mr. Merrick. I told Peggy I would not accept
payment."

"H-m. Never mind. We're not going to quarrel, little neighbor. May I
hitch Joe to the surrey?"

"If you like. I'll help you."

Uncle John led Joe from his stall and together they harnessed the horse
to the surrey. The girl knew better than the man how to buckle the
straps properly, while Louise stood by helplessly and watched the
performance.

Then Uncle John went for old Dan, whom he led, rickety buggy and all,
into the Thompson stable.

"I'll send Hucks over to get him, although we might as well knock him in
the head," he said as he unharnessed the ancient steed. "Now then,
Louise, hop in."

"You'll be sure to come over Thursday, for the day, Miss Thompson?"
asked Louise, taking Joe's reins from her uncle's hands.

"I'll not forget such a delightful engagement, be sure."

Uncle John had his pocketbook out, and now he wadded up some bills and
thrust them into the little school teacher's hand.

"Drive ahead, Louise," he called. "Good morning, my dear. See you on
Thursday."

As the vehicle rolled out of the yard and turned into the highway, Ethel
unrolled the bills with trembling fingers.

"If he has dared--!" she began, but paused abruptly with a smile of
content.

The rich man had given her exactly one hundred dollars.



CHAPTER IX.

THE LIVES OF THE SAINTS.

On Wednesday afternoon McNutt drove the sad-eyed sorrel mare over to the
Wegg farm again. He had been racking his brain for a way to get more
money out of the nabob, for the idea had become a veritable passion with
him and now occupied all his thoughts.

That very morning an inspiration had come to him. Among other
occupations he had at one time adopted that of a book-agent, and by dint
of persistent energy had sold numerous copies of "Radford's Lives of the
Saints" to the surrounding farmers. They had cost him ninety cents a
copy and he had sold them at three dollars each, netting a fine profit
in return for his labor. The books were printed upon cheap paper,
fearfully illustrated with blurred cuts, but the covers were bound in
bright red with gold lettering. Through misunderstandings three of these
copies had come back to him, the subscribers refusing to accept them;
and so thorough had been his canvassing that there remained no other
available customers for the saintly works. So Peggy had kept them on a
shelf in his "office" for several years, and now, when his eye chanced
to light upon them, he gave a snort of triumph and pounced upon them
eagerly. Mr. Merrick was a newcomer. Without doubt he could be induced
to buy a copy of Radford's Lives.

An hour later McNutt was on his mission, the three copies, which had
been carefully dusted, reclining on the buggy seat beside him. Arrived
at the Wegg farm, he drove up to the stile and alighted.

Louise was reading in the hammock, and merely glanced at the little man,
who solemnly stumped around to the back door with the three red volumes
tucked underneath his arm. He had brought them all along to make his
errand "look like business."

"Where's the nabob?" he asked blind Nora.

"What's that, Mr. McNutt?" she inquired, as if puzzled. She knew his
voice, as she did that of nearly everyone with whom she had ever been
brought in contact.

"Why, the nabob; the boss; Mr. Merrick."

"Oh. He's in the barn with Tom, I guess."

McNutt entered the barn. Uncle John was seated upon an overturned pail
watching Old Hucks oil Joe's harness. The agent approached him with a
deferential bow.

"Sir," said he, "you'll 'scuse my comin' agin so soon to be a-botherin';
but I hev here three copies of Radford's famis wucks on the Lives o' the
Saints, in a edishun dee looks----"

"A what?"

"A edishun dee looks, which means extry fine. It's a great book an'
they's all out'n print 'cept these three, which I hain't no doubt many
folks would be glad to give their weight in gold fer, an' some over."

"Stand out of the light, McNutt."

The agent shifted his position.

"Them books, sir----"

"Oh, take 'em away."

"What!"

"I don't read novels."

McNutt scratched his head, perplexed at the rebuff. His "dee looks"
speech had usually resulted in a sale. An idea flashed across his
brain--perhaps evolved by the scratching.

"The young lady, sir--"

"Oh, the girls are loaded with books," growled the nabob.

The agent became desperate.

"But the young lady in the hammick, sir, as I jest now left, says to
tell ye she wants one o' these books mighty bad, an' hopes you'll buy it
for her eddificationing."

"Oh; she does, eh?"

"Mighty bad, sir."

Uncle John watched Thomas polish a buckle.

"Is it a moral work?" he asked.

"Nuthin' could be moraler, sir. All 'bout the lives o'--"

"How much is it?"

"Comes pretty high, sir. Three dollars. But it's--"

"Here. Take your money and get out. You're interrupting me."

"Very sorry, sir. Much obleeged, sir. Where'll I leave the book?"

"Throw it in the manger."

McNutt selected a volume that had a broken corner and laid it carefully
on the edge of the oat-bin. Then he put his money in his pocket and
turned away.

"Morn'n' to ye, Mr. Merrick."

"Stop a bit," said Uncle John, suddenly.

The agent stopped.

"I believe I paid you ten dollars for Miss Ethel Thompson's services. Is
that correct?"

"Ye--yes, Mr. Merrick."

McNutt's heart was in his shoes and he looked guiltily at his accuser,
the pale blue eyes bulging fearfully.

"Very well; see that she gets it."

"Of course, Mr. Merrick."

"And at once. You may go."

McNutt stumped from the barn. He felt that a dreadful catastrophe had
overtaken him. Scarcely could he restrain the impulse to sob aloud. Ten
dollars!--Ten dollars gone to the dogs as the result of his visit to the
nabob that morning! To lose ten dollars in order to gain three was very
bad business policy. McNutt reflected bitterly that he would have been
better off had he stayed at home. He ought to have been contented with
what he had already made, and the severe manner the nabob had used in
addressing him told the agent plainly that he need not expect further
pickings from this source.

In the midst of his despair the comforting thought that Ethel would
surely refuse the money came to sustain him; so he recovered somewhat
his former spirits. As he turned the corner of the house he observed
Louise still reading in the hammock.

In some ways McNutt was a genius. He did not neglect opportunities.

"Here's my las' chance at these idjits," he muttered, "an' I'll learn
thet nabob what it costs, to make Marsh McNutt stand out'n his light."

Then he hastened over to the hammock.

"'Scuse me, miss," said he, in his most ingratiating voice. "Is yer
uncle 'round anywheres?"

"Isn't he in the barn?" asked the girl, looking up.

"Can't find him, high ner low. But he ordered a book of me t'other
day--'Radford's Lives o' the Saints'--an' perhaps you'll take it an' pay
me the money, so's I kin go home."

Louise gazed at the man musingly. He was one of the people she intended
to pump for information concerning the mystery of Captain Wegg, and she
must be gracious to him in order to win his good-will and induce him to
speak freely. With this thought in mind she drew out her purse
and asked:

"How much were you to be paid for the book?"

"Three dollars, miss."

"Here is the money, then. Tell me--your name is McNutt, isn't it?--how
long have you lived in this place?"

"All my life, miss. Thank 'e, miss. Good day to ye, miss."

He placed the book in the hammock beside her.

"Don't go, please." said the girl. "I'd like you to tell me something
about Captain Wegg, and of his poor wife who died, and--"

"Nuther time, miss, I'll be glad to. Ye'll find me in my orfice, any
time. Jest now I'm in the dumdest hurry ye ever knew. Good day to ye,
miss," he repeated, and stumped quickly to the buggy awaiting him. Next
moment he had seized the reins and was urging the sorrel mare along the
stony lane at her best pace.

Louise was both astonished and disappointed, but after a little thought
she looked after the departing agent with a shrewd smile.

"He's afraid to talk," she murmured, "and that only confirms my
suspicions that he knows more than he cares to tell."

Meantime McNutt was doing his best to get away from the premises before
the discovery was made that he had sold two "Lives of the Saints" to one
family. That there might be future consequences to follow his deception
never occurred to him; only the immediate necessity for escape
occupied his mind.

Nor were his fears altogether groundless. Turning his head from time to
time for a glance behind, he had seen Mr. Merrick come from the barn
with a red book in his hand and approach the hammock, whereupon the
young lady arose and exhibited a second book. Then they both dropped the
books and ran into the lane and began shouting for him to stop--the
man's voice sounding especially indignant and imperative.

But McNutt chose to be deaf. He did not look around again, and was
congratulating himself that he would soon be out of earshot when a
sudden apparition ahead caused the mare to halt abruptly. It also caused
the cold chills to run down the agent's back. Beth and Patsy had stepped
into the lane from a field, being on their way home from their
daily walk.

"They're calling to you, sir," said Patsy to the agent. "Didn't you hear
them?"

"I--I'm a little deaf, miss," stammered McNutt, who recognized the young
ladies as Mr. Merrick's nieces.

"I think they wish you to go back," remarked Beth, thoughtfully watching
the frantic waves of Uncle John's chubby arms and Louise's energetic
beckonings. They were too far off to be heard plainly, but their actions
might surely be understood.

McNutt with reluctance looked over his shoulder, and a second shudder
went through him.

"I hain't got time to go back," he said, as an inspiration came to him;
"but I guess you kin do jest as well. This book here," picking up the
last of the three from the seat, "I offered to sell yer uncle fer five
dollars; but he wanted it fer four. I ain't no haggler, you understan',
so I jest driv away. Now Mr. Merrick has changed his mind an' is willin'
to give five fer it; but there ain't nuthin' small about me. Ef you
gals'll jest give me the four dollars ye kin take the book to yer uncle,
with my compliments; an' I won't hev t' go back. I'm in a
drea'ful hurry."

Patsy laughed at the little man's excited manner.

"Fortunately I have some money with me," she said; "but you may as well
take the five dollars, for unless Uncle had been willing to pay it he
would not have called you back."

"I think so, myself, miss," he rejoined, taking the money and handing
her the volume.

Uncle John and Louise, glaring at the distant group, saw the third red
book change hands, and in answer to their renewed cries and gestures
Patsy waved the "Lives of the Saints" at them reassuringly and came on
at a brisk walk, followed by Beth.

McNutt slapped the sorrel with the ends of the reins so energetically
that the mare broke into a trot, and before the girls had come within
speaking distance of their uncle, the agent was well out of sight and
exulting in the possession of eleven dollars to pay for his morning's
work. Even if Ethel accepted that ten, he reflected, he would still be a
dollar ahead. But he was sure she would tell him to keep it; and he'd
"jest like to see thet air nabob git a penny back agin."

Meantime Uncle John's wrath, which was always an effervescent quality
with the little gentleman, had changed to wonder when he saw his nieces
approaching with the third red-and-gold book. Louise was leaning against
the rail fence and laughing hysterically, and suddenly a merry smile
appeared and spread over her uncle's round face as he said:

"Did you ever hear of such an audacious swindle in all your born days?"

"What will you do, Uncle?" asked the girl, wiping the tears of merriment
from her eyes. "Have the man arrested?"

"Of course not, my dear. It's worth the money just to learn what talents
the fellow possesses. Tell me, Patsy," he continued, as the other nieces
joined them, "what did you pay for your book?"

"Five dollars. Uncle. He said--"

"Never mind what he said, my dear. It's all right. I wanted it to add to
my collection. So far I've got three 'Lives of the Saints'--and I'm
thankful they're not cats, or there'd be nine lives for me to
accumulate."



CHAPTER X.

THE MYSTERY DEEPENS.

Ethel Thompson came over the next day, as she had promised, and the
sweet-faced, gentle school-mistress won the hearts of Uncle John's three
nieces without an effort. She was the eldest of them all, but her
retired country life had kept her fresh and natural, and Ethel seemed no
more mature than the younger girls except in a certain gravity that
early responsibility had thrust upon her.

Together the four laughing, light-hearted maids wandered through the
pines, where the little school-ma'am showed them many pretty nooks and
mossy banks that the others had not yet discovered. By following an
unsuspected path, they cut across the wooded hills to the waterfall,
where Little Bill Creek made a plunge of twenty feet into a rocky basin
below. In spite of the bubbles, the water here showed clear as crystal,
and the girls admiringly christened it the "Champagne Cup." They shed
their shoes and stockings and waded in the pool, enjoying the sport with
shrieks of merry laughter--more because they were happy than that there
was anything to laugh at.

Afterward they traced the stream down to a lovely glade a half mile
above Millville, where Ethel informed them the annual Sunday-school
picnic was always held, and then trailed across the rocky plateau to the
farm. By the time they reached home their appetites were well sharpened
for Mary's excellent luncheon, and the afternoon was devoted to rest
under the shady pines that grew beside the house.

It was now, when they felt thoroughly acquainted and at ease in one
another's society, that the girls indulged in talks concerning events in
their past, and Ethel was greatly interested in the nieces' recital of
their recent trip abroad with Uncle John. They also spoke frankly of
their old life together at Elmhurst, where Aunt Jane, who was Uncle
John's sister, had congregated her three nieces for the purpose of
choosing from among them one to inherit her vast estates. It seemed no
source of regret to any of them that a boy, Kenneth Forbes, had finally
succeeded to Aunt Jane's property, and this may be explained by the fact
that Uncle John had at that interesting juncture appeared to take charge
of the nieces. It was quite evident that the eccentric but kindly old
fellow had succeeded in making these three girls as happy as their
dispositions would allow them to be.

After the most interesting phases of their personal history had been
discussed, the nieces began, perhaps unconsciously, to draw from Ethel
her own story. It was simple enough, and derived its interest mainly
from the fact that it concerned their new friend. Her parents had both
passed away while she was young, and Ethel had always lived with her
father's father, big Will Thompson, a man reputed very well-to-do for
this section, and an energetic farmer from his youth.

Old Will had always been accused of being unsociable and considering
himself above the neighboring farmers; and it was true that Bob West,
the implement dealer, was his only associate before Captain Wegg
arrived. A casual acquaintance with the Millville people might easily
explain this.

With the advent of the Weggs, however, a strong friendship seemed to
spring up between the retired sea captain and the bluff, erratic old
farmer, which lasted until the fatal day when one died and the other
became a paralytic and a maniac.

"We have always thought," said Ethel, "that the shock of the Captain's
death unsettled my grandfather's mind. They had been sitting quietly in
Captain Wegg's room one evening, as they were accustomed to do, when
there was a sudden fall and a cry. Thomas ran in at once, and found
grandfather raving over the Captain's dead body. The old seaman had
heart disease, it seems, and had often declared he would die suddenly.
It was a great blow to us all, but especially to Joe."

Her voice softened at this last remark, and Patsy exclaimed,
impulsively:

"Tell us about Joe Wegg. Did you like him?"

"Yes," said Ethel, simply; "we were naturally thrown much together in
our childhood, and became staunch friends. Grandpa often took me with
him on his visits to the Weggs, and sometimes, but not often, the
Captain would bring Joe to see us. He was a quiet, thoughtful boy; much
like his mother, I imagine; but for some reason he had conceived an
intense dislike for his father and an open hatred for this part of the
country, where he was born. Aside from these morbid notions, Joe was
healthy-minded and frank and genuine. Had he been educated in any other
atmosphere than the gloomy one of the Wegg household I am sure Joe's
character would have been wholly admirable, and I have never blamed the
boy much for his peculiarities. Captain Wegg would not permit him to go
to school, but himself attended to such instructions as Joe could
acquire at home, and this was so meager and the boy so ambitious that I
think it was one cause of his discontent. I remember, when I was sent to
school at Troy, that Joe sobbed for days because he could not have the
same advantages. He used to tell me wonderful stories of what he would
accomplish if he could only get out into the world.

"When he implored his father to let him go away, Captain Wegg used to
assure Joe that he would some day be rich, and there was no need of his
preparing himself for either a business or a profession; but that did
not satisfy Joe's ambition, as you may imagine. And, when the end came,
scarcely a dollar of money could be found among the Captain's
possessions, and no other property than this farm; so it is evident he
deceived his son for some selfish purpose.

"Joe was at last free, and the only thing I reproach him for is going
away without a word to me or any of his friends. I heard, indirectly, of
his working his way through a technical school, for he was always crazy
about mechanics, and then he went to New York and I lost all further
trace of him."

"What do you suppose became of Captain Wegg's money?" asked Louise.

"I've no idea. It is a singular thing that most of my grandfather's
savings disappeared at the same time. On account of his mental condition
he can never tell us what became of his little fortune; but luckily the
returns from the farm, which we rent on shares, and my own salary as
teacher of the district school, enable us to live quite comfortably,
although we must be economical."

"Why, it's really a romance!" cried Patsy, who had listened eagerly.

"There are many romances in real life," added Beth, in her
undemonstrative way.

Louise said nothing, but her heart was throbbing with excitement
engendered by the tale, which so strongly corroborated the suspicions
she had begun to entertain. When Ethel had gone home Louise still
deliberated upon this fascinating mystery, and her resolve grew to force
some sort of an explanation from the smiling lips of Old Hucks. For the
sole available witness of that fatal night's tragedy, when one strong
man died and another was driven mad, was Thomas Hucks. The old servitor
was also in a position to know much of the causes leading up to the
catastrophe, he having been the confidential retainer of Captain Wegg
for many years. Hucks must speak; but the girl was wise enough to
realize that he would not do so unless urged by coaxing or forced by
strategy. There was doubtless good reason why the old man had remained
silent for three years. Her plan was to win his confidence. Interest him
in Joe's welfare, and then the truth must come out.

The frankly related story of Ethel had supplied Louise with the motive
for the crime, for that a crime had been committed she was now doubly
sure. Captain Wegg had money; old Will Thompson had money; both were
well-to-do men. In a retired country district, where there were no
banks, it was reasonable to suppose they kept large sums of money on
hand, and the knowledge of this fact had tempted some one to a dreadful
deed. Captain Wegg had been killed and old Thompson perhaps injured by a
blow upon the head from which he had never recovered. Any suspicion the
fair young detective may have entertained that Thompson himself had
killed his friend was eradicated by the fact that he had been robbed at
the same time.

Louise had originally undertaken her investigation through curiosity and
a desire to amuse herself by unveiling the mystery. Now she began to
reflect that she was an instrument of justice, for a discovery of the
truth might restore a fortune to poor Joe Wegg, now struggling with the
world, and put sweet Ethel Thompson in a position where the necessity
for her to teach school would be abolished. This thought added a strong
impulse to her determination to succeed.

Sunday afternoon the girl took blind Nora for a long drive through the
country, taking pains to explain to her all the points of interest they
came to, and delighting the old woman with her bright chatter. Louise
had been kind to Nora from the beginning, and her soft, sympathetic
voice had quite won the poor creature's heart.

On the way home, in the delightful summer twilight, the girl dexterously
led the conversation toward Nora's past history.

"Was Thomas a sailor when you married him?" she asked.

"Yes, miss. He were bos'n on Cap'n Wegg's schooner the 'Lively Kate,'
an' I were livin' with Miss Mary, as come to be Mrs. Wegg arterward."

"Oh, I see. And were you blind then, Nora?"

"No, miss. I went blind arter our great trouble come to us."

"Trouble? Oh, I'm so sorry, dear. What was it?"

The old woman was silent for a time. Then she said:

"I'd better not mention it, I guess. Thomas likes to forgit, an' when I
gets cryin' an' nervous he knows I've been thinkin' 'bout the
old trouble."

Louise was disappointed, but changed the subject adroitly.

"And Miss Mary, who was afterward Mrs. Wegg. Did you love her, Nora?"

"Indeed I did, child."

"What was she like?"

"She were gentle, an' sweet, an' the mos' beautiful creetur in
all--in--in the place where we lived. An' her fambily was that proud an'
aristocratic thet no one could tech 'em with a ten-foot pole."

"I see. Did she love Captain Wegg?"

"Nat'rally, sense she married of him, an' fit all her fambily to do it.
An' the Cap'n were thet proud o' her thet he thought the world lay in
her sweet eyes."

"Oh. I had an idea he didn't treat her well," remarked the girl,
soberly.

"That's wrong," declared Nora, promptly. "Arter the trouble come--fer it
come to the Weggs as well as to Tom an' me--the Cap'n sort o' lost heart
to see his Mary cry day arter day an' never be comforted. He were hard
hit himself, ye see, an' that made it a gloomy house, an' no mistake."

"Do you mean after you moved here, to the farm?"

"Yes, deary."

"I hear Captain Wegg was very fond of Ethel's grandfather," continued
Louise, trying to find an opening to penetrate old Nora's reserve.

"They was good friends always," was the brief reply.

"Did they ever quarrel, Nora?"

"Never that I knows of."

"And what do you suppose became of their money?" asked the girl.

"I don't know, child. Air we gettin' near home?"

"We are quite near, now. I wish you would open your heart to me, and
tell me about that great trouble, Nora. I might be able to comfort you
in some way."

The blind woman shook her head.

"There's no comfort but in forgettin'," she said; "an' the way to forgit
ain't to talk about it."

The unsatisfactory result of this conversation did not discourage
Louise, although she was sorry to meet with no better success. Gradually
she was learning the inside history of the Weggs. When she discovered
what that "great trouble" had been she would secure an important clue in
the mystery, she was sure. Nora might some time be induced to speak more
freely, and it was possible she might get the desired information from
Old Hucks. She would try, anyway.

A dozen theories might be constructed to account for this "great
trouble." The one that Louise finally favored was that Captain Wegg had
been guilty of some crime on the high seas in which his boatswain, Old
Hucks, was likewise implicated. They were obliged to abandon the sea and
fly to some out-of-the-way corner inland, where they could be safely
hidden and their whereabouts never discovered. It was the knowledge of
this crime, she conjectured, that had ruined sweet Mrs. Wegg's life and
made her weep day after day until her guilty husband became surly and
silent and unsociable.

Louise now began to cultivate Thomas, but her progress was slow. Patsy
seemed to be the old man's favorite, and for some reason he became glum
and uncommunicative whenever Louise was around. The girl suspected that
Nora had told her husband of the recent conversation, in spite of her
assertion that she wished to avoid all reference to their great trouble.



CHAPTER XI.

THREE AMATEUR DETECTIVES.

Puzzling her brain what to do next, Louise suddenly decided to confide
her secret to her two cousins. Not that she considered them capable of a
greater success than she could herself accomplish, but they might prove
valuable assistants in the capacity of lieutenants. She had great
respect for Beth's calm judgment and keen intuitions, and Patsy had a
way of accomplishing difficult things with ease.

The two girls listened to Louise with expressions of mingled wonder and
amusement while she confided to them her first suspicions that Captain
Wegg had been murdered, and then the bits of information she had
gathered to strengthen the surmise and assure her she was justified in
her efforts to untangle the web of mystery.

"You see, my dears," she explained, impressively, as the three lounged
upon the grass in the shade of the right wing of the house, "there is a
very interesting story about these people that ought to guide us
directly to a solution of the puzzle. A roving sea captain marries a
girl of good family in spite of the opposition of her relatives. His
boatswain, a confidential servant, marries the girl's maid. The next
thing we know is that a 'great trouble' causes them to flee--doubtless
some crime committed by the captain. It may have been robbery, or
perhaps piracy on the high seas; who knows? Anyhow, he steals away to
this forsaken spot, far from the sea or the railroads, and builds a fine
house on a worthless farm, showing that he has money, but that
retirement is his main object. Here the Weggs make no friends: but the
wife cries her eyes out until she dies miserably, leaving a son to the
tender mercies of a wicked father. So fearful is he of discovery that he
will not allow the boy to go to school, but tries to educate
him himself."

"Probably the captain's real name was not Wegg, at all," suggested
Patsy, entering into the spirit of the relation.

"Probably not, dear. He would assume some name, of course, so that it
might be more difficult to trace him," answered Louise. "But now--mark
me well, girls!--a Nemesis was on the track of this wicked sinner. After
many years the man Captain Wegg had wronged, or stolen from, or
something, discovered his enemy's hiding place. He promptly killed the
Captain, and probably recovered the money, for it's gone. Old Thompson,
Ethel's grandfather, happened to be present. The murderer also took his
money, and--"

"Oh, Louise! That isn't reasonable," objected Beth, who had been
following the story carefully.

"Why not?"

"Because you are making the wronged party as wicked as the man who
wronged him. When the avenger found his enemy he might force him to give
up his ill-gotten gains; I agree with you there; but he wouldn't be
liable to rob old Thompson, I'm sure."

"Beth is right," said Patsy, stoutly.

"But old Thompson lost his money at the same time, you know; at least
his money could never be found afterward. And I'm sure he was dealt some
blow on the head that made him crazy," answered Louise, positively.

They thought that over.

"I believe I can explain it, girls," said Beth, presently. "The avenger
found Captain Wegg, all right--just as Louise has said--and when he
found him he demanded a restitution of his money, threatening to send
the criminal to jail. That would be very natural, wouldn't it? Well,
Captain Wegg had spent a good deal of the money, and couldn't pay it all
back; so Ethel's grandfather, being his friend, offered to makeup the
balance himself rather than see his friend go to prison. That accounts
for the disappearance of all the money."

"If that is so," observed Patsy, "I don't see why the man, having got
his money back, should murder one and knock the other on the head."

It way a puzzle, they all acknowledged, and after discussing the matter
from every conceivable standpoint they were no nearer an explanation.
That's the way with mysteries; they're often hard to understand.

"The only thing that occurs to me as being sensible," said Louise,
finally, "is that after the money was paid over they got into a quarrel.
Then the avenger lost his temper and committed the murders."

"This talk about an avenger is all guess work," asserted Beth, calmly.
"I don't believe the facts point to an avenger at all."

"But the old crime--the great trouble--"

"Oh, we'll allow all that," returned Beth; "and I don't say that an
avenger wouldn't be the nicest person to exact retribution from the
wicked captain. But avengers don't always turn up, in real life, when
they ought to, girls; so we mustn't be too sure that one turned up in
this case."

"But now else can you account for the captain's murder?" objected
Louise.

"Well, some one else might know he had money, and that Ethel's
grandfather had money, too," was the reply. "Suppose the robbery and
murder had nothing to do with the old crime at all, but that the
murderer knew this to be a deserted place where he could make a good
haul without being discovered. The two old men sat in the right wing,
quite unsuspicious, when----"

"When in walks Mr. Murderer, chokes the captain, knocks his friend on
the brain-box, and makes off with the money!" continued Patsy,
gleefully. "Oh, girls, I'm sure we've got it right this time."

Louise reflected a moment.

"This country is almost a wilderness," she mused, aloud, "and few
strangers ever come here. Besides, a stranger would not know positively
that these two men had money. If we abandon the idea of an avenger, and
follow Beth's clue, then the murderer is still right here in Millville,
and unsuspected by any of his neighbors."

"Oh, Louise!" with startled glances over their shoulders.

"Let us be sensible, reasoning girls; not silly things trying to figure
out possible romances," continued Louise, with a pretty and impressive
assumption of dignity. "Do you know, I feel that some angel of
retribution has guided us to this lonely farmhouse and put the idea into
my head to discover and expose a dreadful crime."

"Succotash!" cried Patsy, irrelevantly. "You're romancing this minute,
Louise. The way you figure things out I wouldn't be surprised if you
accused me, or Uncle John, any time during the next half hour. Adopting
your last supposition, for the sake of argument, I'm interested to know
what inhabitant of sleepy old Millville you suspect."

"Don't get flighty, Patricia," admonished Beth. "This is a serious
matter, and Louise is in earnest. If we're going to help her we mustn't
talk rubbish. Now, it isn't a bad suggestion that we ought to look
nearer home for the key to this mystery. There's old Hucks."

"Hucks!"

"To be sure. No one knew so well as he the money affairs of the two men
who were robbed."

"I'm ashamed of you," said Patsy.

"And the man's smile is a mask!" exclaimed Louise.

"Oh, no!" protested Patsy.

"My dear, no person who ever lived could smile every minute, winter and
summer, rain or shine, day and night, and always have a reason for
the smile."

"Of course not," agreed Beth. "Old Hucks is a curious character. I
realized that when I had known him five minutes."

"But he's poor," urged Patsy, in defense of the old man. "He hasn't a
penny in the world, and McNutt told me if we turned Thomas and Nora away
they'd have to go to the poorhouse."

"That is no argument at all," said Louise, calmly. "If we consider the
fact that Old Hucks may be a miser, and have a craving for money without
any desire to spend it, then we are pretty close to a reason why he
should bide his time and then murder his old master to obtain the riches
he coveted. Mind you, I don't say Hucks is guilty, but it is our duty to
consider this phase of the question."

"And then," added Beth, "if Hucks should prove to be a miser, it is easy
to guess he would hide his wealth where he could secretly gloat over it,
and still continue to pose as a pauper."

"I don't believe it," said Patsy, stoutly.

"You'll never make a successful detective if you allow your personal
feelings to influence you," returned Louise. "I, too, sincerely hope
that Thomas is innocent; but we are not justified in acquitting him
until we have made a careful investigation and watched his actions."

"I'm quite sure he's connected with the mystery in some way," said Beth.
"It will do no harm to watch Old Hucks, as Louise suggests."

"And you might try to pump him, Patsy, and see if you can get him to
talk of the murder. Some careless remark might give us just the clue we
need and guide us to the real criminal. That would free Thomas from all
suspicion, you see."

"But why do you ask me to do this?" demanded Patsy. "Thomas and I are
good friends, and I'd feel like a traitor to try to get him to confess
a murder."

"If he is innocent, you have done no harm," said her eldest cousin; "and
if he is guilty you don't want him for your friend."

"He likes you, dear," added Beth, "and perhaps he will tell you frankly
all we want to know. There's another person, though, Louise, who might
tell us something."

"Who is that?"

"The little man with the golf-ball eyes; McNutt."

"Now, there's some sense in suspecting him," exclaimed Patsy. "We know
he's a robber, already, and a man who is clever enough to sell Uncle
John three 'Lives of the Saints' would stick at nothing, I'm sure."

"He hasn't enough courage to commit a great crime," observed Beth.

"But he may be able to give us some information," Louise asserted; "so I
propose we walk over to the town tomorrow morning and interview him."

This was promptly agreed to, for even Patsy, the least enthusiastic
detective of the three, was eager to find some sort of a solution of the
Wegg mystery. Meantime they decided to watch Old Hucks very carefully.

Beth happened to be present when Uncle John paid Thomas his weekly wage
that evening, and was interested to notice how the old man's hand
trembled with eagerness as he took the money.

"How much are you accustomed to receive?" Uncle John had asked.

"Nothing 'tall, sir, since Cap'n Wegg died," was the reply. "We was glad
enough to have a home, Nora an' me, 'thout 'spectin' wages."

"And there was no one here for you to serve," mused Uncle John. "But in
Captain Wegg's day, how much did he give you?"

Thomas hesitated, and his smile wavered an instant.

"My old master was also my old friend," said he, in a low voice; "an' I
ast him fer little money because my needs were little."

"Well, the conditions are now different," remarked Uncle John,
carelessly; "and while you are in my employ you shall have your wages
regularly. Will ten dollars a week be satisfactory?"

"Oh, sir!"

"And five for Nora."

"You are too good, sir. I--I--"

"Never mind, Thomas. If you want more at any time let me know."

It was then, as the old man took the fifteen dollars extended to him,
that Beth noted a flash in the mild blue eyes and a trembling of the
horny hands. Hucks was very glad to get the money; there was little
doubt of that.

She spoke of this incident to Louise, and the following morning they
tested the man again. All three girls being present, Beth tendered Old
Hucks two dollars, saying it was intended as a slight mark of her
appreciation of his attention. Thomas demurred at first, but on being
urged took the money with the same eager gesture he had before
displayed. Louise followed with a donation of a like sum, and Patsy gave
the old man still another two dollar bill. This generosity so amazed him
that tears stood in his eyes as he tried to thank them all. It was
noticed that the smile did not give way even to the tears, although it
was tinged with a pathetic expression that proved wonderfully affecting.
He concealed the offerings with a stealthy motion, as if ashamed of his
weakness in accepting them, and then hurried away to his work.

"Well," said Louise, when they were alone, "is Thomas a miser or not?"

"He clutched the money almost as if he loved it," observed Beth, in a
musing and slightly regretful tone.

"But think how poor he has been," pleaded Patsy, "and how destitute both
he and Nora are yet. Can we blame him for being glad to earn something
substantial at last?"

Somehow that did not seem to explain fully the old man's behavior, and
the girl who had championed him sighed and then gave a sudden shiver as
she remembered the awful suspicion that had fallen upon this strange
individual. If the proof must be accepted that Hucks had miserly
instincts, had not Beth accidentally stumbled upon a solution of the
whole mystery?

But Patsy would not believe it. If Thomas' open countenance lied, it was
hard to put faith in any one.



CHAPTER XII.

THE BAITING OF PEGGY M'NUTT.

By this time the three nieces were so thoroughly impressed with the
importance of the task they had undertaken that more ordinary things
failed to interest them. Louise longed to solve the mystery. Beth wanted
to punish the wrongdoers. Patsy yearned to exonerate the friends whom
she imagined unjustly accused. Therefore the triple alliance for
detective purposes was a strong one.

By mutual agreement they kept the matter secret from Uncle John, for
they realized what a triumph it would be to surprise the old gentleman
with proofs of their cleverness. To confide in him now would mean to
invite no end of ridicule or good natured raillery, for Uncle John had
not a grain of imagination or romance in his nature and would be unable
to comprehend the delights of this secret investigation.

Because he was in the dark the significant looks and unnatural gravity
of his nieces in the succeeding days puzzled the poor man greatly.

"What's wrong, girls?" he would ask. "Aren't you happy here? Do you miss
anything you'd like? Is it too quiet and dull at Millville to suit you?"

"Oh, no!" they would exclaim. "We are having a splendid time, and would
not leave the farm for anything."

And he often noticed them grouped in isolated places and conversing in
low, eager tones that proved "something was up." He felt somewhat
grieved that he was not their confidant, since these girls and their
loyal affection for him constituted the chief joy of his life. When he
put on his regulation fishing costume and carried his expensive rod and
reel, his landing net and creel to the brook for a day's sport, he could
no longer induce one of his girls to accompany him. Even Patsy pleaded
laughingly that she had certain "fish to fry" that were not to be found
in the brook.

Soon the three nieces made their proposed visit to McNutt, their idea
being to pump that individual until he was dry of any information he
might possess concerning the Wegg mystery. They tramped over to the
village after breakfast one morning and found the agent seated on the
porch before his little "office," by which name the front room of his
cottage was dignified. He was dressed in faded overalls, a checked shirt
and a broad-brimmed cheap straw hat. His "off foot," as he called it
with grim humor, was painted green and his other foot was bare and might
have been improved in color. Both these extremities rested on the rail
of the porch, while McNutt smoked a corncob pipe and stared at his
approaching visitors with his disconcerting, protruding eyes.

"Good morning, Mr. McNutt," said Louise, pleasantly. "We've come to see
if you have any books to sell."

The agent drew a long breath. He had at first believed they had come to
reproach him for his cruel deception; for although his conscience was
wholly dormant, he had at times been a bit uneasy concerning his
remarkable book trade.

"Uncle is making a collection of the 'Lives of the Saints.'" announced
Patsy, demurely. "At present he has but three varieties of this work,
one with several pages missing, another printed partly upside down, and
a third with a broken corner. He is anxious to secure some further
variations of the 'dee looks' Lives, if you can supply them."

Peggy's eyes couldn't stare any harder, so they just stared.

"I--I hain't got no more on hand," he stammered, fairly nonplussed by
the remarkable statement.

"No more? Oh, how sad. How disappointed we are," said Beth.

"We were depending so much on you. Mr. McNutt," added Louise, in a tone
of gentle reproach.

McNutt wiggled the toes of his good foot and regarded them reflectively.
These city folks were surely the "easiest marks" he had ever
come across.

"Ef ye could wait a few days," he began, hopefully, "I might----"

"Oh, no; we can't possibly wait a single minute," declared Patsy.
"Unless Uncle can get the Saints right away he will lose interest in the
collection, and then he won't care for them at all."

McNutt sighed dismally. Here was a chance to make good money by fleecing
the lambs, yet he was absolutely unable to take advantage of it.

"Ye--ye couldn't use any duck eggs, could ye?" he said, a sudden thought
seeming to furnish him with a brilliant idea.

"Duck eggs?"

"I got the dum-twistedest, extry fine lot o' duck eggs ye ever seen."

"But what can we do with duck eggs?" inquired Beth, wonderingly, while
Patsy and Louise tried hard not to shriek with laughter.

"W'y, set 'em under a hen, an' hatch 'em out."

"Sir," said Beth, "I strongly disapprove of such deceptions. It seems to
me that making a poor hen hatch out ducks, under the delusion that they
are chickens, is one of the most cruel and treacherous acts that
humanity can be guilty of. Imagine the poor thing's feelings when her
children take to water! I'm surprised you could suggest such a wicked
use for duck eggs."

McNutt wiggled his toes again, desperately.

"Can't use any sas'frass roots, can ye?"

"No, indeed; all we crave is the 'Lives of the Saints.'"

"Don't want to buy no land?"

"What have you got to sell?"

"Nuth'n, jest now. But ef ye'll buy I kin git 'most anything."

"Don't go to any trouble on our account, sir; we are quite content with
our splendid farm."

"Shoo! Thet ain't no good."

"Captain Wegg thought it was," answered Louise, quickly seizing this
opening. "Otherwise he would not have built so good a house upon it."

"The Cap'n were plumb crazy," declared the agent, emphatically. "He
didn't want ter farm when he come here; he jest wanted to hide."

The girls exchanged quick glances of intelligence.

"Why?"

"Why?" repeated McNutt. "Thet's a thing what's puzzled us fer years,
miss. Some thinks Wegg were a piret; some thinks he kidnaped thet pretty
wife o' his'n an' took her money; some thinks he tried to rob ol' Will
Thompson, an' Will killed him an' then went crazy hisself. There's all
sorts o' thinks goin' 'round; but who _knows_?"

"Don't you, Mr. McNutt?"

The agent was flattered by the question. As he had said, the Weggs had
formed the chief topic of conversation in Millville for years, and no
one had a more vivid interest in their history than Marshall McMahon
McNutt. He enjoyed gossiping about the Weggs almost as much as he did
selling books.

"I never thought I had no call to stick my nose inter other folkses
privit doin's," he said, after a few puffs at the corncob pipe. "But
they kain't hide much from Marsh McNutt, when he has his eyes open."

Patsy wondered if he could possibly close them. The eyelids seemed to be
shy and retiring.

"I seen what I seen," continued the little man, glancing impressively at
his attentive audience. "I seen Cap'n Wegg livin' without workin', fer
he never lifted a hand to do even a chore. I seen him jest settin'
'round an' smokin' his pipe an' a glowerin' like a devil on ev'ryone
thet come near. Say, once he ordered me off'n his premises--me!"

"What a dreadful man," said Patsy. "Did he buy any 'Lives of the
Saints?'"

"Not a Life. He made poor Ol' Hucks fetch an' carry fer him ev'ry
blessid minnit, an' never paid him no wages."

"Are you sure?" asked Louise.

"Sure as shootin'. Hucks hain't never been seen to spend a cent in all
the years he's been here."

"Hasn't he sold berries and fruit since the Captain's death?"

"Jest 'nough to pay the taxes, which ain't much. Ye see, young Joe were
away an' couldn't raise the tax money, so Ol' Hucks had to. But how they
got enough ter live on, him an' Nora, beats me."

"Perhaps Captain Wegg left some money," suggested Patsy.

"No; when Joe an' Hucks ransacked the house arter the Cap'n's death they
couldn't find a dollar. Cur'ous. Plenty o' money till he died, 'n' then
not a red cent. Curiouser yet. Ol' Will Thompson's savin's dis'peared,
too, an' never could be located to this day."

"Were they robbed, do you suppose?" asked Louise.

"Nat'rally. But who done it? Not Ol' Hucks, fer he's too honest, an'
hasn't showed the color of a nickel sense. Not Joe; 'cause he had to
borrer five dollars of Bob West to git to the city with. Who then?"

"Perhaps," said Louise, slowly, "some burglar did it."

"Ain't no burglers 'round these parts."

"I suppose not. Only book agents," remarked Beth.

McNutt flushed.

"Do ye mean as I did it?" he demanded, angrily. "Do ye mean as I killed
Cap'n Wegg an' druv 01' Will crazy, an' robbed the house?"

His features were fairly contorted, and his colorless eyes rolled
fearfully.

"If you did," said Beth, coolly, "you would be sure to deny it."

"I kin prove a alybi," answered the little man, calming down somewhat.
"I kin prove my ol' woman had me locked up in the chicken-coop thet
night 'cause I wouldn't split a lot o' cordwood thet were full o'
knots." He cast a half fearful glance over his shoulder toward the
interior of the cottage. "Next day I split 'em," he added, mildly.

"Perhaps," said Louise, again, "someone who knew Captain Wegg in the
days before he came here followed him to his retreat and robbed and
murdered him."

"Now ye've hit the nail on the head!" cried the agent, slapping his fat
thigh energetically. "Thet's what I allus claimed, even when Bob West
jest shook his head an' smiled sort o' superior like."

"Who is Bob West?" asked Louise, with interest.

"He's our implement man, an' hardware dealer. Bob were the on'y one o'
the Millville folks thet could git along with Cap'n Wegg, an' even he
didn't manage to be any special friend. Bob's rich, ye know. Rich as
blazes. Folks do say he's wuth ten thousan' dollars; but it don't set
Bob up any. He jest minds his business an' goes on sellin' plows an'
harvesters to the farmers an' takin' notes fer 'em."

"And you say he knew Captain Wegg well?" inquired Patsy.

"Better 'n' most folks 'round here did. Once er twicet a year the Cap'n
'd go to Bob's office an' set around an' smoke his pipe. Sometimes Bob
would go to the farm an' spend an' ev'nin'; but not often. Ol' Will
Thompson might be said to be the on'y friend the Cap'n really
hankered fer."

"I'd like to meet Mr. West," said Louise, casting a shrewd look at her
cousins. For here was another clue unearthed.

"He's in his store now." remarked McNutt, "Last buildin' on the left. Ye
can't miss it."

"Thank you. Good morning, sir."

"Can't use any buttermilk er Dutch cheese?"

"No, thank you."

McNutt stared after them disconsolately. These girls represented so much
money that ought to be in his pockets, and they were, moreover,
"innercent as turtle doves"; but he could think of no way to pluck their
golden quills or even to arrest their flight.

"Well, let 'em go," he muttered. "This thing ain't ended yit."



CHAPTER XIII.

BOB WEST, HARDWARE DEALER.

A few steps down the little street brought the girls to the hardware
store, quite the most imposing building in town. They crossed the broad
platform on which stood samples of heavy farm machinery and entered a
well-stocked room where many articles of hardware and house furnishings
were neatly and systematically arranged.

The place seemed deserted, for at that time of day no country people
were at Millville; but on passing down the aisle the visitor approached
a little office built at the rear of the store. Behind the desk Bob West
sat upon his high stool, gravely regarding his unusual customers over
the rims of his spectacles.

"Good morning," said Louise, taking the lead. "Have you a stew pan?"

The merchant left the office and silently walked behind the counter.

"Large or small, miss?" he then asked.

The girls became interested in stew pans, which they were scarcely able
to recognize by their official name. Mr. West offered no comment as they
made their selection.

"Can you send this to the Wegg farm?" asked Louise, opening her purse to
make payment.

West smiled.

"I have no means of delivering goods," said he; "but if you can wait a
day or two I may catch some farmer going that way who will consent
to take it."

"Oh. Didn't Captain Wegg purchase his supplies in the village?" asked
the girl.

"Some of them. But it is our custom here to take goods that we purchase
home with us. As yet Millville is scarcely large enough to require a
delivery wagon."

The nieces laughed pleasantly, and Beth said:

"Are you an old inhabitant, Mr. West?"

"I have been here thirty-five years."

"Then you knew Captain Wegg?" Louise ventured.

"Very well."

The answer was so frank and free from embarrassment that his questioner
hesitated. Here was a man distinctly superior to the others they had
interviewed, a man of keen intellect and worldly knowledge, who would be
instantly on his guard if he suspected they were cross-examining him. So
Louise, with her usual tact, decided to speak plainly.

"We have been much interested in the history of the Wegg family," she
remarked, easily; "and perhaps it is natural for us to speculate
concerning the characters of our predecessors. It was so odd that
Captain Wegg should build so good a house on such a poor farm."

"Yes."

"And he was a sea captain, who retired far from the sea, which he must
have loved."

"To be sure."

"It made him dissatisfied, they say, as well as surly and unsociable;
but he stuck it out even after his poor wife died, and until the day of
the murder."

"Murder?" in a tone of mild surprise.

"Was it not murder?" she asked, quickly.

He gave his shoulders a quiet shrug.

"The physician pronounced it heart disease, I believe."

"What physician?"

"Eh? Why, one who was fishing in the neighborhood for trout, and staying
at the hotel. Old Dr. Jackson was in Huntington at the time, I
remember."

The girls exchanged significant glances, and West noted them and smiled
again.

"That murder theory is a new one to me," he said; "but I see now why it
originated. The employment of a strolling physician would give color to
the suspicion."

"What do you think, sir?" asked Patsy, who had been watching the man's
expression closely.

"I? What do I think? Why, that Captain Wegg died from heart disease, as
he had often told me he was sure to do in time."

"Then what made old Mr. Thompson go mad?" inquired Beth.

"The shock of his friend's sudden death. He had been mentally unbalanced
for some time previous--not quite mad, you understand, but showing by
his actions at times that his brain was affected."

"Can you explain what became of their money?" asked Louise, abruptly.

West gave a start, but collected himself in an instant and covered the
action with another shrug.

"I cannot say what become of their money," he answered.

It struck both Beth and Louise that his tone indicated he would not,
rather than that he could not say. Before they had time to ask another
questioned he continued:

"Will you take the saucepan with you, then, or shall I try to send it in
a day or so?"

"We will take it, if you please," answered Louise. But as he wrapped it
into a neat parcel she made one more effort.

"What sort of a young man was Joseph Wegg?"

"Joe? A mere boy, untried and unsettled. A bright boy, in his way, and
ambitious to have a part in the big world. He's there now, I believe."

He spoke with an air of relief, and handed Louise the parcel.

"Thank you, young ladies. Pray call again if I can be of service to
you," he added, in a brisker tone.

They had no recourse but to walk out, which they did without further
words. Indeed, they were all three silent until they had left the
village far behind and were half way to the farm.

Then Patsy said, inquiringly:

"Well, girls?"

"We have progressed," announced Louise, seriously.

"In what way?"

"Several things are impressed upon my mind," replied the girl. "One is
McNutt's absurd indignation when he thought we hinted that he was the
murderer."

"What do you make of that?" queried Patsy.

"It suggests that he knows something of the murder, even if he is
himself wholly innocent. His alibi is another absurdity."

"Then that exonerated Old Hucks," said Patsy, relieved.

"Oh, not at all. Hucks may have committed the deed and McNutt knows
about it. Or they might have been partners in the crime."

"What else have you learned, Louise?" asked Beth.

"That the man West knows what became of the money."

"He seems like a very respectable man," asserted Patsy.

"Outwardly, yes; but I don't like the cold, calculating expression in
his eyes. He is the rich man of this neighborhood. Do you suppose he
acquired a fortune honestly in this forsaken district, where everyone
else is poor as a church mouse?"

"Seems to me," said Patsy, discontentedly, "that the plot thickens, as
they say in novels. If we interview many more people we shall find
ourselves suspecting an army."

"Not at all, my dear," replied Louise, coldly. "From our present
knowledge the murder lies between the unknown avenger and Hucks, with
the possibility that McNutt is implicated. This avenger may be the
stranger who posed as a physician and said Captain Wegg died of heart
disease, in order to prevent the simple people from suspecting a murder.
His fishing was all a blind. Perhaps McNutt was his accomplice. That
staring scarecrow would do anything for money. And then we come to the
robbery. If Hucks did the murder he took the money, and perhaps West,
the hardware dealer, knows this. Or West may have arrived at the house
after the mysterious stranger committed the deed, and robbed the two
men himself."

"And perhaps he didn't," said Patsy, skeptically. "Do you know, girls,
I'd like to find Joe Wegg. He could put us right, I'm sure."

"Joe!"

"Yes. Why don't we suspect him of something? Or Ethel; or old Nora?"

"Do be sensible, Patsy," said Beth, impatiently.

But Louise walked on a way in silence. Presently she remarked:

"I'm glad you mentioned Joe Wegg. The boy gives me an idea that may
reconcile many conflicting suspicions."

"In what way, Louise?"

"I'll tell you when I've thought it out," she replied.



CHAPTER XIV.

THE MAJOR IS PUZZLED.

Ethel came frequently to visit the girls at the Wegg farm, and at such
times Uncle John treated her with the same affectionate consideration he
bestowed upon his nieces, and made her so cordially welcome that the
little school teacher felt entirely at her ease. The girls did not
confide to Ethel their investigation of the Wegg mystery, but in all
other matters gave her their full confidence. Together they made
excursions to the Falls, to the natural caves on the rocky hill called
Mount Parnassus, or rowed on the lake, or walked or drove, as the mood
seized them. But mostly they loved the shade of the pines and the broad
green beside the quaint mansion Captain Wegg had built, and which now
contained all the elements of a modern summer home.

Once Louise asked Ethel, casually, if she knew what "great trouble" had
come to Hucks and his wife in their early life, but the girl frankly
answered that the old people had never referred to anything of the kind
in her presence.

Finally a telegram announced the arrival of Major Doyle to join the
party at the farm. Patsy was in the seventh heaven of delight, and drove
Joe over to the Junction to meet her father on the arrival of the
morning train.

The Major was a prime favorite with all the party and his coming infused
new life into the household. He was the type of educated, polished,
open-hearted Irish gentleman it is always a delight to meet, and Uncle
John beamed upon his brother-in-law in a way that betokened a hearty
welcome. It was a source of much satisfaction to lug the Major over the
farm and prove to him how wise Mr. Merrick had been in deciding to spend
the summer on his own property; and the Major freely acknowledged that
he had been in error and the place was as charming as anyone could wish.
It was a great treat to the grizzled old warrior to find himself in the
country, away from every responsibility of work, and he promised himself
a fortnight of absolute rest, with the recreation of beholding his
beloved Patsy as often as he pleased.

Of course, the girl would tell her father about the Wegg mystery, for
Patsy had a habit of telling him everything; therefore the cousins
decided to take the Major freely into their confidence, so as to obtain
the benefit of his opinion. That could not be done the first day, of
course, for on that day Uncle John insisted on displaying the farm and
afterward carrying the Major a willing prisoner to watch him fish in the
brook. But on the following morning the girls surrounded Patsy's father
and with solemn faces recounted their suspicions, the important clues
they had unearthed, and their earnest desire to right the great wrong
that had been done by apprehending the criminal.

The Major smoked his after breakfast cigar and listened attentively. The
story, told consecutively, was quite impressive. In spite of his long
experience in buffeting the world, the old soldier's heart was still as
simple as that of a child, and the recital awakened his sympathies
at once.

"'Tis evident, me children," said he, in his quaint way, "that you've
shtumbled on the inside of a crime that doesn't show on the outside.
Many of the things you mention are so plain that he who runs may read;
but I've remarked that it's just the things ye don't suspect in real
life that prove to be the most important."

"That is true, Major," commented Louise. "At first it was just to amuse
ourselves that we became amateur detectives, but the developments are so
startling and serious that we now consider it our duty to uncover the
whole dreadful crime, in the interests of justice."

"Just so," he said, nodding.

"But I'm sure Old Hucks is innocent!" declared Patsy, emphatically.

"Then he is," asserted the Major; "for Patsy's always right, even when
she's wrong. I've had me eye on that man Hucks already, for he's the
merriest faced villain I ever encountered. Do you say he's shy with
you girls?"

"He seems afraid of us, or suspicious, and won't let us talk to him,"
answered Beth.

"Leave him to me," proposed the Major, turning a stern face but
twinkling eyes upon the group. "'Twill be my task to detect him. Leave
him to me, young women, an' I'll put the thumb-screws on him in
short order."

Here was the sort of energetic confederate they had longed for. The
Major's assurance of co-operation was welcome indeed, and while he
entered heartily into their campaign he agreed that no mention of the
affair ought to reach Uncle John's ears until the case was complete and
they could call upon the authorities to arrest the criminal.

"It's me humble opinion," he remarked, "that the interesting individual
you call the 'avenger' was put on the trail by someone here--either
Thomas Hucks, or the timber-toed book agent, or the respectable hardware
man. Being invited to come and do his worst, he passed himself as a
docther on a fishing excursion, and having with deliberate intent
murthered Captain Wegg, got himself called by the coroner to testify
that the victim died of heart disease. A very pretty bit of
scoundrelism; eh, me dears?"

"But the robber--who do you think he was?" asked Louise.

"That I've still to discover. You inform me that Hucks is eager for
money and acts like a miser. I've seen the time I was eager for money
meself, and there's not a miserly hair on me bald head. But exceptions
prove the rule. I'll watch our smiling Thomas and make a report later."

Within half an hour he was telling Hucks a funny story and slapping the
old man upon the back as familiarly as if he had known him for years. He
found an opportunity that same day to give Thomas a dollar in return for
a slight service, and was amazed at the eagerness with which the coin
was clutched and the earnestness of the thanks expressed. It really did
seem as if the man was fond of money. But when the Major tried to draw
Hucks into speaking of his past history and of Captain Wegg's singular
life and death, the old fellow became reserved at once and evaded the
inquiries most skillfully.

That night, as the Major strolled in the orchard to smoke his last cigar
after all the others had retired to bed, he noticed Hucks leave the back
door of the lean-to with a parcel under his arm and pass hurriedly
around the barn. After a little hesitation he decided to follow the man,
and crept stealthily along in the shadow of the trees and buildings
until he found himself at the edge of the berry-patch that was in the
rear of the outbuildings. But there he paused irresolutely, for Thomas
had completely disappeared.

The Major was puzzled, but decided to watch for the man's return. So he
took a position where he could watch the rear door of the house and
smoked patiently for nearly an hour before Hucks returned and let
himself quietly in.

He said nothing to the girls next day of this mysterious proceeding, but
on the following night again took his station in the orchard to watch.

Sure enough, as soon as the house was quiet the old servant came out
with a bundle underneath his arm; but this time he led his blind wife by
the other hand.

The Major gave a low whistle and threw away his cigar. The night was so
dark that he had little difficulty in following the aged pair closely
enough to keep their shadowy forms in sight, without the risk of being
discovered. They passed around the barn and along a path that led
through the raspberry bushes back of the yard. There were several acres
of these bushes, and just now they were full-leaved and almost shoulder
high. The path wound this way and that, and branched in several
directions. Twice the Major thought he had lost his quarry, but was
guided aright by their soft footfalls. The ground dipped here and there,
and as they entered one of the hollows Major Doyle was startled to
observe the twinkle of a dim light ahead. A minute later he saw the
outlines of a little frame building, and within this Old Hucks and Nora
presently disappeared.



CHAPTER XV.

THE MAN IN HIDING.

Cautiously the Major approached the cabin, which seemed to have been
built as a place for the berry pickers to assemble and pack their fruit.
It was constructed of rough boards and had a little window in the side
nearest the dwelling house and a door on the opposite side.

Creeping near to the window the Major obtained a clear view of the
interior. Upon a dilapidated wicker settee, which had one end propped
with a box, partially reclined the form of a man whose right arm was in
splints and supported by a sling, while his head was covered with
plasters and bandages. The man's back was toward the window, but from
his slender form and its graceful poise the Major imagined him young.

Old Nora held the left hand of this mysterious person in a warm clasp,
bending now and then to press a kiss upon it, while Hucks busied himself
opening the parcel he had brought and arranging various articles of food
on a rickety stand at the head of the couch. The old man's smile was
more benevolent and cheery than ever, and his actions denoted that
strange, suppressed eagerness the Major had marked when he had taken
the money.

The three spoke little, and in tones so low that the spy outside the
window failed to catch them. Soon the injured man began to eat, feeding
himself laboriously with his left hand. But his hunger was quickly
satisfied, and then he lay back wearily upon his pillows, while Nora
tenderly spread a coverlet over him.

After this the old couple did not linger long. Hucks poured some water
from a jug into a tumbler, glanced around the little room to see that
everything was in order, and then--after he and Nora had both kissed the
bandaged forehead--blew out the candle and retired.

The Major crouched low in the berry bushes until the couple had passed
by; then he rose and thoughtfully followed after them.

Whatever Patsy's father might have thought of the Wegg farm mystery
before, this adventure convinced him that the girls were not altogether
foolish in imagining a romance connected with the place. And,
notwithstanding Patsy's loyal defense of Old Hucks, he was evidently
tangled up in the affair to a large extent, and could explain if he
chose much that was now puzzling the girl detectives.

After careful thought the Major decided to confide in Uncle John, at
this juncture, rather than in the nieces; since the latest developments
were more fitted for a man's interference.

By good fortune the girls had an engagement the next day, and set out
together in the surrey to visit Ethel Thompson and lunch with her in the
rose bower, which was the pride of the little school teacher's garden.
As soon as they were gone the Major hunted up Uncle John and said:

"Come with me, sir."

"I won't," was the brisk reply; "I'm going fishing, and whoever wishes
my society must come with me."

"You'll not catch anything fishing, but you're very liable to catch
something if you follow my lead," said the Major, meaningly.

"What's up, Gregory?"

"I'm not sure what it is, John." And then he carefully explained his
discovery that an injured man was occupying the cabin in the berry
patch, and seemed to be the object of the Hucks' tender care.

"It's the secrecy of the thing that astounds me most, sir," he added.
"If all was open and above board, I'd think little enough of it."

Uncle John's kindly interest was at once aroused, and he proposed that
they go directly to the cabin and interview the man in hiding. Hucks
being at the time busy in the barn, the two men sauntered into the berry
patch without being observed, and then walked briskly along the winding
paths until they sighted the building.

Pausing at the window, they saw the man still reclining upon his cot,
and holding in his left hand a book--one of Patsy's, the Major
observed--which he was quietly engaged in reading. Then they moved
around to the door, which Uncle John pushed open.

Without hesitation, the two men entered and stood gazing down upon the
strange occupant of the place.

"Good morning," said Mr. Merrick, while the Major nodded a greeting.

The man half arose, moving stiffly.

"Pardon me, sirs," he said, rather startled at the interruption; "I
regret that I am physically unable to receive you with more courtesy."

The Major gazed into the partially bandaged face with a glimmer of
awakening recognition.

"H-m! Ha! If I'm not mistaken," said he, "it's Joseph Wegg."

"Oh; is it?" asked Uncle John, looking upon the young man curiously.
"What's happened to you, Joseph?"

"Just an automobile accident, sir. The steering gear broke, and we went
over an embankment."

"I see."

"Are you Mr. Merrick, sir."

"Yes."

"I owe you an apology for intruding upon your premises in this way, and
beg you to forgive the seeming impertinence. But I've been rather
unlucky of late, sir, and without this refuge I don't know what would
have become of me. I will explain, if you will permit me."

Uncle John nodded.

"After I had squandered the money you paid me, through Major Doyle, for
this farm, in a vain endeavor to protect a patent I had secured, I was
forced to become a chauffeur to earn my livelihood. I understand
automobiles, you know, and obtained employment with a wealthy man who
considered me a mere part of his machine. When the accident occurred,
through no fault of mine, I was, fortunately, the only person injured;
but my employer was so incensed over the damage to his automobile that
he never even sent to inquire whether I lived or died. At a charity
hospital they tried to mend my breaks and tinker up my anatomy. My
shoulder-blade was shattered, my arm broken in three places, and four
ribs were crashed in. The wounds in my head are mere abrasions of the
scalp, and not serious. But it has taken me a long time to mend, and the
crowded, stuffy hospital got on my nerves and worried me. Being
penniless and friendless, I wrote to Thomas and asked him if he could
find a way to get me to the old farm, for I never imagined you would
yourself take possession of the deserted place you had bought.

"Thomas and Nora have cared for me since I was born, you know, and the
old man was greatly distressed by the knowledge of my sad condition. He
did not tell me you were here, for fear I would hesitate to come, but he
sent me the money you had given him and Nora for wages, together with
all that the young ladies had kindly given him. I was thus enabled to
leave the hospital, which I had come to detest, and journey to my old
home. I arrived at the Junction on a night train, and Thomas met me with
your surrey, drove me here under cover of darkness, and concealed me in
this out-of-the-way place, hoping you would not discover me.

"I regret that I was thus foisted upon you, believe me, sir; but, being
here, I have no means of getting away again. Thomas Hucks has had little
worldly experience, and cannot realize the full extent of the imposition
he has practiced. He feeds me from your table, and is hoarding up his
money for me against the time I shall have recovered sufficiently to
leave. I think that is the full explanation, Mr. Merrick."

Again Uncle John nodded.

"How are you?" he asked.

"Doing finely, sir. I can walk a little, and my appetite is improving.
The doctors said my shoulder would never be very strong again, but I'm
beginning to hope they were mistaken. My ribs seem all right, and in
another ten days I shall remove the splints from my arm."

"You have no medical attendance?"

"Not since I left the hospital. But I imagine this pure, bracing air is
better for me than a dozen doctors," was the cheerful reply.

"And what are your future plans?"

The young man smiled. He was little more than a boy, but his questioner
noticed that he had a fine manly face and his eye was clear and
steadfast.

"Nothing further than to get to work again as soon as I am able to
undertake it," he said.

Uncle John looked thoughtfully, and drummed with his finger upon the
little table.

"Joseph," he remarked, presently, "I bought this farm at a price
altogether too small, considering its value."

The boy flushed.

"Please do not say that!" he exclaimed, hastily. "I am well aware that I
virtually robbed you, and my only excuse is that I believed I would win
my fight and be able to redeem the place. But that is over now, and you
must not think that because I am ill and helpless I am an object
of charity."

"Phoo!" said the little man; "aren't you accepting charity from Old
Hucks?"

"But he stands as a second father to me. He is an old retainer of my
family, and one of my ambitions is to secure a home for him and Nora in
their old age. No; I do not feel at all embarrassed in accepting money
or assistance from Thomas."

"Young man," said Uncle John, sternly, "one of the follies of youth is
the idea of being independent of the good-will of your fellow-creatures.
Every person who lives is dependent on some other person for something
or other, and I'll not allow you to make a fool of yourself by refusing
to let me take you in hand. Your brain is affected--"

"It is not!"

"You are mentally unbalanced, and need a guardian. That's me. You are
helpless and cannot resist, so you're my prisoner. Dare to defy me, dare
to oppose my wishes in any way, and I'll have you put in a
straight-jacket and confined in a padded cell. Understand me, sir?"

Joseph Wegg looked into the little man's round face until the tears
filled his own eyes and blurred his vision.

"Won't you protect me, Major Doyle?" he asked, weakly.

"Not I," said the Major, stoutly. "This brother-in-law of mine, who
connected himself with me without asking permission, is a perfect demon
when 'roused, and I'll not meddle with any opposition to his desires. If
you value your life and happiness, Joseph Wegg, you'll accept Mr.
Merrick as a guardian until he resigns of his own accord, and then it's
likely you'll wish he hadn't."

"I don't deserve----" began the young man, brokenly; but Uncle John
quickly interrupted him.

"No one deserves anything," said he; "but everyone gets something or
other, nevertheless, in this vale of tears. If you'll kindly remember
that you've no right to express an opinion in the presence of your
guardian, we'll get along better together. Now, then, you're going to
leave here, because the place is not comfortable. My guests fill every
room in my house, so you can't go there. But the hotel in Millville is a
cheerful-looking place, and I've noticed some vine-covered windows that
indicate pleasant and sunny rooms. Major, go and tell Hucks to hitch
that groaning, balky Daniel to the ancient buggy, and then to drive this
young man over to the hotel. We'll walk."

The Major started at once, and Uncle John continued: "I don't know
whether this arrangement suits you or not, Joseph, but it suits me; and,
as a matter of fact, it's none of your business. Feel able to take
a ride?"

The boy smiled, gratefully.

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Merrick," said he, and was shrewd enough not to
venture a word of thanks.



CHAPTER XVI.

A MATTER OF SPECULATION.

Old Hucks, still smiling, but dreadfully nervous over the discovery of
Joe, and Mr. Merrick's sudden activity in the boy's behalf, speedily
harnessed Daniel and induced the reluctant steed to amble down the path
to the cabin. Leaning on Uncle John's arm, the invalid walked to the
buggy and was assisted to mount to the seat beside Thomas. Then away
they started, and, although Dan obeyed Hucks more willingly than any
other driver, the Major and Uncle John walked 'cross-lots and reached
the hotel a good fifteen minutes in advance of the equipage.

The Millville Hotel depended almost entirely for patronage upon the
commercial travelers who visited the place periodically to sell goods to
the merchants, and these did not come too often, because trade was never
very energetic and orders never very large. Bob West boarded at the
hotel, and so did Ned Long, a "farm hand," who did sundry odd jobs for
anyone who needed him, and helped pay his "keep" by working for Mrs.
Kebble when not otherwise engaged.

Mrs. Kebble was the landlady, and a famous cook. Kate Kebble, a
slatternly girl of sixteen, helped her mother do the work and waited on
the table. Chet Kebble, the landlord, was a silent old man, with
billy-goat whiskers and one stray eye, which, being constructed of
glass, usually assumed a slanting gaze and refused to follow the
direction of its fellow. Chet minded the billiard-room, which was mostly
patronized Saturday nights, and did a meager business in fire insurance;
but he was "so eternal lazy an' shifless," as Mrs. Kebble sharply
asserted, that he was considered more a "hanger-on" of the establishment
than its recognized head.

The little rooms of the hotel were plainly furnished but maintained with
exceptional neatness.

The one in the east corner of the second floor met with the approval of
Uncle John and the Major, and was promptly engaged. It was cheerful and
sunny, with outlooks on the lake and the village, and contained a lounge
as well as the bed.

When the invalid arrived, he was assisted to this apartment and
installed as its permanent occupant.

"Any baggage?" asked Mr. Merrick.

"There's a small trunk lying at the Junction," said Joe; "but it
contains little of importance."

"Well, make yourself at home, my boy, and get well at your leisure,"
remarked Uncle John. "Mrs. Kebble has promised to look after you, and
the Major and I will stop in now and then and see how you progress."

Then he went out, engaged Nick Thorne to go to the Junction for the
boy's trunk, and selected several things at the store that he thought
might be useful to the invalid. Afterward he marched home again beside
the Major, feeling very well pleased with his morning's work.

When the girls reached home late in the afternoon, they were thrown into
a state of great excitement by the news, briefly related by their uncle,
that Joseph Wegg had returned to Millville "considerably smashed" by an
automobile accident, and was now stopping at the village hotel
for repairs.

They refrained from making remarks upon the incident until they were
alone, when the secret council of three decided to make Joe Wegg's
acquaintance as soon as possible, to discover what light the young man
might be able to throw upon the great mystery.

"Do you know, girls," said Louise, impressively, "it almost seems as if
fate had sent Joe Wegg here to be an instrument in the detection of the
murderer and robber of his poor father."

"If Joe knew about it, why didn't he track the villain down himself?"
inquired Patsy.

"Perhaps he hasn't suspected the truth," said Beth. "Often those who are
closely concerned with such tragedies do not observe the evidences of
crime as clearly as outsiders."

"Where did you get that information?" demanded Patsy.

"From one of Anna Doyle Oppenheim's detective stories," answered Beth,
seriously. "I've been reading up on such things, lately."

"Detective stories," said Louise, reflectively, "are only useful in
teaching us to observe the evidences of crime. This case, for example,
is so intricate and unusual that only by careful thought, and following
each thread of evidence to its end, can we hope to bring the criminal
to justice."

"That seems to me conceited," observed Miss Doyle, composedly.
"Detective stories don't have to stick to facts; or, rather, they can
make the facts to be whatever they please. So I don't consider them as
useful as they are ornamental. And this isn't a novel, girls; it's
mostly suspicion and slander."

"You don't seem able to be in earnest about anything," objected Beth,
turning a little red.

"But I try to be." said Patricia.

"We are straying from the subject now under discussion," remarked
Louise. "I must say that I feel greatly encouraged by the sudden
appearance of the Wegg boy. He may know something of his father's former
associates that will enable us to determine the object of the murder and
who accomplished it."

"Captain Wegg was killed over three years ago," suggested Miss Doyle,
recovering easily from her rebuff. "By this time the murderer may have
died or moved to Madagascar."

"He is probably living within our reach, never suspecting that justice
is about to overtake him," asserted Louise. "We must certainly go to
call upon this Wegg boy, and draw from him such information as we can. I
am almost certain that the end is in sight."

"We haven't any positive proof at all, yet," observed Patsy, musingly.

"We have plenty of circumstantial evidence," returned Beth. "There is
only one way to explain the facts we have already learned, and the
theory we have built up will be a hard one to overthrow. The flight of
Captain Wegg to this place, his unhappy wife, the great trouble that old
Nora has hinted at, the--"

"The great trouble ought to come first," declared Louise. "It is the
foundation upon which rest all the mysterious occurrences following, and
once we have learned what the great trouble was, the rest will be
plain sailing."

"I agree with you," said Beth; "and perhaps Joseph Wegg will be able to
tell us what the trouble was that ruined the lives of his parents, as
well as of Old Hucks and his wife, and caused them all to flee here to
hide themselves."

It was not until the following morning that the Major found an
opportunity to give the confederates a solemn wink to indicate he had
news to confide to them. They gathered eagerly on the lawn, and he told
them of the finding of Joe Wegg in the isolated cabin, and how old
Thomas and Nora, loving the boy as well as if he had been their own
child, had sacrificed everything to assist him in his extremity.

"So ye see, my avenging angels, that ye run off the track in the Hucks
matter," he added, smiling at their bewildered faces.

Patsy was delighted at this refutation of the slanderous suspicions that
Thomas was a miser and his smiling face a mask to hide his innate
villainy. The other girls were somewhat depressed by the overthrow of
one of their pet theories, and reluctantly admitted that if Hucks had
been the robber of his master and old Will Thompson, he would not have
striven so eagerly to get enough money to send to Joe Wegg. But they
pointed out that the old servant was surely hiding his knowledge of
Captain Wegg's past, and could not be induced to clear up that portion
of the mystery which he had full knowledge of. So, while he might be
personally innocent of the murder or robbery, both Beth and Louise were
confident he was attempting to shield the real criminal.

"But who is the real criminal?" inquired Patsy.

"Let us consider," answer Louise, with the calm, businesslike tone she
adopted in these matters. "There is the strolling physician, whom we
call the Unknown Avenger, for one. A second suspect is the man McNutt,
whose nature is so perverted that he would stick at nothing. The third
suspicious individual is Mr. Bob West."

"Oh, Louise! Mr. West is so respectable, and so prosperous," exclaimed
Patsy.

"It's a far jump from McNutt to West," added Beth.

"Leaving out Hucks," continued Louise, her eyes sparkling with the
delightful excitement of maintaining her theories against odds, "here
are three people who might have been concerned in the robbery or murder.
Two of them are under our hands; perhaps Joseph Wegg may be able to tell
us where to find the third."

They pleaded so hard with the Major to take them to call upon the
injured youth that very day, that the old gentleman consented, and,
without telling Uncle John of their plans, they drove to Millville in
the afternoon and alighted at the hotel.

The Major went first to the boy's room, and found him not only very
comfortable, but bright and cheerful in mood.

"At this rate, sir," he said, smilingly, "I shall be able to discharge
my guardian in quick time. I'm twice the man I was yesterday."

"I've brought some young ladies to call upon you," announced the Major.
"Will you see them?"

Joe flushed at first, remembering his plastered skull and maimed
condition. But he could not well refuse to receive his callers, whom he
guessed to be the three girls Old Hucks had praised to him so highly.

"It will give me great pleasure, sir," he replied.

An invalid is usually of interest to women, so it is no wonder that the
three young ladies were at once attracted by the bright-faced boy, who
reclined upon his couch before the vine-covered windows. They thought of
Ethel, too, and did not marvel that the girl grieved over the loss of
this friend of her childhood.

Joe had to recount the adventure with the automobile, which led to his
injuries, and afterward give an account of his life at the hospital.
That led, naturally, to the timely assistance rendered him by the
faithful Thomas, so that Louise was able to broach the subject nearest
her heart.

"We have been greatly interested in your old servants--whom we acquired
with the farm, it seems--and all of us admire their simplicity and
sincerity," she began.

"Nora is a dear," added Beth.

"And Thomas is so cheerful that his smile is enough to vanquish any
attack of the blues," said Patsy.

"The Hucks are the right sort, and no mistake," declared the Major,
taking his cue from the others.

This praise evidently delighted the boy. They could have found no more
direct way to win his confidence.

"Nora was my mother's maid from the time she was a mere girl," said he;
"and Thomas sailed with my father many years before I was born."

They were a little surprised to hear him speak so frankly. But Louise
decided to take advantage of the opening afforded her.

"Nora has told us that some great trouble came to them years ago--a
trouble that also affected your own parents. But they do not wish to
talk about it to us."

His face clouded.

"No, indeed," said he. "Their loving old hearts have never recovered
from the blow. Would you like to know their history? It is a sad story,
and pitiful; but I am sure you would understand and appreciate my old
friends better after hearing it."

Their hearts fairly jumped with joy. Would they like to hear the story?
Was it not this very clue which they had been blindly groping for to
enable them to solve the mystery of the Wegg crime? The boy marked their
interest, and began his story at once, while the hearts of the three
girls sang-gladly: "At last--at last!"



CHAPTER XVII.

JOE TELLS OF "THE GREAT TROUBLE."

"As a young man, my father was a successful sea captain," said the boy,
"and, before he was thirty, owned a considerable interest in the ship he
sailed. Thomas Hucks was his boatswain,--an honest and able seaman in
whom my father became much interested. Hucks was married, and his wife
was an attendant in the employ of Hugh Carter, a wealthy ship chandler
of Edmunton, the port from which my fathers ship sailed. Thomas had some
difficulty in enjoying his wife's society when on shore, because old
Carter did not want him hanging around the house; so Captain Wegg
good-naturedly offered to intercede for him.

"Carter was a gruff and disagreeable man, and, although my father had
been a good customer, he refused his request and threatened to discharge
Nora, which he did. This made Captain Wegg angry, and he called upon
Mary Carter, whose especial attendant Nora had been, to ask her to take
the girl back. Mary was a mild young lady, who dared not oppose her
father; but the result of the interview was that the sea captain and
Mary Carter fell mutually in love. During the next two or three years,
whenever the ship was in port, the lovers frequently met by stealth at
the cottage of Mrs. Hucks, a little place Thomas had rented. Here my
father and mother were finally married.

"Meantime Nora had a son, a fine young chap, I've heard; and presently
my mother, who had a little fortune of her own, plucked up enough
courage to leave her father's roof, and took up her abode in a pretty
villa on the edge of a bluff overlooking the sea. Nora came to live with
her again, bringing her child, and the two women were company for one
another while their husbands were at sea.

"In course of time my mother had two children, a girl and a boy, and
because the Hucks boy was considerably older than they, he took care of
them, to a great extent, and the three youngsters were always together.
Their favorite playground was on the beach, at the foot of the bluff,
and before young Tom was ten years old he could swim like a duck, and
manage a boat remarkably well. The Wegg children, having something of
their mother's timid nature, perhaps, were not so adventurous, but they
seldom hesitated to go wherever Tom led them.

"One day, while my mother was slightly ill and Nora was attending to
her, Tom disobeyed the commands that had been given him, and took his
younger companions out on the ocean for a ride in his boat. No one knows
how far they went, or exactly what happened to them; but a sudden squall
sprang up, and the children being missed, my mother insisted, ill as she
was, in running down to the shore to search for her darlings. Braving
the wind and drenched by rain, the two mothers stood side by side,
peering into the gloom, while brave men dared the waves to search for
the missing ones. The body of the girl was first washed ashore, and my
mother rocked the lifeless form in her arms until her dead son was laid
beside her. Then young Tom's body was recovered, and the horror
was complete.

"When my father arrived, three days later, he not only found himself
bereaved of the two children he had loved so tenderly, but his young
wife was raving with brain fever, and likely to follow her babies to the
grave. During that terrible time, Nora, who could not forget that it was
her own adventurous son who had led all three children to their death,
went suddenly blind--from grief, the doctors said.

"My father pulled his wife back to life by dint of careful nursing; but
whenever she looked at the sea she would scream with horror; so it
became necessary to take her where the cruel sound of the breakers could
never reach her ears. I think the grief of Thomas and Nora was scarcely
less than that of my own parents, and both men had suffered so severely
that they were willing to abandon the sea and devote their lives to
comforting their poor wives. Captain Wegg sold all his interests and his
wife's villa, and brought the money here, where he established a home
amid entirely different surroundings. He was devoted to my mother, I
have heard, and when she died, soon after my birth, the Captain seemed
to lose all further interest in life, and grew morose and unsociable
with all his fellow-creatures.

"That, young ladies, is the story of what Thomas and Nora call their
'great trouble'; and I think it is rightly named, because it destroyed
the happiness of two families. I was born long after the tragedy, but
its shadow has saddened even my own life."

When the boy had finished, his voice trembling with emotion as he
uttered the last words, his auditors were much affected by the sad tale.
Patsy was positively weeping, and the Major blew his nose vigorously and
advised his daughter to "dry up an' be sinsible." Beth's great eyes
stared compassionately at the young fellow, and even Louise for the
moment allowed her sympathy to outweigh the disappointment and chagrin
of seeing her carefully constructed theory of crime topple over like the
house of cards it was. There was now no avenger to be discovered,
because there had been nothing to avenge. The simple yet pathetic story
accounted for all the mystery that, in her imagination, enveloped the
life and death of Captain Wegg. But--stay!

"How did your father die?" she asked, softly.

"Through a heart trouble, from which he had suffered for years, and
which had obliged him to lead a very quiet life," was the reply. "That
was one of the things which, after my mother's death, helped to sour his
disposition. He could not return to the sea again, because he was told
that any sudden excitement was likely to carry him off; and, indeed,
that was exactly what happened."

"How is that, sir?" asked the Major.

"It is more difficult to explain than the first of the story," replied
the boy, thoughtfully gazing through the window; "perhaps because I do
not understand it so well. Our simple life here never made much of an
inroad into my father's modest fortune; for our wants were few; but
Captain Wegg was a poor man of business, having been a sailor during all
his active life. His only intimate friend--an honest, bluff old farmer
named Will Thompson--was as childish regarding money matters as my
father, but had a passion for investments, and induced my father to join
some of his schemes. Mr. Thompson's mind was somewhat erratic at times,
but keen in some ways, nevertheless. Fearing to trust his judgment
entirely, my father chose to lean upon the wisdom and experience of a
shrewd merchant of Millville, named Robert West."

"The hardware dealer?" asked Louise, impulsively.

"Yes; I see you have met him," replied Joseph Wegg, with a smile at the
eager, pretty face of his visitor. "Bob West was a prosperous man and
very careful about his own investments; so he became a sort of business
adviser to my father and Mr. Thompson, and arbitrated any differences of
opinion they might have. For several years, due to West's good offices,
the two oddly mated friends were successful in their ventures, and added
to their capital. Finally West came to them himself with a proposition.
He had discovered a chance to make a good deal of money by purchasing an
extensive pine forest near Almaquo, just across the border in Canada.
West had taken an option on the property, when he found by accident that
the Pierce-Lane Lumber Company was anxious to get hold of the tract and
cut the timber on a royalty that would enable the owners to double their
investment."

"Howld on a jiffy!" cried the Major, excitedly. "Did I understand you to
say the Pierce-Lane Lumber Company?"

"That was the firm, sir. I used to overhear my father and Will Thompson
talking about this matter; but I must admit my knowledge is somewhat
imperfect, because I never was allowed to ask questions. I remember
learning the fact that West had not enough money to swing his option,
and so urged his friends to join him. Relying upon West's judgment, they
put all their little fortunes into the deal, although Thompson grumbled
at doing so, because he claimed he had another investment that was
better, and this matter of West's would prevent him from undertaking it.
The Almaquo tract was purchased, and a contract made with the lumber
company to cut the timber and pay them a royalty of so much a thousand
feet. Yet, although the prospects for profit seemed so good, I know that
for some reason both my father and Thompson were dissatisfied with the
deal, and this may be accounted for by the fact that every penny of
their money was tied up in one investment. West used to come to the
house and argue with them that the property was safe as the Bank of
England, and then old Will would tell him how much more he could have
made out of another investment he had in mind; so that a coolness grew
up between West and the others that gradually led to their estrangement.

"I can well remember the evening when Bob West's pretty financial bubble
burst. Thompson and my father were sitting together in the right wing,
smoking solemnly, and exchanging a few words, as was their custom, when
West arrived with a while face, and a newspaper under his arm. I was in
the next room, lying half asleep upon the sofa, when I heard West cry
despairingly: 'Ruined--ruined--ruined!' I crept to the half-opened
door, then, and looked in. Both men were staring, open-mouthed and
half-dazed, at West, who was explaining in a trembling voice that a
terrible forest fire had swept through the Almaquo section and wiped out
every tree upon the property. He had the full account in the newspaper,
and had begun reading it, when my father uttered a low moan and tumbled
off his chair to the floor.

"Will Thompson gave a wild cry and knelt beside him.

"'My God! he's dead, Bob,--he's dead!--and you've killed him with your
good news!' he screamed, already raving; and then Old Hucks ran in just
in time to prevent the madman from throttling West, for his fingers were
even then twined around Bob's throat. There was a desperate struggle,
and I remember that, scared as I was, I joined Thomas in trying to pull
Thompson off his prey. But suddenly old Will threw up his arms and
toppled backward, still raving like a demon, but unable to move his body
from the waist downward. West helped us to put him in bed, and said he
was paralyzed, which afterward proved to be the truth. Also, his mind
was forever gone; and I think it was father's death that did that,
rather than the loss of his money."

They were all staring, white-faced, at the speaker. Most of the mystery
was being cleared away; indeed, there was now little of mystery
remaining at all.

"West hurried after a doctor," continued Joe, who was almost as much
absorbed in his story as were his listeners, and spoke in a reflective,
musing way, "and he succeeded in finding one who was stopping for a few
days at the hotel. Poor Bob was very kind to us in our trouble, and I
never heard him mention a word about his own losses, which must have
been severe. After the funeral was over, and I found I had nothing to
inherit but the farm, I decided to go to the city and make my way there,
as I had long wished to do. West gave me a little money to start me on
my way, and the rest of my story is not very interesting to anybody.
Major Doyle knows something of it, after the time when I got through my
technical school by working as a servant to pay for my instruction. I'm
a failure in life, so far, young ladies; but if you'll not bear that
against me I'll try to do better in the future."

"Good!" cried the Major, approvingly, as he took the boy's left hand in
both his own and pressed it. "You're developing the right spirit,
Joseph, me lad, and we'll think no more about the sadness of the past,
but look forward to the joy of your future."

"Of course," said Patsy, nodding gravely; "Joe Wegg is bound to be a
great man, some day."



CHAPTER XVIII.

THE LOCKED CUPBOARD.

Louise and Beth returned to the farm in dismal silence. Every prop had
been knocked from beneath their carefully erected temple of mystery. Now
there was no mystery at all.

In a few words, Joe Wegg had explained everything, and explained all so
simply and naturally that Louise felt like sobbing with the bitterness
of a child deprived of its pet plaything. The band of self-constituted
girl detectives had been "put out of business," as Patsy said, because
the plain fact had developed that there was nothing to detect, and never
had been. There had been no murder, no robbery, no flight or hiding on
the part of the Weggs to escape an injured enemy; nothing even
mysterious, in the light of the story they had just heard. It was
dreadfully humiliating and thoroughly disheartening, after all their
earnest endeavor to investigate a crime that had never been committed.

Uncle John rallied his nieces on their somber faces at the dinner table,
and was greatly amused when the Major, despite the appealing looks
directed at him, gave Mr. Merrick a brief resume of the afternoon's
developments.

"Well, I declare!" said the little man, merrily; "didn't I warn you,
Louise, not to try to saddle a murder onto my new farm? How you foolish
girls could ever have imagined such a carnival of crime in connection
with the Weggs is certainly remarkable."

"I don't know about that, sir," returned the Major, seriously. "I was
meself inoculated with the idea, and for a while I considered meself and
the girls the equals of all the Pinkertons in the country. And when ye
come to think of it, the history of poor Captain Wegg and his wife, and
of Nora and Thomas as well, is out of the ordinary entirely, and,
without the explanation, contained all the elements of a
first-class mystery."

"How did you say the Weggs lost their money?" inquired Uncle John,
turning the subject because he saw that it embarrassed his nieces.

"Why, forest fires at Almaquo, in Canada, burned down the timber they
had bought," replied the Major. "And, by the way, John, you're
interested in that matter yourself, for the Pierce-Lane Lumber Company,
in which you own a lot of stock, had contracted to cut the timber on
a royalty."

"How long ago?"

"Three years, sir."

"Well, we've been cutting timber at Almaquo ever since," said Mr.
Merrick.

Louise dropped her fork with a clatter, disclosing, in this well-bred
young lady, an unusual degree of excitement.

"Then there _is_ something to detect!" she cried.

"Eh? What do you mean?" inquired her uncle.

"If you've been cutting timber at Almaquo for three years, the trees
couldn't have burned down," Louise declared, triumphantly.

"That is evident," said the Major, dryly. "I've had it in me mind,
Louise, to take that matter up for investigation; but you are so imbued
with the detective spirit that there's no heading you off a trail."

"Before the dessert comes on," announced Uncle John, impressively, "I
want to make a statement. You folks have tried your hands at the
detective business and made a mess of it. Now it's my turn. I'll be a
detective for three days, and if I don't succeed better than you did,
young women, we'll mingle our tears in all humility. Eh, Major?"

"Put me in the bunch, sir," said the old soldier, "I was as bad as any
of them. And go ahead in your own way, if ye like. It's me humble
opinion, John, that you're no Sherlock Holmes; but ye won't believe it
'til ye satisfy yourself of the fact."

Next morning the loungers around Sam Cotting's store were thrown into a
state of great excitement when "the nabob" came over from the Wegg farm
and held the long-distance telephone for more than an hour, while he
talked with people in New York. The natives knew that their telephone,
which was built into a small booth at one end of the store--next the
post-office boxes--was part of a system that made it possible for one to
talk to those in far away cities. Often the country people would eye the
mysterious-looking instrument with awe and whisper to each other of its
mighty powers; but no one had ever before used it to telephone farther
than the Junction, and then only on rare occasions.

"It'll cost a heap o' money, Sam," said McNutt, uneasily, while Uncle
John was engaged in his remarkable conversation. They could see him in
the booth, through the little window.

"It will, Mac," was the solemn reply. "But the fool nabob may as well
spend it thet way as any other. It's mighty little of his capital er
surplus gits inter _my_ cash-drawer; 'n' thet's a fact."

Uncle John came from the booth, perspiring, but smiling and happy. He
walked across the street to see Joe Wegg, and found the youth seated in
a rocking-chair and looking quite convalescent. But he had company. In a
chair opposite sat a man neatly dressed, with a thin, intelligent face,
a stubby gray moustache, and shrewd eyes covered by horn-rimmed
spectacles.

"Good morning, Mr. Merrick," said Joe, cheerily; "this is Mr. Robert
West, one of the Millville merchants, who is an old friend of
our family."

"I've heard of Mr. West, and I'm glad to meet him," replied Uncle John,
looking at the other calmly, but not offering to shake hands. "I believe
you are the president and treasurer of the Almaquo Timber Tract Company,
are you not?"

Joseph looked startled, and then embarrassed, as he overheard the
question. West, without altering his position of careless ease, glanced
over the rims of his glasses at the speaker.

"I am the humble individual you refer to, Mr. Merrick," he said,
briefly.

"But the Almaquo timber all burned down." remarked Joe, thinking an
explanation was needed.

"That's a mistake," returned Mr. Merrick. "My company has paid Mr. West,
as treasurer of his company, more than fifty thousand dollars during the
last three years."

West's jaw dropped.

"Your company!" he exclaimed, as if mystified.

"Yes; I own the controlling interest in the Pierce-Lane Lumber Company,
which has the contract to cut your timber," answered Mr. Merrick.

The hardware dealer slowly arose and glanced at his watch.

"I must get back to my store," he said. "You are somewhat in error about
your company, Mr. Merrick; but I suppose your interests are so large and
varied that you cannot well keep track of them. Good morning, sir. I'll
see you again soon, Joe. Glad you're improving so rapidly. Let me know
if I can do anything to help you."

With these quiet words, he bowed and left the room, and when he had
gone, Joe said, in a deprecating tone:

"Poor Bob must be very unhappy about having lost my father's money in
that speculation, for he advocated the plan very strongly, believing it
was a good investment. I'm afraid your mistake about paying him all that
money upset him. Don't mind if he was a little brusque, sir. Bob West is
a simple, kindly man, whom my father fully trusted. It was he that
loaned me the money to get away from here with."

"Tell me," said Uncle John, thoughtfully, "did your father receive stock
in the Almaquo Timber Tract Company in exchange for his money?"

"Oh, yes; I have seen it in the steel cupboard," replied Joe.

"Where is that?"

"Why, it is the cupboard in the right wing of our house, which was the
Captain's own room. It was one of his whims, when he built, to provide
what he called his 'bank.' You may have noticed the wooden doors of a
cupboard built into the stone wall, sir?"

"Yes; I occupy the room."

"Behind the wooden doors are others of steel. The entire cupboard is
steel-lined. Near the bottom is a sliding-plate, which, when pushed
aside, discovers a hidden drawer--a secret my father never confided to
anyone but me. He once told me that if his heart trouble earned him off
suddenly I ought to know of the existence of this drawer; so he showed
me how to find it. On the day after his death I took the keys, which he
always carried on a small chain around his neck and concealed underneath
his clothing, and opened the cupboard to see if I could find anything of
value. It is needless to say, I could not discover anything that could
be converted into a dollar. The Captain had filled the cupboard with old
letters and papers of no value, and with relics he had brought from
foreign lands during his many voyages. These last are mere rubbish, but
I suppose he loved them for their association. In the secret drawer I
found his stock in the timber company, and also that of old Will
Thompson, who had doubtless left it with my father for safekeeping.
Knowing it was now worthless, I left it in the drawer."

"I'd like to see it," announced Uncle John.

Joe laughed.

"I've lost the keys," he said.

"How's that, my lad?"

"Why, on the day of the funeral the keys disappeared. I could never
imagine what became of them. But I did not care to look in the cupboard
a second time, so the loss did not matter."

Mr. Merrick seemed thoughtful.

"I suppose I own that cupboard now," he remarked.

"Of course," said Joe. "But without the keys it is not serviceable. If
you drill through the steel doors you destroy their security."

"True; but I may decide to do that."

"If you do, sir, I'd like you to clear out the rubbish and papers and
send them to me. They are family matters, and I did not intend to sell
them with the place."

"You shall have them, Joe."

"Just underneath the left end of the lower shelf you will find the
sliding steel plate. It slides toward the front. In the drawer you will
find the worthless stock and a picture of my mother. I'd like to keep
the picture."

"You shall, Joseph. How are you getting on?"

"Why, I'm a new man, Mr. Merrick, and today I'm feeling as strong as a
buffalo--thanks to your kind guardianship."

"Don't overdo, sir. Take it easy. There's a young lady coming to see you
today."

"Ethel!" the boy exclaimed, his face turning crimson.

"Yes," returned Uncle John, tersely. "You've treated that girl
shamefully, Joseph Wegg. Try to make proper amends."

"I never could understand," said Joe, slowly, "why Ethel refused to
answer the letter I wrote her when I went away. It explained
everything, yet--"

"I'll bet the farm against your lame shoulder she never got your
letter," declared Uncle John. "She thought you left her without a word."

"I gave it to McNutt to deliver after I was gone. But you say she's
coming today?"

"That is her intention, sir."

Joe said nothing more, but his expressive face was smiling and eager.
Uncle John pressed the boy's hand and left him, promising to call
again soon.

"Now, then," muttered the little millionaire, as he walked down the
street, "to beard the lion in his den."

The den proved to be the hardware store, and the lion none other than
Robert West. Mr. Merrick found the merchant seated at his desk in the
otherwise deserted store, and, with a nod, helped himself to the only
other chair the little office contained.

"Sir," said he, "I am here to demand an explanation."

"Of what?" asked West, coldly.

"Of your action in the matter of the Almaquo Timber Tract Company. I
believe that you falsely asserted to Captain Wegg and Mr. Thompson that
the timber had burned and their investment was therefore worthless. The
news of the disaster killed one of your confiding friends and drove the
other mad; but that was a consequence that I am sure you did not intend
when you planned the fraud. The most serious thing I can accuse you of
is holding the earnings of the Wegg and Thompson stock--and big earnings
they are, too--for your own benefit, and defrauding the heirs of your
associates of their money."

West carefully balanced a penholder across his fingers, and eyed it with
close attention.

"You are a queer man, Mr. Merrick," he said, quietly. "I can only excuse
your insults on the grounds of ignorance, or the fact that you have been
misinformed. Here is the newspaper report of the Almaquo fire, which I
showed my friends the night of Captain Wegg's sudden death." He took a
clipping from a drawer of the desk and handed it to Uncle John, who read
it carefully.

"As a matter of fact," continued West, "you are not cutting that portion
of the Almaquo tract which this fire refers to, and which Thompson and
Wegg were interested in, but the north half of the tract, which they had
never acquired any title to."

"I suppose the stock will show that," suggested Mr. Merrick.

"Of course, sir."

"I will look it up."

West smiled.

"You will have some trouble doing that," he said.

"Why?"

"Wegg and Thompson had transferred their entire stock to me before one
died and the other went mad," was the quiet reply.

"Oh, I see." The lie was so evident that Uncle John did not try to
refute it.

"I am rather busy, Mr. Merrick. Anything more, sir?"

"Not today. Bye and bye, Mr. West."

He marched out again and climbed into his buggy to drive home. The
interview with Bob West had made him uneasy, for the merchant's cold,
crafty nature rendered him an opponent who would stick at nothing to
protect his ill-gotten gains. Uncle John had thought it an easy matter
to force him to disgorge, but West was the one inhabitant of Millville
who had no simplicity in his character. He was as thoroughly imbued with
worldly subtlety and cunning as if he had lived amid the grille of a
city all his life; and Mr. Merrick was by no means sure of his own
ability to unmask the man and force him to make restitution.



CHAPTER XIX.

THE COURT'N OF SKIM CLARK.

By this time the summer was well advanced, and the rich people at the
Wegg farm had ceased to be objects of wonder to the Millville folk. The
girls were still regarded with curious looks when they wandered into the
village on an errand, and Mr. Merrick and Major Doyle inspired a certain
amount of awe; but time had dulled the edge of marvelous invasion and
the city people were now accepted as a matter of course.

Peggy McNutt was still bothering his head over schemes to fleece the
strangers, in blissful ignorance of the fact that one of his neighbors
was planning to get ahead of him.

The Widow Clark was a shrewd woman. She had proven this by becoming one
of the merchants of Millville after her husband's death. The poor man
had left an insurance of five hundred dollars and the little frame
building wherein he had conducted a harness shop. Mrs. Clark couldn't
make and repair harness; so she cleared the straps and scraps and
wax-ends out of the place, painted the interior of the shop bright
yellow, with a blue ceiling, erected some shelves and a counter and
turned part of the insurance money into candy, cigars, stationery, and a
meager stock of paper-covered novels.

Skim, her small son, helped her as far as he was able, and between them
they managed things so frugally that at the end of eight years the widow
still had her five hundred dollars capital, and the little store had
paid her living expenses.

Skim was named after his uncle, Peter Skimbley, who owned a farm near
Watertown. The widow's hopeful was now a lank, pale-faced youth of
eighteen, whose most imposing features were his big hands and a long
nose that ended in a sharp point. The shop had ruined him for manual
labor, for he sat hunched up by the stove in winter, and in summer hung
around Cotting's store and listened to the gossip of the loungers. He
was a boy of small conversational powers, but his mother declared that
Skim "done a heap o' thinkin' that nobody suspected."

The widow was a good gossip herself, and knew all the happenings in the
little town. She had a habit of reading all her stock of paper-covered
novels before she sold them, and her mind was stocked with the mass of
romance and adventure she had thus absorbed. "What I loves more'n eat'n'
or sleep'n'," she often said, "is a rattlin' good love story. There
don't seem to be much love in real life, so a poor lone crittur like me
has to calm her hankerin's by a-readin' novels."

No one had been more interested in the advent of the millionaire at the
Wegg farm than the widow Clark. She had helped "fix up" the house for
the new owner and her appreciative soul had been duly impressed by the
display of wealth demonstrated by the fine furniture sent down from the
city. She had watched the arrival of the party and noticed with eager
eyes the group of three pretty and stylishly dressed nieces who
accompanied their rich uncle. Once or twice since the young ladies had
entered her establishment to purchase pens or stationery, and on such
occasions the widow was quite overcome by their condescension.

All this set her thinking to some purpose. One day she walked over to
the farm and made her way quietly to the back door. By good fortune she
found blind Nora hemming napkins and in a mood to converse. Nora was an
especially neat seamstress, but required some one to thread her needles.
Mary the cook had been doing this, but now Mrs. Clark sat down beside
Nora to "hev a little talk" and keep the needles supplied with thread.

She learned a good deal about the nieces, for old Nora could not praise
them enough. They were always sweet and kind to her and she loved to
talk about them. They were all rich, too, or would be; for their uncle
had no children of his own and could leave several millions to each one
when he died.

"An' they're so simple, too," said the old woman; "nothin' cityfied ner
stuck-up about any on 'em, I kin tell ye. They dresses as fine as the
Queen o' Sheba, Tom says; but they romp 'round just like they was borned
in the country. Miss Patsy she's learnin' to milk the cow, an' Miss Beth
takes care o' the chickens all by herself. They're reg'lar girls, Marthy
Clark, an' money hain't spiled 'em a bit."

This report tended to waken a great ambition in the widow's heart. Or
perhaps the ambition had already taken form and this gossip confirmed
and established it. Before she left the farm she had a chance to
secretly observe the girls, and they met with her full approval.

At supper that evening she said to her hopeful:

"Skim, I want ye to go courtin'."

Skim looked up in amazement.

"Me, ma?" he asked.

"Yes, you. It's time you was thinkin' of gittin' married."

Skim held his knife in his mouth a moment while he thought over this
startling proposition. Then he removed the cutlery, heaved a deep sigh,
and enquired:

"Who at, ma?"

"What's that?"

"Who'll I go courtin' at?"

"Skim, you 'member in thet las' book we read, 'The Angel Maniac's
Revenge,' there was a sayin' that fate knocks wunst on ev'ry man's door.
Well, fate's knockin' on your door."

Skim listened, with a nervous glance toward the doorway. Then he shook
his head.

"All fool fancy, ma," he remarked. "Don't ye go an' git no rumantic
notions out'n books inter yer head."

"Skim, am I a fool, er ain't I?"

"'Tain't fer me ter say, ma."

"Fate's knockin', an' if you don't open to it, Skim, I'll wash my hands
o' ye, an' ye kin jest starve to death."

The boy looked disturbed.

"What's aggrivatin' of ye, then?" he enquired, anxiously.

"A millionaire is come right under yer nose. He's here in Millville,
with three gals fer nieces thet's all got money to squander an's bound
to hev more."

Skim gave a low whistle.

"Ye don't mean fer me to be courtin' at them gals, do ye?" he demanded.

"Why not? Yer fambly's jest as respectible as any, 'cept thet yer Uncle
Mell backslided after the last revival, an' went to a hoss race. Yer
young, an' yer han'some; an' there's three gals waitin' ready to be won
by a bold wooer. Be bold, Skim; take fate by the fetlock, an' yer
fortun's made easy!"

Skim did not reply at once. He gulped down his tea and stared at the
opposite wall in deep thought. It wasn't such a "tarnal bad notion,"
after all, and so thoroughly impressed was he with his own importance
and merit that it never occurred to him he would meet with any
difficulties if he chose to undertake the conquest.

"Peggy says marri'ge is the mark of a fool; an' Peggy married money,
too," he remarked slowly.

"Pah! money! Mary Ann Cotting didn't hev but a hundred an' forty
dollars, all told, an' she were an old maid an' soured an' squint-eyed
when Peggy hitched up with her."

"I hain't seen nuthin' o' the world, yit," continued Skim, evasively.

"Ner ye won't nuther, onless ye marry money. Any one o' them gals could
take ye to Europe an' back a dozen times."

Skim reflected still farther.

"Courtin' ought to hev some decent clothes," he said. "I kain't set in
the nabob's parlor, with all thet slick furnitur', in Nick Thorne's
cast-off Sunday suit."

"The cloth's as good as ever was made, an' I cut 'em down myself, an'
stitched 'em all over."

"They don't look like store clothes, though," objected Skim.

The widow sighed.

"Tain't the coat that makes the man, Skim."

"It's the coat thet makes decent courtin', though," he maintained,
stubbornly. "Gals like to see a feller dressed up. It shows he means
business an' 'mounts to somethin'."

"I give Nick Thorne two dollars an' a packidge o' terbacker fer them
clotlies, which the on'y thing wrong about was they'd got too snug fer
comfert. Nick said so himself. But I'll make a bargain with ye, Skim. Ef
you'll agree to give me fifty dollars after yer married, I'll buy ye
some store clothes o' Sam Cotting, to do courtin' in."

"Fifty dollars!"

"Well, I've brung ye up, hain't I?" "I've worked like a nigger, mindin'
shop." "Say forty dollars. I ain't small, an' ef ye git one o' them city
gals, Skim, forty dollars won't mean no more'n a wink of an eye to ye."

Skim frowned. Then he smiled, and the smile disclosed a front tooth
missing.

"I'll dream on't," he said. "Let ye know in the mornin', ma. But I won't
court a minite, mind ye, 'nless I git store clothes."



CHAPTER XX.

A LOST CAUSE.

The boy's musings confirmed him in the idea that his mother's scheme was
entirely practical. He didn't hanker much to marry, being young and
fairly satisfied with his present lot; but opportunities like this did
not often occur, and it seemed his bounden duty to take advantage of it.

He got the "store clothes" next day, together with a scarlet necktie
that was "all made up in the latest style," as Sam Cotting assured him,
and a pair of yellow kid gloves "fit fer a howlin' swell." Skim wasn't
sure, at first, about the gloves, but capitulated when Sam declared they
were "real cityfied."

In the evening he "togged up," with his mother's help, and then walked
over to the Wegg farm.

Beth answered the knock at the door. The living room was brightly
lighted; Uncle John and the Major were playing checkers in a corner and
Patsy was softly drumming on the piano. Louise had a book and Beth had
been engaged upon some fancy-work.

When the door opened Skim bobbed his head and said:

"Evenin', mom. I've come a-visitin'."

Beth conquered an inclination to smile.

"Won't you come in?" she said, sweetly.

"Thankee; I will. I'm Skimbley Clark, ye know; down t' the village. Ma
keeps a store there."

"I'm pleased to meet you, Mr. Clark. Allow me to introduce to you my
uncle and cousins," said the girl, her eyes dancing with amusement.

Skim acknowledged the introductions with intense gravity, and then sat
down upon a straight-backed chair near the piano, this being the end of
the room where the three girls were grouped. Uncle John gave a chuckle
and resumed his game with the Major, who whispered that he would give a
dollar for an oil painting of Mr. Clark--if it couldn't be had for less.

Louise laid down her book and regarded the visitor wonderingly. Patsy
scented fun and drew a chair nearer the group. Beth resumed her
embroidery with a demure smile that made Skim decide at once that "he
picked the pretty one."

Indeed, the decision did justice to his discretion. Beth De Graf was a
rarely beautiful girl and quite outshone her cousins in this respect.
Louise might be attractive and Patsy fascinating; but Beth was the real
beauty of the trio, and the most charming trait in her character was her
unconsciousness that she excelled in good looks.

So Skim stared hard at Beth, and answered the preliminary remarks
addressed to him by Patsy and Louise in a perfunctory manner.

"Won't you take off your gloves?" asked Louise, soberly. "It's so warm
this evening, you know."

The boy looked at his hands.

"It's sech a tarnal job to git 'em on agin," he replied.

"Don't put them on, then," advised Patsy. "Here in the country we are
allowed to dispense with much unnecessary social etiquette."

"Air ye? Then off they come. I ain't much stuck on gloves, myself; but
ma she 'lowed that a feller goin' courtin' orter look like a sport."

A chorus of wild laughter, which greeted this speech, had the effect of
making Skim stare at the girls indignantly. He couldn't find anything
funny in his remark; but there they sat facing him and uttering
hysterical peals of merriment, until the tears ran down their cheeks.

Silently and with caution he removed the yellow gloves from his hands,
and so gave the foolish creatures a chance "to laugh out their
blamed giggle."

But they were watching him, and saw that he was disconcerted. They had
no mind to ruin the enjoyment in store for them by offending their
guest, so they soon resumed a fitting gravity and began to assist the
youth to forget their rudeness.

"May I ask," said Patsy, very graciously, "which one of us you intend to
favor with your attentions?"

"I ain't much used to sech things," he replied, looking down at his big
hands and growing a little red-faced. "P'raps I hadn't orter tell,
before the rest o' ye."

"Oh, yes; do tell!" pleaded Louise. "We're so anxious to know."

"I don't s'pose it's right clever to pick an' choose when ye're all by,"
said Skim, regaining confidence. "But ma, she 'lowed thet with three
gals handy I orter git one on 'em, to say the least."

"If you got more than one," remarked Beth, calmly, "it would be
illegal."

"Oh, one's enough," said Skim, with a grin. "Peggy says it's too many,
an' a feller oughtn't to take his gal out'n a grab-bag."

"I should think not, indeed," returned Patsy. "But here are three of us
openly displayed, and unless you turn us all down as unworthy, it will
be necessary for you to make a choice."

"What foolishness are you girls up to now?" demanded Uncle John,
catching a stray word from the other corner while engaged in a desperate
struggle with the Major.

"This is a time for you to keep quiet, Uncle," retorted Patsy, merrily.
"We've got important things to consider that are none of your affairs,
whatever."

Skim reflected that he didn't want this one, except as a last resort.
She was "too bossy."

"When I started out," he said, "I jest come a-courtin', as any feller
might do thet wasn't much acquainted. But ef I've got to settle down to
one o' ye--"

He hesitated.

"Oh, you must really take one at a time, you know," asserted Louise.
"It's the only proper way."

"Then I'll start on thet dark-eyed one thet's a sewin'," he said,
slowly.

Beth looked up from her work and smiled.

"Go ahead, Mr. Clark," she said, encouragingly. "My name is Beth. Had
you forgotten it?"

"Call me Skim," he said, gently.

"Very well, Skim,--Now look here, Patsy Doyle, if you're going to sit
there and giggle you'll spoil everything. Mr. Clark wants to court, and
it's getting late."

"P'raps I've went fur enough fer tonight," remarked Skim, uneasily.
"Next time they'll leave us alone, an' then----"

"Oh, don't postpone it, please!" begged Beth, giving the boy a demure
glance from her soft brown eyes. "And don't mind my cousins. I don't."

"These things kain't be hurried," he said. "Si Merkle courted three
weeks afore he popped. He tol' me so."

"Then he was a very foolish man," declared Patsy, positively. "Just look
at Beth! She's dying to have you speak out. What's the use of waiting,
when she knows why you are here?"

By this time Skim had been flattered to the extent of destroying any
stray sense he might ever have possessed. His utter ignorance of girls
and their ways may have been partly responsible for his idiocy, or his
mother's conviction that all that was necessary was for him to declare
himself in order to be accepted had misled him and induced him to
abandon any native diffidence he might have had. Anyway, the boy fell
into the snare set by the mischievous young ladies without a suspicion
of his impending fate.

"Miss Beth," said he, "ef yer willin', I'll marry ye; any time ye say. I
agreed t' help Dick Pearson with the harvestin', but I'll try to' git
Ned Long to take my place, an' it don't matter much, nohow."

"But I couldn't have you break an engagement," cried Beth, hastily.

"Why not?"

"Oh, it wouldn't be right, at all. Mr. Pearson would never forgive me,"
she asserted.

"Can't ye--"

"No; not before harvest, Skim. I couldn't think of it."

"But arterward--"

"No; I've resolved never to marry after harvest. So, as you're engaged,
and I don't approve of breaking engagements, I must refuse your
proposition entirely."

Skim looked surprised; then perplexed; then annoyed.

"P'raps I didn't pop jest right," he murmured, growing red again.

"You popped beautifully," declared Patsy. "But Beth is very peculiar,
and set in her ways. I'm afraid she wouldn't make you a good
wife, anyhow."

"Then p'raps the gal in blue----"

"No;" said Louise. "I have the same prejudices as my cousin. If you
hadn't been engaged for the harvest I might have listened to you; but
that settles the matter definitely, as far as I am concerned."

Skim sighed.

"Ma'll be mad as a hornet ef I don't get any of ye," he remarked, sadly.
"She's paid Sam Cotting fer this courtin' suit, an' he won't take back
the gloves on no 'count arter they've been wore; an' thet'll set ma
crazy. Miss Patsy, ef yo' think ye could----"

"I'm sure I couldn't," said Patsy, promptly. "I'm awfully sorry to break
your heart, Skim, dear, and ruin your future life, and make you
misanthropic and cynical, and spoil your mother's investment and make
her mad as a hornet. All this grieves me terribly; but I'll recover from
it, if you'll only give me time. And I hope you'll find a wife that will
be more congenial than I could ever be."

Skim didn't understand all these words, but the general tenor of the
speech was convincing, and filled him with dismay.

"Rich gals is tarnal skeerce in these parts," he said, regretfully.

Then they gave way again, and so lusty was the merriment that Uncle John
and the Major abandoned their game and came across the room to discover
the source of all this amusement.

"What's up, young women?" asked their Uncle, glancing from their
laughing faces to the lowering, sullen one of the boy, who had only now
begun to suspect that he was being "poked fun at."

"Oh, Uncle!" cried Patsy; "you've no idea how near you have been to
losing us. We have each had an offer of marriage within the last
half hour!"

"Dear me!" ejaculated Uncle John.

"It shows the young man's intelligence and good taste," said the Major,
much amused. "But is it a Mormon ye are, sir, to want all three?"
directing a keen glance at Skim.

"Naw, 'tain't," he returned, wholly disgusted with the outcome of his
suit. "All three got as't 'cause none of 'em's got sense enough t' know
a good thing when they seen it."

"But I do," said the Major, stoutly; "and I maintain that you're a good
thing, and always will be. I hope, sir, you'll call 'round and see me in
Baltimore next year. I'll not be there, but ye can leave your card, just
the same."

"Please call again, sir," added Uncle John; "about October--just before
snow flies."

The boy got up.

"I don't keer none," he said, defiantly. "It's all ma's fault, gittin'
me laughed at, an' she won't hear the last of it in a hurry, nuther."

"Be gentle with her, Skim," suggested Beth, softly. "Remember she has to
face the world with you by her side."

Having no retort for this raillery, which he felt rather than
understood, Skim seized his hat and fled. Then Patsy wiped the tears
from her eyes and said:

"Wasn't it grand, girls? I haven't had so much fun since I was born."



CHAPTER XXI.

THE TRAP IS SET.

Uncle John was forced to acknowledge to his nieces that his boast to
unmask Bob West within three days was mere blustering. If he
accomplished anything in three weeks he would consider himself
fortunate. But he had no wish to conceal anything from the girls, so he
told them frankly of his interview with the hardware merchant, and also
what Joe Wegg had said about the stock in the locked cupboard. They
were, of course, greatly interested in this new phase of the matter and
canvassed it long and eagerly.

"The man is lying, of course," said Patsy, "for Captain Wegg and poor
Mr. Thompson could not transfer their stock to West after that fatal
night when he brought to them the news of the fire."

"I believe the stock is still in this cupboard," declared Uncle John.

"Unless West stole the keys and has taken it away," suggested Louise.

"I'm sure he did not know about the secret drawer," said her uncle.
"Probably he stole the keys and searched the cupboard; if he had found
the stock he would have left the keys, which would then be of no further
use to him. As he did not find the stock certificates, he carried the
keys away, that he might search again at his leisure. And they've never
yet been returned."

"Why, John, ye're possessed of the true detective instinct," the Major
remarked, admiringly. "Your reasoning is at once clever and
unassailable."

"I wonder," mused Beth, "if we could tempt Mr. West to come again to
search the cupboard."

"He will scarcely venture to do that while we are here," replied Uncle
John.

"I said 'tempt him,' Uncle."

"And what did you mean by that expression, Beth?"

"I'll think it over and tell you later," she returned, quietly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ethel Thompson would have shown Joe Wegg how much she resented his
leaving Millville without a word to her, had she not learned from Mr.
Merrick the boy's sad condition. Knowing her old friend was ill, she
determined to ignore the past and go to him at once, and Uncle John knew
very well there would be explanations to smooth away all the former
misunderstandings.

Joe was now aware of the fact that his letter to Ethel had never reached
its destination, so, as soon as the girl had arrived and the first
rather formal greetings were over, he sent Kate Kebble to McNutt's to
ask the agent to come over to the hotel at once.

The girl returned alone.

"Peggy says as he can't come," she announced.

"Why not?" asked Joe.

"Says he's jest painted his off foot blue an' striped it with red, an'
it hain't dried yit."

"Go back," said Joe, firmly. "Tell Peggy he's in trouble, and it's
likely to cost him more than a new coat of paint for his foot if he
doesn't come here at once."

Kate went back, and in due time the stump of McNutt's foot was heard on
the stairs. He entered the room looking worried and suspicious, and the
stern faces of Ethel and Joe did not reassure him, by any means. But he
tried to disarm the pending accusation with his usual brazen
impertinence.

"Nice time ter send fer me, this is, Joe," he grumbled. "It's gittin' so
a feller can't even paint his foot in peace an' quiet."

"Peggy," said Joe, "when I went away, three years ago, I gave you a
letter for Miss Ethel. What did you do with it?"

Peggy's bulging eyes stared at his blue foot, which he turned first one
side and then the other to examine the red stripes.

"It's this way, Joe," he replied; "there wa'n't no postige stamp on the
letter, an' Sam Cotting said it couldn't be posted no way 'thout
a stamp."

"It wasn't to be sent through the post-office," said the boy. "I gave
you a quarter to deliver it in person to Miss Ethel."

"Did ye, Joe? did ye?"

"Of course I did."

"Cur'ous," said McNutt, leaning over to touch the foot cautiously with
one finger, to see if the paint was dry.

"Well, sir!"

"Well, Joe, there's no use gittin' mad 'bout it. Thet blamed quarter ye
giv me rolled down a crack in the stoop, an' got lost. Sure. Got lost as
easy as anything."

"Well, what was that to me?"

"Oh, I ain't blamin' you," said Peggy; "but 'twere a good deal to me, I
kin tell ye. A whole quarter lost!"

"Why didn't you take up a board, and get it again?"

"Oh, I did," said McNutt. cheerfully. "I did, Joe. But the money was all
black an' tarnished like, by thet time, an' didn't look at all like
silver. Sam he wouldn't take it at the store, so my ol' woman she 'lowed
she'd polish it up a bit. Ye know how sort o' vig'rous she is, Joe. She
polished that blamed quarter the same way she jaws an' sweeps; she
polished it 'til she rubbed both sides smooth as glass, an' then Sam
wouldn't take it, nuther, 'n' said it wasn't money any more. So I
drilled two holes in it an' sewed it on my pants fer a 'spender butt'n."

"But why didn't you deliver the letter?"

"Did ye 'spect I'd tramp way t' Thompson's Crossing fer nuthin'?"

"I gave you a quarter."

"An' it turned out to be on'y a 'spender butt'n. Be reason'ble, Joe."

"Where is the letter?"

"'Tain't a letter no more. It's on'y ol' fambly papers by this time.
Three years is----"

"Where is it? By thunder, Peggy, if you don't answer me I'll put you in
jail for breach of trust!"

"Ye've changed, Joe," sadly. "Ye ain't no more like----"

"Where is it?"

"Behind the lookin'-glass in my sett'n-room."

"Go and get it immediately, sir!"

"Ef I hev to cross thet dusty road twic't more, I'll hev to paint all
over agin, an' thet's a fact."

"Ethel," said Joe, with the calmness of despair, "you'll have to
telephone over to the Junction and ask them to send a constable here
at once."

"Never mind," cried McNutt, jumping up hastily; "I'll go. Paint don't
cost much, nohow."

He stumped away, but on his return preferred to let Kate carry the
soiled, torn envelope up to the young folks. The letter had palpably
been tampered with. It had been opened and doubtless read, and the flap
clumsily glued down again.

But Ethel had it now, and even after three years her sweet eyes dimmed
as she read the tender words that Joe had written because he lacked the
courage to speak them. "My one great ambition is to win a home for us,
dear," he had declared, and with this before her eyes Ethel reproached
herself for ever doubting his love or loyalty.

When she rode her pony over to the Wegg farm next day Ethel's bright
face was wreathed with smiles. She told her girl friends that she and
Joe had had a "good talk" together, and understood each other better
than ever before. The nieces did not tell her of their newly conceived
hopes that the young couple would presently possess enough money to
render their future comfortable, because there were so many chances that
Bob West might win the little game being played. But at this moment
Ethel did not need worldly wealth to make her heart light and happy, for
she had regained her childhood's friend, and his injuries only rendered
the boy the more interesting and companionable.

Meantime Uncle John had been busily thinking. It annoyed him to be so
composedly defied by a rascally country merchant, and he resolved, if he
must fight, to fight with all his might.

So he wired to his agent in New York the following words:

"What part of the Almaquo timber tract burned in forest fire three years
ago?"

The answer he received made him give a satisfied grunt.

"No forest fires near Almaquo three years ago. Almadona, seventy miles
north, burned at that time, and newspaper reports confounded the names."

"Very good!" exclaimed Uncle John. "I've got the rascal now."

He issued instructions to the lumber company to make no further payments
of royalties to Robert West until otherwise advised, and this had the
effect of bringing West to the farm white with rage.

"What do you mean by this action, Mr. Merrick?" he demanded.

"We've been paying you money that does not belong to you for three
years, sir," was the reply. "In a few days, when my investigations are
complete, I will give you the option of being arrested for embezzlement
of funds belonging to Joseph Wegg and the Thompsons, or restoring to
them every penny of their money."

West stared.

"You are carrying matters with a high hand, sir," he sneered.

"Oh, no; I am acting very leniently," said Uncle John.

"Neither Joe nor the Thompsons own a dollar's interest in the Almaquo
property. It is all mine, and mine alone."

"Then produce the stock and prove it!" retorted Mr. Merrick,
triumphantly.

At that moment Louise interrupted the interview by entering the room
suddenly.

"Oh, Uncle," said she, "will you join us in a picnic to the Falls
tomorrow afternoon? We are all going."

"Then I won't be left behind," he replied, smiling upon her.

"We shall take even Thomas and Nora, and come home late in the evening,
by moonlight."

"That suits me, my dear," said he.

West stood silent and scowling, but as the girl tripped away she saw him
raise his eyes and glance slyly toward the cupboard, for they were in
the right wing room.

"Mr. Merrick," he resumed, in a harsh voice; "I warn you that if your
company holds up the payment of my royalties it will break the contract,
and I will forbid them to cut another tree. You are doubtless aware that
there are a dozen firms willing to take your place and pay me higher
royalties."

"Act as you please, sir," said Uncle John, indifferently. "I believe you
are face to face with ruin, and it won't matter much what you do."

West went away more quietly than he had come, and the girls exclaimed,
delightedly:

"The trap is set, Uncle!"

"I think so, myself," he rejoined. "That picnic was a happy thought,
Louise."

Early the next afternoon they started out with hammocks and baskets and
all the paraphernalia of a picnic party. The three girls, Nora and Uncle
John squeezed themselves into the surrey, while the Major and Old Hucks
rode after them in the ancient buggy, with Dan moaning and groaning
every step he took. But the old horse moved more briskly when following
Joe, and Hucks could get more speed out of him than anyone else; so he
did not lag much behind.

The procession entered Millville, where a brief stop was made at the
store, and then made its exit by the north road. West was standing in
the door of his hardware store, quietly observing them. When they
disappeared in the grove he locked the door of his establishment and
sauntered in the direction of the Pearson farm, no one noticing him
except Peggy McNutt, who was disappointed because he had intended to go
over presently and buy a paper of tacks.

When the village was left behind, Uncle John drove swiftly along,
following the curve of the lake until he reached a primitive lane that
he had discovered formed a short cut directly back to the Wegg farm. Old
Thomas was amazed by this queer action on the part of the picnic party,
but aside from blind Nora, who had no idea where they were, the others
seemed full of repressed eagerness, and in no way surprised.

The lane proved very rocky though, and they were obliged to jolt slowly
over the big cobble stones. So Beth and Patsy leaped out of the surrey
and the former called out:

"We will run through the forest, Uncle, and get home as soon as you do."

"Be careful not to show yourselves, then," he replied. "Remember our
plans."

"We will. And don't forget to tie the horses in the thicket, and warn
Thomas and Nora to keep quiet until we come for them," said Patsy.

"I'll attend to all that, dear," remarked Louise, composedly. "But if
you girls are determined to walk, you must hurry along, or you will keep
us waiting."

The nieces had explored every path in the neighborhood by this time, so
Beth and Patsy were quite at home in the pine forest. The horses started
up again, and after struggling along another quarter of a mile a wheel
of the surrey dished between two stones, and with a bump the axle struck
the ground and the journey was promptly arrested.

"What shall we do now?" asked Uncle John, much annoyed, as the party
alighted to examine the wreck.

"Send Thomas back to the village for another wheel" suggested the Major.

"Not today!" cried Louise. "We mustn't appear in the village again this
afternoon, on any account. It is absolutely necessary we should keep out
of sight."

"True," agreed Uncle John, promptly. "Thomas and Nora must picnic here
all by themselves, until nearly midnight. Then they may drive the buggy
home, leading Daniel behind them. It will be time enough tomorrow to get
a new buggy wheel, and the broken surrey won't be in anybody's way until
we send for it."

If Old Hucks thought they had all gone crazy that day he was seemingly
justified in the suspicion, for his master left the baskets of good
things to be consumed by himself and Nora and started to walk to the
farm, the Major and Louise accompanying him.

"We mustn't loiter," said the girl, "for while West may wait until
darkness falls to visit the farm, he is equally liable to arrive at any
time this afternoon. He has seen us all depart, and believes the house
deserted."

But they were obliged to keep to the lane, where walking was difficult,
and meantime Patsy and Beth were tripping easily along their woodland
paths and making much better progress.



CHAPTER XXII.

CAUGHT.

"We're early," said Beth, as they came to the edge of the woods and
sighted the farm house; "but that is better than being late."

Then she stopped suddenly with a low cry and pointed to the right wing,
which directly faced them. Bob West turned the corner of the house,
tried the door of Uncle John's room, and then walked to one of the
French windows. The sash was not fastened, so he deliberately opened it
and stepped inside.

"What shall we do?" gasped Patsy, clasping her hands excitedly.

Beth was always cool in an emergency.

"You creep up to the window, dear, and wait till you hear me open the
inside door," said she. "I'll run through the house and enter from the
living-room. The key is under the mat, you know."

"But what can we do? Oughtn't we to wait until Uncle John and father
come?" Patsy asked, in a trembling voice.

"Of course not. West might rob the cupboard and be gone by that time.
We've got to act promptly, Patsy; so don't be afraid."

Without further words Beth ran around the back of the house and
disappeared, while Patsy, trying to control the beating of her heart,
stole softly over the lawn to the open window of Uncle John's room.

She could not help looking in, at the risk of discovery. Bob West--tall,
lean and composed as ever--was standing beside the cupboard, the doors
of which were wide open. The outer doors were of wood, panelled and
carved; the inner ones were plates of heavy steel, and in the lock that
secured these latter doors were the keys that had so long been missing.
Both were attached to a slender silver chain.

As Patsy peered in at the man West was engaged in deliberately examining
packet after packet of papers, evidently striving to find the missing
stock certificates. He was in no hurry, believing he would have the
house to himself for several hours; so he tumbled Captain Wegg's
souvenirs of foreign lands in a heap on the floor beside him, thrusting
his hand into every corner of the cupboard in order that the search
might be thorough. He had once before examined the place in vain; this
time he intended to succeed.

Presently West drew a cigar from his pocket, lighted it, and was about
to throw the match upon the floor when the thought that it might later
betray his presence made him pause and then walk to the open window. As
he approached, Patsy became panic-stricken and, well knowing that she
ought to run or hide, stood rooted to the spot, gazing half appealingly
and half defiantly into the startled eyes of the man who suddenly
confronted her.

So for a moment they stood motionless. West was thinking rapidly. By
some error be had miscounted the picnic party and this girl had been
left at home. She had discovered his intrusion, had seen him at the
cupboard, and would report the matter to John Merrick. This being the
case, it would do him no good to retreat without accomplishing his
purpose. If once he secured the stock certificates he could afford to
laugh at his accusers, and secure them he must while he had the
opportunity.

So clearly did these thoughts follow one another that West's hesitation
seemed only momentary. Without a word to the girl he tossed the match
upon the grass, calmly turned his back, and started for the
cupboard again.

But here a new surprise awaited him. Brief as had been his absence,
another girl had entered the room. Beth opened the door even as West
turned toward the window, and, taking in the situation at a glance, she
tiptoed swiftly to the cupboard, withdrew the keys from the lock and
dropped them noiselessly into a wide-mouthed vase that stood on the
table and was partially filled with flowers. The next instant West
turned and saw her, but she smiled at him triumphantly. "Good afternoon,
sir," said the girl, sweetly; "can I do anything to assist you?"

West uttered an impatient exclamation and regarded Beth savagely.

"Is the house full of girls?" he demanded.

"Oh, no; Patsy and I are quite alone," she replied, with a laugh. "Come
in, Patsy dear, and help me to entertain our guest," she added.

Patsy came through the window and stood beside her cousin. The man
stared at them, bit his lip, and then turned again to the cupboard. If
he noted the absence of the keys he did not remark upon the fact, but
with hurried yet thorough examination began anew to turn over the
bundles of papers.

Beth sat down and watched him, but Patsy remained standing behind her
chair. West emptied all the shelves, and then after a pause took out his
pocket knife and began tapping with its end the steel sides of the
cupboard. There was no doubt he suspected the existence of a secret
aperture, and Beth began to feel uneasy.

Slowly the man worked his way downward, from shelf to shelf, and began
to sound the bottom plates, wholly oblivious of the fascinated gaze of
the two young girls. Then a sudden gruff ejaculation startled them all,
and West swung around to find a new group of watchers outside the
window. In the foreground appeared the stern face of John Merrick.

The scene was intensely dramatic to all but the singular man who had
been battling to retain a fortune. West knew in an instant that his
attempt to secure the certificates was a failure. He turned from the
cupboard, dusted his hands, and nodded gravely to the last arrivals.

"Come in, Mr. Merrick," said he, seating himself in a chair and removing
his hat, which he had been wearing. "I owe you an apology for intruding
upon your premises in your absence."

Uncle John strode into the room angry and indignant at the fellow's cool
impertinence. The Major and Louise followed, and all eyes centered upon
the face of Bob West.

"The contents of this cupboard," remarked the hardware merchant, calmly,
"belong to the estate of Captain Wegg, and can scarcely be claimed by
you because you have purchased the house. You falsely accused me the
other day, sir, and I have been searching for proof that the Almaquo
Timber Tract stock is entirely my property."

"Have you found such proof?" inquired Mr. Merrick.

"Not yet."

"And you say the stock was all issued to you?"

West hesitated.

"It was all transferred to me by Captain Wegg and Will Thompson."

"Does the transfer appear upon the stock itself?"

"Of course, sir."

"In that case," said Uncle John, "I shall be obliged to ask your pardon.
But the fact can be easily proved."

He walked to the open cupboard, felt for the slide Joe had described to
him, and drew it forward. A small drawer was behind the orifice, and
from this Mr. Merrick drew a packet of papers.

West gave a start and half arose. Then he settled back into his chair
again.

"H-m. This appears to be the stock in question," said Uncle John. He
drew a chair to the table, unfolded the documents and examined them with
deliberate care.

The nieces watched his face curiously. Mr. Merrick first frowned, then
turned red, and finally a stern, determined look settled upon his
rugged features.

"Take your stock, Mr. West," he said, tossing it toward the man; "and
try to forgive us for making fools of ourselves!"



CHAPTER XXIII.

MR. WEST EXPLAINS.

A cry of amazed protest burst from the girls. The Major whistled softly
and walked to the window.

"I find the stock properly transferred," continued Uncle John, grimly
conscious that he was as thoroughly disappointed as the girls. "It is
signed by both Wegg and Thompson, and witnessed in the presence of a
notary. I congratulate you, Mr. West. You have acquired a fortune."

"But not recently," replied the hardware dealer, enjoying the confusion
of his recent opponents. "I have owned this stock for more than three
years, and you will see by the amount endorsed upon it that I paid a
liberal price for it, under the circumstances."

Uncle John gave a start and a shrewd look.

"Of course you did," said he. "On paper."

"I have records to prove that both Captain Wegg and Will Thompson
received their money," said West, quietly. "I see it is hard for you to
abandon the idea that I am a rogue."

There could be no adequate reply to this, so for a time all sat in moody
silence. But the thoughts of some were busy.

"I would like Mr. West to explain what became of the money he paid for
this stock," said Louise; adding: "That is, if he will be so courteous."

West did not answer for a moment. Then he said, with a gesture of
indifference:

"I am willing to tell all I know. But you people must admit that the
annoyances you have caused me during the past fortnight, to say nothing
of the gratuitous insults heaped upon my head, render me little inclined
to favor you."

"You are quite justified in feeling as you do," replied Uncle John,
meekly. "I have been an ass, West; but circumstances warranted me in
suspecting you, and even Joseph Wegg did not know that the Almaquo stock
had been transferred to you. He merely glanced at it at the time of his
father's death, without noticing the endorsement, and thought the fire
had rendered it worthless. But if you then owned the stock, why was it
not in your possession?"

"That was due to my carelessness," was the reply. "The only notary
around here is at Hooker's Falls, and Mr. Thompson offered to have him
come to Captain Wegg's residence and witness the transfer. As my
presence was not necessary for this, and I had full confidence in my
friends' integrity, I paid them their money, which they were eager to
secure at once, and said I would call in a few days for the stock. I did
call, and was told the notary had been here and the transfer had been
legally made. Wegg said he would get the stock from the cupboard and
hand it to me; but we both forgot it at that time. After his death I
could not find it, for it was in the secret drawer."

"Another thing, sir," said Uncle John. "If neither Wegg nor Thompson was
then interested in the Almaquo property, why did the news of its
destruction by fire shock them so greatly that the result was Captain
Wegg's death?"

"I see it will be necessary for me to explain to you more fully,"
returned West, with a thoughtful look. "It is evident, Mr. Merrick, from
your questions, that some of these occurrences seem suspicious to a
stranger, and perhaps you are not so much to be blamed as, in my
annoyance and indignation, I have imagined."

"I would like the matter cleared up for the sake of Ethel and Joe," said
Mr. Merrick, simply.

"And so would I," declared the hardware dealer. "You must know, sir,
that Will Thompson was the one who first led Captain Wegg into investing
his money. I think the Captain did it merely to please Will, for at that
time he had become so indifferent to worldly affairs that he took no
interest in anything beyond a mild wish to provide for his son's future.
But Thompson was erratic in judgment, so Wegg used to bring their
matters to me to decide upon. I always advised them as honestly as I was
able. At the time I secured an option on the Almaquo tract, and wanted
them to join me, Will Thompson had found another lot of timber, but
located in an out-of-the-way corner, which he urged the Captain to join
him in buying. Wegg brought the matter to me, as usual, and I pointed
out that my proposed contract with the Pierce-Lane Lumber Company would
assure our making a handsome profit at Almaquo, while Thompson had no
one in view to cut the other tract. Indeed, it was far away from any
railroad. Wegg saw the force of my argument, and insisted that Thompson
abandon his idea and accept my proposition. Together we bought the
property, having formed a stock company, and the contract for cutting
the timber was also secured. Things were looking bright for us and
royalty payments would soon be coming in.

"Then, to my amazement, Wegg came to me and wanted to sell out their
interests. He said Thompson had always been dissatisfied because they
had not bought the other tract of timber, and that the worry and
disappointment was affecting his friend's mind. He was personally
satisfied that my investment was the best, but, in order to sooth old
Will and prevent his mind from giving way, Wegg wanted to withdraw and
purchase the other tract.

"I knew there was a fortune in Almaquo, so I went to New York and
mortgaged all I possessed, discounting a lot of notes given me by
farmers in payment for machinery, and finally borrowing at a high rate
of interest the rest of the money I needed. In other words I risked all
my fortune on Almaquo, and brought the money home to pay Wegg and
Thompson for their interest. The moment they received the payment they
invested it in the Bogue tract--"

"Hold on!" cried Uncle John. "What tract did you say?"

"The Bogue timber tract, sir. It lies--"

"I know where it lies. Our company has been a whole year trying to find
out who owned it."

"Wegg and Thompson bought it. I was angry at the time, because their
withdrawal had driven me into a tight corner to protect my investment,
and I told them they would bitterly regret their action. I think Wegg
agreed with me, but Will Thompson was still stubborn.

"Then came the news of the fire at Almaquo. It was a false report, I
afterward learned, but at that time I believed the newspapers, and the
blow almost deprived me of reason. In my excitement I rushed over to
Wegg's farm and found the two men together, whereupon I told them I
was ruined.

"The news affected them powerfully because they had just saved
themselves from a like ruin, they thought. Wegg was also a sympathetic
man, in spite of his reserve. His old heart trouble suddenly came upon
him, aggravated by the excitement of the hour, and he died with scarcely
a moan. Thompson, whose reason was tottering long before this, became
violently insane at witnessing his friend's death, and has never since
recovered. That is all I am able to tell you, sir."

"The Bogue tract," said Uncle John, slowly, "is worth far more than the
Almaquo. Old Will Thompson was sane enough when insisting on that
investment. But where is the stock, or deed, to show they bought that
property?"

"I do not know, sir. I only know they told me they had effected the
purchase."

"Pardon me," said the Major. "Have you not been through this cupboard
before?"

West looked at him with a frown.

"Yes; in a search for my own stock," he said. "But I found neither that
nor any deed to the Bogue property. I am not a thief, Major Doyle."

"You stole the keys, though," said Louise, pointedly.

"I did not even do that," said West. "On the day of the funeral Joe
carelessly left them lying upon a table, so I slipped them into my
pocket. When I thought of them again Joe had gone away and I did not
know his address. I came over and searched the cupboard unsuccessfully.
But it was not a matter of great importance at that time if the stock
was mislaid, since there was no one to contest my ownership of it. It
was only after Mr. Merrick accused me of robbing my old friends and
ordered my payments stopped that I realized it was important to me to
prove my ownership. That is why I came here today."

Again a silence fell upon the group. Said Uncle John, finally:

"If the deed to the Bogue tract can be found, Joe and Ethel will be
rich. I wonder what became of the paper."

No one answered, for here was another mystery.



CHAPTER XXIV.

PEGGY HAS REVENGE.

Joe Wegg made a rapid recovery, his strength returning under the
influence of pleasant surroundings and frequent visits from Ethel and
Uncle John's three nieces. Not a word was hinted to either the invalid
or the school teacher regarding the inquiries Mr. Merrick was making
about the deed to the Bogue timber lands, which, if found, would make
the young couple independent. Joe was planning to exploit a new patent
as soon as he could earn enough to get it introduced, and Ethel
exhibited a sublime confidence in the boy's ability that rendered all
question of money insignificant.

Joe's sudden appearance in the land of his birth and his generally
smashed up condition were a nine days' wonder in Millville. The gossips
wanted to know all the whys and wherefores, but the boy kept his room in
the hotel, or only walked out when accompanied by Ethel or one of the
three nieces. Sometimes they took him to ride, as he grew better, and
the fact that Joe "were hand an' glove wi' the nabobs" lent him a
distinction he had never before possessed.

McNutt, always busy over somebody else's affairs, was very curious to
know what had caused the accident Joe had suffered. Notwithstanding the
little affair of the letter, in which he had not appeared with especial
credit, Peggy made an effort to interview the young man that resulted in
his complete discomfiture. But that did not deter him from indulging in
various vivid speculations about Joe Wegg, which the simple villagers
listened to with attention. For one thing, he confided to "the boys" at
the store that, in his opinion, the man who had murdered Cap'n Wegg had
tried to murder his son also, and it wasn't likely Joe could manage to
escape him a second time. Another tale evolved from Peggy's fertile
imagination was that Joe, being about to starve to death in the city,
had turned burglar and been shot in the arm in an attempt at
housebreaking.

"Wouldn't be s'prised," said the agent, in an awed voice, "ef the p'lice
was on his track now. P'raps there's a reward offered, boys; let's keep
an eye on him!"

He waylaid the nieces once or twice, and tried to secure from them a
verification of his somber suspicions, which they mischievously
fostered.

The girls found him a source of much amusement, and relieved their own
disappointment at finding the "Wegg Mystery" a pricked bubble by getting
McNutt excited over many sly suggestions of hidden crimes. They knew he
was harmless, for even his neighbors needed proof of any assertion he
made; moreover, the investigation Uncle John was making would soon set
matters right; so the young ladies did not hesitate to "have fun" at the
little agent's expense.

One of McNutt's numerous occupations was raising a "patch" of
watermelons each year on the lot back of the house. These he had
fostered with great care since the plants had first sprouted through the
soil, and in these late August days two or three hundreds of fine, big
melons were just getting ripe. He showed the patch with much pride one
day to the nieces, saying:

"Here's the most extry-fine melling-patch in this county, ef I do say it
myself. Dan Brayley he thinks he kin raise mellings, but the ol' fool
ain't got a circumstance to this. Ain't they beauties?"

"It seems to me," observed Patsy, gravely, "that Brayley's are just as
good. We passed his place this morning and wondered how he could raise
such enormous melons."

"'Normous! Brayley's!"

"I'm sure they are finer than these," said Beth.

"Well, I'll be jiggered!" Peggy's eyes stared as they had never stared
before. "Dan Brayley, he's a miser'ble ol' skinflint. Thet man couldn't
raise decent mellings ef he tried."

"What do you charge for melons, Mr. McNutt?" inquired Louise.

"Charge? Why--er--fifty cents a piece is my price to nabobs; an' dirt
cheap at that!"

"That is too much," declared Patsy. "Mr. Brayley says he will sell his
melons for fifteen cents each."

"Him! Fifteen cents!" gasped Peggy, greatly disappointed. "Say,
Brayley's a disturbin' element in these parts. He oughter go to jail fer
asking fifteen cents fer them mean little mellings o' his'n."

"They seem as large as yours," murmured Louise.

"But they ain't. An' Brayley's a cheat an' a rascal, while a honester
man ner me don't breathe. Nobody likes Brayley 'round Millville. Why,
on'y las' winter he called me a meddler--in public!--an' said as I shot
off my mouth too much. Me!"

"How impolite."

"But that's Dan Brayley. My mellings at fifty cents is better 'n his'n
at fifteen."

"Tell me," said Patsy, with a smile, "did you ever rob a melon-patch,
Mr. McNutt?"

"Me? I don't hev to. I grow 'em."

"But the ones you grow are worth fifty cents each, are they not?"

"Sure; mine is."

"Then every time you eat one of your own melons you eat fifty cents. If
you were eating one of Mr. Brayley's melons you would only eat
fifteen cents."

"And it would be Brayley's fifteen cents, too," added Beth, quickly.

Peggy turned his protruding eyes from one to the other, and a smile
slowly spread over his features.

"By jinks, let's rob Brayley's melling-patch!" he cried.

"All right; we'll help you," answered Patsy, readily.

"Oh, my dear!" remonstrated Louise, not understanding.

"It will be such fun," replied her cousin, with eyes dancing merrily.
"Boys always rob melon-patches, so I don't see why girls shouldn't. When
shall we do it, Mr. McNutt?"

"There ain't any moon jest now, an' the nights is dark as blazes. Let's
go ternight."

"It's a bargain," declared Patsy. "We will come for you in the surrey at
ten o'clock, and all drive together to the back of Brayley's yard and
take all the melons we want."

"It'll serve him right," said Peggy, delightedly. "Ol' Dan called me a
meddler onc't--in public--an' I'm bound t' git even with him."

"Don't betray us, sir," pleaded Beth.

"I can't," replied McNutt, frankly; "I'm in it myself, an' we'll jest
find out what his blame-twisted ol' fifteen-cent mellings is like."

Patsy was overjoyed at the success of her plot, which she had conceived
on the spur of the moment, as most clever plots are conceived. On the
way home she confided to her cousins a method of securing revenge upon
the agent for selling them the three copies of the "Lives of
the Saints."

"McNutt wants to get even with Brayley, he says, and we want to get even
with McNutt. I think our chances are best, don't you?" she asked.

And they decided to join the conspiracy.

There was some difficulty escaping from Uncle John and the Major that
night, but Patsy got them interested in a game of chess that was likely
to last some hours, while Beth stole to the barn and harnessed Joe to
the surrey. Soon the others slipped out and joined her, and with Patsy
and Beth on the front seat and Louise Inside the canopy they drove
slowly away until the sound of the horse's feet on the stones was no
longer likely to betray them.

McNutt was waiting for them when they quietly drew up before his house.
The village was dark and silent, for its inhabitants retired early to
bed. By good fortune the sky was overcast with heavy clouds and not even
the glimmer of a star relieved the gloom.

They put McNutt on the back seat with Louise, cautioned him to be quiet,
and then drove away. Dan Brayley's place was two miles distant, but in
answer to Peggy's earnest inquiry if she knew the way Beth declared she
could find it blind-folded. In a few moments Louise had engaged the
agent in a spirited discussion of the absorbing "mystery" and so
occupied his attention that he paid no heed to the direction they had
taken. The back seat was hemmed in by side curtains and the canopy, so
it would be no wonder if he lost all sense of direction, even had not
the remarks of the girl at his side completely absorbed him.

Beth drove slowly down the main street, up a lane, back by the lake road
and along the street again; and this programme was repeated several
times, until she thought a sufficient distance had been covered to
convince the agent they had arrived at Brayley's. They way was pitch
dark, but the horse was sensible enough to keep in the middle of the
road, so they met with no accident more than to jolt over a stone
now and then.

But now the most difficult part of the enterprise lay before them. The
girls turned down the lane back of the main street and bumped over the
ruts until they thought they had arrived at a spot opposite McNutt's own
melon patch.

"What's wrong?" asked the agent, as they suddenly stopped with a jerk.

"This ought to be Brayley's," said Beth; "but it's so dark I'm not
certain just where we are."

McNutt thrust his head out and peered into the blackness.

"Drive along a little," he whispered.

The girl obeyed.

"Stop--stop!" said he, a moment later. "I think that's them contwisted
fifteen-cent mellings--over there!"

They all got out and Beth tied the horse to the fence. Peggy climbed
over and at once whispered:

"Come on! It's them, all right."

Through the drifting clouds there was just enough light to enable them
to perceive the dark forms of the melons lying side by side upon their
vines. The agent took out his big clasp knife and recklessly slashed one
of them open.

"Green's grass!" he grumbled, and slashed another.

Patsy giggled, and the others felt a sudden irresistible impulse to join
her.

"Keep still!" cautioned McNutt. "Wouldn't ol' Dan be jest ravin' ef he
knew this? Say--here's a ripe one. Hev a slice."

They all felt for the slices he offered and ate the fruit without being
able to see it. But it really tasted delicious.

As the girls feasted they heard a crunching sound and inquired in low
voices what it was.

McNutt was stumping over the patch and plumping his wooden foot into
every melon he could find, smashing them wantonly against the ground.
The discovery filled them with horror. They had thought inducing the
agent to rob his own patch of a few melons, while under the delusion
that they belonged to his enemy Brayley, a bit of harmless fun; but here
was the vindictive fellow actually destroying his own property by the
wholesale.

"Oh, don't! Please don't, Mr. McNutt!" pleaded Patsy, in frightened
accents.

"Yes, I will," declared the agent, stubbornly. "I'll git even with Dan
Brayley fer once in my life, ef I never do another thing, by gum!"

"But it's wrong--it's wicked!" protested Beth.

"Can't help it; this is my chance, an' I'll make them bum fifteen-cent
mellings look like a penny a piece afore I gits done with 'em."

"Never mind, girls," whispered Louise. "It's the law of retribution.
Poor Peggy will be sorry for this tomorrow."

The man had not the faintest suspicion where he was. He knew his own
melon patch well enough, having worked in it at times all the summer;
but he had never climbed over the fence and approached it from the rear
before, so it took on a new aspect to him from this point of view, and
moreover the night was dark enough to deceive anybody.

If he came across an especially big melon McNutt would lug it to the
carriage and dump it in. And so angry and energetic was the little man
that in a brief space the melon patch was a scene of awful devastation,
and the surrey contained all the fruit that survived the massacre.

Beth unhitched the horse and they all took their places in the carriage
again, having some difficulty to find places for their feet on account
of the cargo of melons. McNutt was stowed away inside, with Louise, and
they drove away up the lane. The agent was jubilant and triumphant, and
chuckled in gleeful tones that thrilled the girls with remorse as they
remembered the annihilation of McNutt's cherished melons.

"Ol' Dan usu'lly has a dorg," said Peggy, between his fits of laughter;
"but I guess he had him chained up ternight."

"I'm not positively sure that was Brayley's place," remarked Beth; "it's
so very dark."

"Oh, it were Brayley's, all right," McNutt retorted. "I could tell by
the second-class taste o' them mellings, an' their measley little size.
Them things ain't a circumstance to the kind I raise."

"Are you sure?" asked Louise.

"Sure's shootln'. Guess I'm a jedge o' mellings, when I sees 'em."

"No one could see tonight," said Beth.

"Feelin's jest the same," declared the little man, confidently.

After wandering around a sufficient length of time to allay suspicion,
Beth finally drew up before McNutt's house again.

"I'll jest take my share o' them mellings," said Peggy, as he alighted.
"They ain't much 'count, bein' Brayley's; but it'll save me an' the ol'
woman from eatin' our own, or perhaps I kin sell 'em to Sam Cotting."

He took rather more than his share of the spoils, but the girls had no
voice to object. They were by this time so convulsed with suppressed
merriment that they had hard work not to shriek aloud their laughter.
For, in spite of the tragic revelations the morrow would bring forth,
the situation was so undeniably ridiculous that they could not resist
its humor.

"I've had a heap o' fun," whispered McNutt. "Good night, gals. Ef ye
didn't belong to thet gum-twisted nabob, ye'd be some pun'kins."

"Thank you, Mr. McNutt. Good night."

And it was not until well on their journey to the farm that the girls
finally dared to abandon further restraint. Then, indeed, they made the
grim, black hills of the plateau resound to the peals of their
merry laughter.



CHAPTER XXV.

GOOD NEWS AT LAST.

It was on the morning following this adventure that Uncle John received
a bulky envelope from the city containing the result of the
investigation he had ordered regarding the ownership of the Bogue tract
of pine forest. It appeared that the company in which he was so largely
interested had found the tract very valuable, and had been seeking for
the owners in order to purchase it or lease the right to cut the timber.
But although they had traced it through the hands of several successive
owners the present holders were all unknown to them until Mr. Merrick's
information had furnished them with a clue. A year ago the company had
paid up the back taxes--two years overdue--in order to establish a claim
to the property, and now they easily succeeded in finding the record of
the deed from a certain Charles Walton to Jonas Wegg and William
Thompson. The deed itself could not be found, but Uncle John considered
the county record a sufficient claim to entitle the young folks to the
property unless the ownership should be contested by others, which was
not likely.

Uncle John invited Ethel and Joe to dine with him that evening, and Mary
was told the occasion merited the best menu she could provide. The young
folks arrived without any idea of receiving more than a good dinner and
the pleasure of mingling with the cordial, kindly household at the farm;
but the general air of hilarity and good fellowship pervading the family
circle this evening inspired the guests with like enthusiasm, and no
party could be merrier than the one that did full justice to Mary's
superior cookery.

One of the last courses consisted of iced watermelon, and when it
appeared the three girls eyed one another guiltily and then made frantic
attempts to suppress their laughter, which was unseemly because no one
but themselves understood the joke. But all else was speedily forgotten
in the interest of the coming ceremony, which Mr. Merrick had carefully
planned and prepared.

The company was invited to assemble in the room comprising the spacious
right wing, and when all were seated the little gentleman coughed to
clear his throat and straightway began his preamble.

He recited the manner in which Captain Wegg and Will Thompson, having
money to invest, were led into an enterprise which Bob West had
proposed, but finally preferred another venture and so withdrew their
money altogether from the Almaquo tract.

This statement caused both Joe and Ethel to stare hard, but they said
nothing.

"Your grandfather, Ethel," continued the narrator, "was much impressed
by the value of another timber tract, although where he got his
information concerning it I have been unable to discover. This piece of
property, called the Bogue tract, was purchased by Wegg and Thompson
with the money they withdrew from Almaquo, and still stands in
their name."

Then he recounted, quite frankly, his unjust suspicions of the hardware
dealer, and told of the interview in which the full details of this
transaction were disclosed by West, as well as the truth relating to the
death of Captain Wegg and the sudden insanity and paralysis of old
Will Thompson.

Joe could corroborate this last, and now understood why Thompson had
cried out that West's "good news" had killed his father. He meant, of
course, their narrow escape from being involved in West's supposed ruin,
for at that time no one knew the report of the fire was false.

Finally, these matters being cleared up, Uncle John declared that the
Pierce-Lane Lumber Company was willing to contract to cut the timber on
the Bogue property, or would pay a lump sum of two hundred thousand
dollars for such title to the tract as could be given. He did not add
that he had personally offered to guarantee the title. That was an
unnecessary bit of information.

You may perhaps imagine the happiness this announcement gave Joe and
Ethel. They could scarcely believe the good news was true, even when the
kindly old gentleman, with tears in his eyes, congratulated the young
couple on the fortune in store for them. The Major followed with a happy
speech of felicitation, and then the three girls hugged the little
school teacher rapturously and told her how glad they were.

"I think, sir," said Joe, striving to curb his elation, "that it will be
better in the end for us to accept the royalty. Don't you?"

"I do, indeed, my boy," was the reply. "For if our people make an offer
for the land of two hundred thousand you may rest assured it is worth
much more. The manager has confided to me in his letter that if we are
obliged to pay royalties the timber will cost us nearly double what it
would by an outright purchase of the tract."

"In that case, sir," began Joe, eagerly, "we will--"

"Nonsense. The company can afford the royalty, Joe, for it is making a
heap of money--more than I wish it were. One of my greatest trials is to
take care of the money I've already made, and--"

"And he couldn't do it at all without my help," broke in the Major.
"Don't ye hesitate to take an advantage of him, Joseph, if ye can get
it--which I doubt--for Mr. Merrick is most disgracefully rich already."

"That's true," sighed the little millionaire. "So it will be a royalty,
Joe. We are paying the same percentage to Bob West for the Almaquo
tract, but yours is so much better that I am sure your earnings will
furnish you and Ethel with all the income you need."

They sat discoursing upon the happy event for some time longer, but Joe
had to return to the hotel early because he was not yet strong enough to
be out late.

"Before I go, Mr. Merrick," he said, "I'd like you to give me my
mother's picture, which is in the secret drawer of the cupboard. You
have the keys, now, and Ethel is curious to see how my mother looked."

Uncle John went at once to the cupboard and unlocked the doors. Joe
himself pushed the slide and took out of the drawer the picture, which
had lain just beneath the Almaquo stock certificates.

The picture was passed reverently around. A sweet-faced, sad little
woman it showed, with appealing eyes and lips that seemed to quiver even
in the photograph.

As Louise held it in her hand something induced her to turn it over.

"Here is some writing upon the back," she said.

Joe bent over and read it aloud. It was in his father's handwriting.

"'Press the spring in the left hand lower corner of the secret drawer.'"

"Hah!" cried Uncle John, while the others stared stupidly. "That's it!
That's the information we've been wanting so long, Joseph!"

He ran to the cupboard, even as he spoke, and while they all thronged
about him thrust in his hand, felt for the spring, and pressed it.

The bottom of the drawer lifted, showing another cavity beneath. From
this the searcher withdrew a long envelope, tied with red tape.

"At last, Joseph!" he shouted, triumphantly waving the envelope over his
head. And then he read aloud the words docketed upon the outside:
"'Warranty Deed and Conveyance from Charles Walton to Jonas Wegg and
William Thompson.' Our troubles are over, my boy, for here is the key to
your fortune."

"Also," whispered Louise to her cousins, rather disconsolately, "it
explains the last shred of mystery about the Wegg case. Heigh-ho! what a
chase we've had for nothing!"

"Not for nothing, dear," replied Patsy, softly, "for we've helped make
two people happy, and that ought to repay us for all our anxiety
and labor."

       *       *       *       *       *

A knock was heard at the door, and Old Hucks entered and handed Mr.
Merrick a paper.

"He's waiting, sir," said he, ambiguously.

"Oh, Tom--Tom!" cried Joe Wegg, rising to throw his arms around the old
man's neck, "I'm rich, Tom--all my troubles are over--and Mr. Merrick
has done it all--for Ethel and me!"

The ever smiling face of the ancient retainer did not change, but his
eyes softened and filled with tears as he hugged the boy close to
his breast.

"God be praised. Joe!" he said in a low voice. "I allus knew the
Merricks 'd bring us luck."

"What the devil does this mean?" demanded Uncle John at this juncture,
as he fluttered the paper and glared angrily around.

"What is it, dear?" inquired Louise.

"See for yourself," he returned.

She took the paper and read it, while Patsy and Beth peered over her
shoulder. The following was scrawled upon a sheet of soiled stationery:


"John Merrak, esquare, to
  Marshall McMahon McNutt, detter.

"To yur gals Smashin' 162 mellings at 50 cents a one
  .....................$81.00
    Pleas remitt & save trouble."

The nieces screamed, laughing until they cried, while Uncle John
spluttered, smiled, beamed, and then requested an explanation.

Patsy told the story of the watermelon raid with rare humor, and it
served to amuse everybody and relieve the strain that had preceded the
arrival of McNutt's bill.

"Did you say the man is waiting, Thomas?" asked Uncle John.

"Yes, sir."

"Here--give him five dollars and tell him to receipt the bill. If he
refuses, I'll carry the matter to the courts. McNutt's a rascal, and a
fool in the bargain; but we've had some of his melons and the girls have
had five dollars' worth of fun in getting them. But assure him that this
squares accounts, Thomas."

Thomas performed his mission.

McNutt rolled his eyes, pounded the floor with his stump to emphasize
his mingled anger and satisfaction, and then receipted the bill.

"It's jest five more'n I 'spected to git, Hucks," he said with a grin.
"But what's the use o' havin' nabobs around, ef ye don't bleed 'em?"

       *       *       *       *       *

This story is one of the delightful "Aunt Jane Series" in which are
chronicled the many interesting adventures in the lives of those
fascinating girls and dear old "Uncle John." The other volumes can be
bought wherever books are sold. A complete list of titles, which is
added to from time to time, is given on page 3 of this book.

(_ Complete catalog sent free on request._)




CHAPTER I

MISS DOYLE INTERFERES


"Daddy," said Patricia Doyle at the breakfast table in her cosy New York
apartment, "here is something that will make you sit up and take
notice."

"My dear Patsy," was the reply, "it's already sitting up I am, an'
taking waffles. If anything at all would make me take notice it's your
own pretty phiz."

"Major," remarked Uncle John, helping himself to waffles from a fresh
plate Nora brought in, "you Irish are such confirmed flatterers that you
flatter your own daughters. Patsy isn't at all pretty this morning.
She's too red and freckled."

Patsy laughed and her blue eyes danced.

"That comes from living on your old farm at Millville," she retorted.
"We've only been back three days, and the sunburn sticks to me like a
burr to a kitten."

"Pay no attention to the ould rascal, Patsy," advised the Major,
composedly. "An' stop wavin' that letter like a white flag of surrender.
Who's it from?"

"Kenneth."

"Aha! An' how is our lad?"

"Why, he's got himself into a peck of trouble. That's what I want to
talk to you and Uncle John about," she replied, her happy face growing
as serious as it could ever become.

"Can't he wiggle out?" asked Uncle John.

"Out of what?"

"His trouble."

"It seems not. Listen--"

"Oh, tell us about it, lassie," said the Major. "If I judge right
there's some sixty pages in that epistle. Don't bother to read it
again."

"But every word is important," declared Patsy, turning the letter over,
"--except the last page," with a swift flush.

Uncle John laughed. His shrewd old eyes saw everything.

"Then read us the last page, my dear."

"I'll tell you about it," said Patsy, quickly. "It's this way, you see.
Kenneth has gone into politics!"

"More power to his elbow!" exclaimed the Major.

"I can't imagine it in Kenneth," said Uncle John, soberly. "What's he in
for?"

"For--for--let's see. Oh, here it is. For member of the House of
Representatives from the Eighth District."

"He's flying high, for a fledgling," observed the Major. "But Kenneth's
a bright lad and a big gun in his county. He'll win, hands down."

Patsy shook her head.

"He's afraid not," she said, "and it's worrying him to death. He doesn't
like to be beaten, and that's what's troubling him."

Uncle John pushed back his chair.

"Poor boy!" he said. "What ever induced him to attempt such a thing?"

"He wanted to defeat a bad man who now represents Kenneth's district,"
explained Patsy, whose wise little head was full of her friend's
difficulties; "and--"

"And the bad man objects to the idea and won't be defeated," added the
Major. "It's a way these bad men have."

Uncle John was looking very serious indeed, and Patsy regarded him
gratefully. Her father never would be serious where Kenneth was
concerned. Perhaps in his heart the grizzled old Major was a bit jealous
of the boy.

"I think," said the girl, "that Mr. Watson got Ken into politics, for he
surely wouldn't have undertaken such a thing himself. And, now he's in,
he finds he's doomed to defeat; and it's breaking his heart, Uncle
John."

The little man nodded silently. His chubby face was for once destitute
of a smile. That meant a good deal with Uncle John, and Patsy knew she
had interested him in Kenneth's troubles.

"Once," said the Major, from behind the morning paper, "I was in
politics, meself. I ran for coroner an' got two whole votes--me own an'
the undertaker's. It's because the public's so indiscriminating that
I've not run for anything since--except th' street-car."

"But it's a big game," said Uncle John, standing at the window with his
hands deep in his pockets; "and an important game. Every good American
should take an interest in politics; and Kenneth, especially, who has
such large landed interests, ought to direct the political affairs of
his district."

"I'm much interested in politics, too, Uncle," declared the girl. "If I
were a man I'd--I'd--be President!"

"An' I'd vote fer ye twenty times a day, mavourneen!" cried the Major.
"But luckily ye'll be no president--unless it's of a woman's club."

"There's the bell!" cried Patsy. "It must be the girls. No one else
would call so early."

"It's Beth's voice, talking to Nora," added her father, listening; and
then the door flew open and in came two girls whose bright and eager
faces might well warrant the warm welcome they received.

"Oh, Louise," cried Patsy, "however did you get up so early?"

"I've got a letter from Kenneth," was the answer, "and I'm so excited I
couldn't wait a minute!"

"Imagine Louise being excited," said Beth, calmly, as she kissed Uncle
John and sat down by Patsy's side. "She read her letter in bed and
bounced out of bed like a cannon-ball. We dressed like the 'lightning
change' artist at the vaudeville, and I'm sure our hats are not on
straight."

"This bids fair to be a strenuous day," observed the Major. "Patsy's had
a letter from the boy, herself."

"Oh, did you?" inquired Louise; "and do you know all about it, dear?"

"She knows sixty pages about it," replied Major Doyle.

"Well, then, what's to be done?"

The question was addressed to Patsy, who was not prepared to reply. The
three cousins first exchanged inquiring glances and then turned their
eager eyes upon the broad chubby back of Uncle John, who maintained his
position at the window as if determined to shut out the morning
sunlight.

Louise Merrick lived with her mother a few blocks away from Patsy's
apartment, and her cousin Beth DeGraf was staying with her for a time.
They had all spent the summer with Uncle John at Millville, and had only
returned to New York a few days before. Beth's home was in Ohio, but
there was so little sympathy between the girl and her parents that she
was happy only when away from them. Her mother was Uncle John's sister,
but as selfish and cold as Uncle John was generous and genial. Beth's
father was a "genius" and a professor of music--one of those geniuses
who live only in their own atmosphere and forget there is a world around
them. So Beth had a loveless and disappointed childhood, and only after
Uncle John arrived from the far west and took his three nieces "under
his wing," as he said, did her life assume any brightness or interest.

Her new surroundings, however, had developed Beth's character
wonderfully, and although she still had her periods of sullen depression
she was generally as gay and lovable as her two cousins, but in a
quieter and more self-possessed way.

Louise was the eldest--a fair, dainty creature with that indescribable
"air" which invariably wins the admiring regard of all beholders.
Whatever gown the girl wore looked appropriate and becoming, and her
manner was as delightful as her appearance. She was somewhat frivolous
and designing in character, but warm-hearted and staunch in her
friendships. Indeed, Louise was one of those girls who are so complex as
to be a puzzle to everyone, including themselves.

Beth DeGraf was the beauty of the group of three, and she also possessed
great depth of character. Beth did not like herself very well, and was
always afraid others would fail to like her, so she did not win friends
as easily as did Louise. But those who knew the beautiful girl
intimately could read much to admire in the depth of her great dark
eyes, and she was not the least interesting of the three nieces whose
fortunes had been so greatly influenced by Aunt Jane and Uncle John
Merrick.

But Patricia Doyle--usually called "Patsy" by her friends--was after all
the general favorite with strangers and friends alike. There was a
subtle magnetism about the girl's laughing, freckled face and dancing
blue eyes that could not well be resisted. Patsy was not beautiful; she
was not accomplished; she had no especial air of distinction. But she
was winning from the top of her red hair to the tips of her toes, and so
absolutely unaffected that she won all hearts.

"And for wisdom she's got Solomon beat to a frazzle," declared the Major
to Uncle John, in discussing his daughter's character. But it is
possible that Major Doyle was prejudiced.

"Well, what's to be done?" demanded Louise, for the second time.

"We don't vote in Ken's district," remarked the Major, "or there would
be six votes to his credit, and that would beat my own record by four!"

"Ken is so impressionable that I'm afraid this defeat will ruin his
life," said Beth, softly. "I wish we could get him away. Couldn't we get
him to withdraw?"

"He might be suddenly called to Europe," suggested Louise. "That would
take him away from the place and give him a change of scene."

Patsy shook her head.

"Kenneth isn't a coward," she said. "He won't run away. He must accept
his defeat like a man, and some time try again. Eh, Uncle John?"

Uncle John turned around and regarded his three nieces critically.

"What makes you think he will be defeated?" he asked.

"He says so himself," answered Patsy.

"He writes me he can see no hope, for the people are all against him,"
added Louise.

"Pah!" said Uncle John, contemptuously. "What else does the idiot say?"

"That he's lonely and discouraged, and had to pour out his heart to some
one or go wild," said Patsy, the tears of sympathy filling her eyes.

"And you girls propose to sit down and allow all this?" inquired their
uncle sternly.

"We?" answered Louise, lifting her brows and making a pretty gesture.
"What can we do?"

"Go to work!" said Uncle John.

"How?" asked Patsy, eagerly.

"Politics is a game," declared Mr. Merrick. "It's never won until the
last card is played. And success doesn't lie so much in the cards as the
way you play 'em. Here are three girls with plenty of shrewdness and
energy. Why don't you take a hand in the game and win it?"

"Oh, Uncle John!"

The proposition was certainly disconcerting at first.

"Yes, yes!" laughed the Major, derisively. "Put on some blue stockings,
read the history of woman's suffrage, cultivate a liking for depraved
eggs, and then face Kenneth's enraged constituents!"

"I shouldn't mind, daddy, if it would help Kenneth any," declared Patsy,
stoutly.

"Go on, Uncle John," said Beth, encouragingly.

"Women in politics," observed their uncle, "have often been a tremendous
power. You won't need to humiliate yourselves, my dears. All you'll need
to do is to exercise your wits and work earnestly for the cause. There
are a hundred ways to do that."

"Mention a few," proposed the Major.

"I will when I get to Elmhurst and look over the ground," answered Uncle
John.

"You're going on, then?"

"Yes."

"I'll go with you," said Patsy promptly.

"So will I," said Beth. "Kenneth needs moral encouragement and support
as much as anything else, just now."

"He's imagining all sorts of horrors and making himself miserable," said
Louise. "Let's all go, Uncle, and try to cheer him up."

By this time Uncle John was smiling genially.

"Why, I was sure of you, my dears, from the first," he said. "The
Major's an old croaker, but he'd go, too, if it were not necessary for
him to stay in New York and attend to business. But we mustn't lose any
time, if we're going to direct the politics of the Eighth District
Election the eighth of November."

"I can go any time, and so can Beth," said Louise.

"All I need is the blue stockings," laughed Patsy.

"It won't be play. This means work," said Uncle John seriously.

"Well, I believe we're capable of a certain amount of work," replied
Beth. "Aren't we, girls?"

"We are!"

"All right," said Mr. Merrick. "I'll go and look up the next train. Go
home, Louise, and pack up. I'll telephone you."

"That bad man 'd better look out," chuckled the Major. "He doesn't
suspect that an army of invasion is coming."

"Daddy," cried Patsy, "you hush up. We mean business."

"If you win," said the Major, "I'll run for alderman on a petticoat
platform, and hire your services."




CHAPTER II

THE ARTIST


To most people the great rambling mansion at Elmhurst, with its ample
grounds and profusion of flowers and shrubbery, would afford endless
delight. But Kenneth Forbes, the youthful proprietor, was at times
dreadfully bored by the loneliness of it all, though no one could better
have appreciated the beauties of his fine estate.

The town, an insignificant village, was five miles distant, and
surrounding the mansion were many broad acres which rather isolated it
from its neighbors. Moreover, Elmhurst was the one important estate in
the county, and the simple, hard-working farmers in its vicinity
considered, justly enough, that the owner was wholly out of their class.

This was not the owner's fault, and Kenneth had brooded upon the matter
until he had come to regard it as a distinct misfortune. For it isolated
him and deprived him of any social intercourse with his neighbors.

The boy had come to live at Elmhurst when he was a mere child, but only
as a dependent upon the charities of Aunt Jane, who had accepted the
charge of the orphan because he was a nephew of her dead lover, who had
bequeathed her his estate of Elmhurst. Aunt Jane was Kenneth's aunt
merely in name, since she had never even married the uncle to whom she
had been betrothed, and who had been killed in an accident before the
boy was born.

She was an irritable old woman, as Kenneth knew her, and had never shown
him any love or consideration. He grew up in a secluded corner of the
great house, tended merely by servants and suffered to play in those
quarters of the ample grounds which Aunt Jane did not herself visit. The
neglect which Kenneth had suffered and his lonely life had influenced
the youth's temperament, and he was far from being an agreeable
companion at the time Aunt Jane summoned her three nieces to Elmhurst in
order to choose one of them as her heiress. These girls, bright, cheery
and wholesome as they were, penetrated the boy's reserve and drew him
out of his misanthropic moods. They discovered that he had remarkable
talent as an artist, and encouraged him to draw and paint, something he
had long loved to do in secret.

Then came the great surprise of the boy's life, which changed his
condition from one of dependency into affluence. Aunt Jane died and it
was discovered that she had no right to transfer the estate to one of
her nieces, because by the terms of his uncle's deed to her the property
reverted on her death to Kenneth himself. Louise Merrick, Beth DeGraf
and Patsy Doyle, the three nieces, were really glad that the boy
inherited Elmhurst, and returned to their eastern homes with the most
cordial friendship existing between them all.

Kenneth was left the master of Elmhurst and possessor of considerable
wealth besides, and at first he could scarcely realize his good fortune
or decide how to take advantage of it. He had one good and helpful
friend, an old lawyer named Watson, who had not only been a friend of
his uncle, and the confidant of Aunt Jane for years, but had taken an
interest in the lonely boy and had done his best to make his life
brighter and happier.

When Kenneth became a landed proprietor Mr. Watson was appointed his
guardian, and the genial old lawyer abandoned the practice of law and
henceforth devoted himself to his ward's welfare and service.

They made a trip to Europe together, where Kenneth studied the pictures
of the old masters and obtained instruction from some of the foremost
living artists of the old world.

It was while they were abroad, a year before the time of this story,
that the boy met Aunt Jane's three nieces again. They were "doing"
Europe in company with a wealthy bachelor uncle, John Merrick, a
generous, kind-hearted and simple-minded old gentleman who had taken the
girls "under his wing," as he expressed it, and had really provided for
their worldly welfare better than Aunt Jane, his sister, could have
done.

This "Uncle John" was indeed a whimsical character, as the reader will
presently perceive. Becoming a millionaire "against his will," as he
declared, he had learned to know his nieces late in life, and found in
their society so much to enjoy that he was now wholly devoted to their
interests. His one friend was Major Doyle, Patsy's father, a dignified
but agreeable old Irish gentleman who amused Uncle John nearly as much
as the girls delighted him. The Major managed John Merrick's financial
affairs, leaving the old millionaire free to do as he pleased.

So he took the girls to Europe, and the four had a fine, adventurous
trip, as may be imagined. Kenneth and Mr. Watson met them in Sicily, and
afterward in the Italian cities, and the friendship already existing
between the young people was more firmly cemented than before.

In the spring Kenneth returned with his guardian to Elmhurst, where he
devoted himself largely to painting from the sketches he had made
abroad, while Mr. Watson sat beside him comfortably smoking his pipe and
reading his favorite authors. The elder man was contented enough in his
condition, but the boy grew restless and impatient, and longed for
social intercourse. His nature was moody and he had a tendency to brood
if left much to himself.

Uncle John had carried his nieces to a farm at Millville, in the
Adirondack region, for the summer, so that Kenneth heard but seldom from
his friends.

Such was the disposition of the characters when our story opens.

Kenneth Forbes, although I have called him a boy, had attained his
majority on the fifteenth day of May. At this time Mr. Watson rendered
his accounts and turned over the estate to its owner. He would then have
retired, but Kenneth would not let him go. Twenty-one years of age
sounds mature, but the owner of Elmhurst was as boyish and inexperienced
as it is possible for one twenty-one years old to be. He had grown
accustomed, moreover, to depend much on Mr. Watson's legal acumen in the
management of his affairs, and would have been embarrassed and
bewildered if obliged to shoulder the burden all at once.

The lawyer, who had always had an affection for the young man, perceived
this clearly; so an arrangement was made that he should remain with his
young friend indefinitely and strive to teach him such elements of
business as would enable him in time to attend to his extensive
interests understandingly and wisely.

The country around Elmhurst is thickly settled with agriculturists, for
the farms are rich and productive in that part of the state. But it is
not a flat country, and Nature has given it many pretty woodland glades
and rocky glens to add to its charm.

From the hill country at the west came several rushing streams which
tumbled along rocky paths to the river nine miles below Elmhurst, and
there are scenes along these routes that might well delight the eye of
an artist. Kenneth had often wandered into these out-of-the-way places
when a half-forgotten, neglected lad, but had not visited them for
years. Now, however, with the spirit of loneliness upon him, he suddenly
thought of a glen that would make an interesting study for a picture; so
one morning he mounted his horse and rode away to pay the place a
preliminary visit.

The farmers along the road nodded at the young fellow good-naturedly as
he passed them. Everyone knew him well by sight, yet Kenneth could not
have named many of his neighbors, having held little intercourse with
them. It struck him, this morning, that they had little cause to be
interested in him. He had been an unsociable lad, and since he had
become master of Elmhurst had done little to cultivate acquaintance with
the people who lived around him.

One reason for this was that they held little in common with him. The
neighboring farmers were honest, thrifty souls, and among them were many
both shrewd and thoughtful; but they naturally would not force
themselves upon the society of the one really rich man in their
community, especially as that man had shown no desire to know them.

Kenneth was the subject of much speculation among them, and opinions
widely differed concerning his character. Some called him a "prig" and
declared that he was "stuck up" and conceited. Others said he was a
"namby-pamby" without brains or wit. But there were a few who had
occasionally talked with the boy, who understood him better, and hinted
that he might develop into "quite a man" in time.

Kenneth surprised himself this morning by greeting several of his
neighbors with unusual cordiality. He even stopped a man who was driving
along the highway to inquire about his horse, which he perceived was
very lame. The boy knew something about horses and suggested a method of
treatment that he thought would help the nag; a suggestion the farmer
received with real gratitude.

This simple incident cheered Kenneth more than you might suppose, and he
was actually whistling as he rode through the glen, where the country
road wound its way beside the noisy, rushing stream.

Pausing in front of the picturesque "table rock" that he had come to
inspect, the boy uttered an exclamation of chagrin and disappointment.
Painted broadly upon the face of the rock, in great white letters, was
the advertisement of a patent medicine. The beauty of the scene was
ruined--only the glaring advertisement caught and held the eye of the
observer.

At first Kenneth's mind held only a feeling of disgust that such a
desecration of Nature's gifts to humanity should be allowed. Then he
remembered another place further along the glen which was almost as
pretty as this had been before the defiling brush of the advertiser had
ruined it. So he spurred his horse and rode up the winding way to the
spot. There a red-lettered announcement of "Simpson's Soap" stared him
in the face.

This was too much for his temper, and his disappointment quickly turned
to resentment. While he sat on his mare, considering the matter, the man
with the lame horse, whom he had passed, overtook him.

"Can you tell me," Kenneth asked, "who owns this property?"

"Why, I do," replied the man, reining up.

"And you permitted these vile signs to be painted on the rocks?"
demanded the boy angrily.

"O' course," replied the man, with a grin of amusement. "I can't farm
the rocks, can I? An' these 'ere signs pays me ten dollars a year,
each."

Kenneth groaned.

"I'll give you fifteen dollars a year each if you'll let me wash off the
letters and restore the scene to its original beauty," he declared.

"I'm willin'," was the response. "But ye see they're contracted. I'd git
into trouble with the sign-painter."

"Who is he?"

"Lives in Cleveland. I've got his name up t' th' house, if you'll come
along. He comes up here every spring and paints fences an' rocks, payin'
spot cash fer th' privilege."

"Oh, I see."

"Then he contracts with the soap man an' the medicine man to paint up
their ads. You're the young 'un from Elmhurst, ain't ye?"

"Yes."

"Well, I'd like to earn that extra five, well enough. My name's Parsons.
I've got three signs let on my property in the glen. Ef ye'll jest ride
up t' the house I'll giv' ye the feller's name."

"All right. Come along," said Kenneth, with sudden resolve.

The farmer rode a time in silent thought. He could not go fast, for the
beast was very lame. Finally he remarked:

"Ef ye buy up the sign painters, so's ye can wash off the letters, like
enough ye'll hev to pay him fer th' paint an' paintin', too."

"I don't mind," was the response.

The farmer chuckled. Here was an interesting adventure, for a fact. What
on earth could possess the "young 'un" from Elmhurst to object to signs,
and be willing to pay for having them erased?

"Like enough ye'll hev to pay back the money the soap an' medicine men
guv th' painter, too," he hazarded.

"Like enough," said Kenneth, grimly.

One of his stubborn moods had seized him. At all hazards he was resolved
to eliminate those ugly signs.

He got the name of the sign painter, accepted a glass of buttermilk at
the farm house, and then rode slowly home by another route, so that he
might not have to face the signs again.

But on this route he saw even more. They were painted on the fences and
barns as he passed along. He scowled at each one, but they did not
appear to him quite so inharmonious as those which marred the more
picturesque and retired spots which were his favorite haunts.




CHAPTER III

DON QUIXOTE


When Kenneth got home he told Mr. Watson of his discovery and asked the
old gentleman to write to the sign painter and find out what could be
done. The lawyer laughed heartily at his young friend's whim, but agreed
to help him.

"If you are going to try to prevent rural advertising," he remarked,
"you'll find your hands full."

Kenneth looked up smiling.

"Thank you," he said.

"For what?"

"For finding me something to do. I'm sick of this inaction."

Again the lawyer laughed.

"What is your idea?" he asked.

"To remove such eyesores as advertising signs from the neighborhood of
Elmhurst."

"It's a Titan's task, Ken."

"So much the better."

The lawyer grew thoughtful.

"I believe it's impossible," he ventured.

"Better yet. I don't say I'll succeed, but I promise to try. I want
something to occupy myself--something really difficult, so that I may
test my own powers."

"But, my dear boy! This foolish proposition isn't worthy your effort. If
you want to be up and doing we'll find something else to occupy your
mind."

"No, Mr. Watson; I'm set on this. It's a crime to allow these signs to
flaunt themselves in our prettiest scenes. My instinct revolts at the
desecration. Besides, no one else seems to have undertaken the task of
exterminating them."

"True enough. If you're serious, Ken, I'll frankly say the thing can't
be done. You may, perhaps, buy the privilege of maintaining the rocks of
the glen free from advertising; but the advertisers will paint more
signs on all the approaches, and you won't have gained much."

"I'll drive every advertising sign out of this country."

"Impossible. The great corporations who control these industries make
their fortunes by this style of advertising. The rural districts are
their strongholds. And they must advertise or they can't sell their
products."

"Let them advertise in decent ways, then. What right has any soap maker
to flaunt his wares in my face, whether I'm interested in them or not?"

"The right of custom. People have submitted to these things so long that
the manufacturers consider themselves justified in covering every barn,
rock and fence with their signs. I see no way to stop them."

"Nor I, at present. But there must be a way."

"Drive out one, and another will take his place. They pay liberally for
locations--"

"Pshaw! Ten dollars a year for a rock as big as a barn!"

"But they rent thousands of such positions, and in the aggregate our
farmers get large sums from them."

"And ruin the appearance of their homes and farms."

Mr. Watson smiled.

"They're not artists, Ken. They can't realize on appearances, but they
can use the money the signs bring them."

"They need to be educated, that's all. These farmers seem very honest,
decent fellows."

"They are, Ken. I wish you knew them better."

"So do I, Mr. Watson. This campaign ought to bring us closer together,
for I mean to get them to help me."

"You'll have to buy them, I'm afraid."

"Not all of them. There must be some refinement among them."

But the lawyer was not convinced. However, it was not his desire to
stifle this new-born enthusiasm of Kenneth's, even though he believed it
misdirected. He wanted the young man to rouse himself and take an
interest in life, and if his antagonism to advertising signs would
effect this, the futile fight against them was to be welcomed. It would
cost the boy something, but he would gain his money's worth in
experience.

After a few days the sign painter answered the letter. He would
relinquish the three signs in the glen for a payment of fifty dollars
each, with the understanding that no other competing signs were to take
their place. Kenneth promptly mailed a check for the amount demanded and
early next morning started for the glen with what he called his
"eliminators."

These "eliminators" consisted of two men with cans of turpentine and
gasoline and an equipment of scrubbing brushes. Parsons, the farmer,
came over to watch this novel proceeding, happy in the possession of
three crisp five-dollar notes given in accordance with the agreement
made with him. All day the two men scrubbed the rocks faithfully,
assisted at odd times by their impatient employer; but the thick
splashes of paint clung desperately to the rugged surface of the rock,
and the task was a hard one. When evening came the letters had almost
disappeared when viewed closely; but when Kenneth rode to the mouth of
the glen on his way home and paused to look back, he could see the
injunction "Take Smith's Liver Pills" staring at him, in grim defiance
of the scrubbing brushes.

But his energy was not exhausted. No one ever knew what it cost in labor
and material to erase those three signs; but after ten days they had
vanished completely, and the boy heaved a sigh of satisfaction and
turned his attention to extending the campaign.

On the farm nearest to Elmhurst at the north, which belonged to a man
named Webb, was a barn, facing the road, that displayed on its side a
tobacco sign. Kenneth interviewed Mr. Webb and found that he received no
money for the sign; but the man contended that the paint preserved his
barn from the weather on that side. So Kenneth agreed to repaint the
entire barn for him, and actually had the work done. As it took many
coats of paint to blot out the sign it was rather a expensive operation.

By this time the campaign of the youthful proprietor of Elmhurst against
advertising signs began to be talked of throughout the county, and was
the subject of much merriment among the farmers. Some of them were
intelligent enough to admire the young Quixote, and acknowledged frankly
that it was a pity to decorate their premises with signs of patent
medicines and questionable soaps.

But the majority of them sneered at the champion, and many refused
point-blank to consider any proposition to discard the advertisements.
Indeed, some were proud of them, and believed it a mark of distinction
to have their fences and sheds announce an eye-remedy or several
varieties of pickles.

Mr. Watson, at first an amused observer of the campaign, soon became
indignant at the way that Kenneth was ridiculed and reviled; and he took
a hand in the fight himself. He decided to call a meeting of the
neighboring farmers at the district school-house on Saturday night,
where Kenneth could address them with logical arguments and endeavor to
win them over to his way of thinking.

The invitation was promptly accepted by the rural population; not so
much because they were interested in the novel ideas of the young artist
as because they expected to be amused by hearing the boyish master of
Elmhurst "lecture at 'em." So they filled the little room to
overflowing, and to add to the dignity of the proceedings the Hon.
Erastus Hopkins, State Representative for the district, lent his
presence to the assemblage.

Not that the Honorable Erastus cared a fig about this foolish talk of
exterminating advertising signs. He was himself a large stockholder in a
breakfast-food factory, which painted signs wherever it could secure
space. These signs were not works of art, but they were distinctly
helpful to business, and only a fool, in the opinion of the Honorable
Erastus, would protest against the inevitable.

What brought the legislator to the meeting was the fact that he was
coming forward for re-election in November, and believed that this
afforded a good chance to meet some of his constituents and make a
favorable impression. So he came early and shook hands with everyone
that arrived, and afterward took as prominent a seat as possible.

Indeed, the gathering had at first the appearance of being a political
one, so entirely did the Representative dominate it. But Mr. Watson took
the platform and shyly introduced the speaker of the evening.

The farmers all knew Mr. Watson, and liked him; so when Kenneth rose
they prepared to listen in respectful silence.

Usually a young man making his maiden speech is somewhat diffident; but
young Forbes was so thoroughly in earnest and so indignant at the
opposition that his plans had encountered that he forgot that it was his
first public speech and thought only of impressing his hearers with his
views, exulting in the fact that on this occasion they could not "talk
back," as they usually did in private when he tried to argue with them.
So he exhorted them earnestly to keep their homes beautiful and free
from the degradation of advertising, and never to permit glaring
commercialism to mar the scenery around them. He told them what he had
been able to accomplish by himself, in a short time; how he had redeemed
the glen from its disgraceful condition and restored it to its former
beauty. He asked them to observe Webb's pretty homestead, no longer
marred by the unsightly sign upon the barn. And then he appealed to them
to help him in driving all the advertising signs out of the community.

When he ended they applauded his speech mildly; but it was chiefly for
the reason that he had spoken so forcibly and well.

Then the Honorable Erastus Hopkins, quick to catch the lack of sympathy
in the audience, stood up and begged leave to reply to young Forbes.

He said the objection to advertising signs was only a rich man's
aristocratic hobby, and that it could not be indulged in a democratic
community of honest people. His own firm, he said, bought thousands of
bushels of oats from the farmers and converted them into the celebrated
Eagle-Eye Breakfast Food, three packages for a quarter. They sold this
breakfast food to thousands of farmers, to give them health and strength
to harvest another crop of oats. Thus he "benefited the community going
and coming." What! Should he not advertise this mutual-benefit commodity
wherever he pleased, and especially among the farmers? What aristocratic
notion could prevent him? It was a mighty good thing for the farmers to
be reminded, by means of the signs on their barns and fences, of the
things they needed in daily life.

If the young man at Elmhurst would like to be of public service he might
find some better way to do so than by advancing such crazy ideas. But
this, continued the Representative, was a subject of small importance.
What he wished especially to call their attention to was the fact that
he had served the district faithfully as Representative, and deserved
their suffrages for renomination. And then he began to discuss political
questions in general and his own merits in particular, so that Kenneth
and Mr. Watson, disgusted at the way in which the Honorable Erastus had
captured the meeting, left the school-house and indignantly returned to
Elmhurst.

"This man Hopkins," said Mr. Watson, angrily, "is not a gentleman. He's
an impertinent meddler."

"He ruined any good effect my speech might have created," said Kenneth,
gloomily.

"Give it up, my boy," advised the elder man, laying a kindly hand on the
youth's shoulder. "It really isn't worth the struggle."

"But I can't give it up and acknowledge myself beaten," protested
Kenneth, almost ready to weep with disappointment.

"Well, well, let's think it over, Ken, and see what can be done. Perhaps
that rascally Hopkins was right when he advised you to find some other
way to serve the community."

"I can't do better than to make it clean--to do away with these
disreputable signs," said the boy, stubbornly.

"You made a fine speech," declared Mr. Watson, gravely puffing his pipe.
"I am very proud of you, my lad."

Kenneth flushed red. He was by nature shy and retiring to a degree. Only
his pent-up enthusiasm had carried him through the ordeal, and now that
it was over he was chagrined to think that the speech had been so
ineffective. He was modest enough to believe that another speaker might
have done better.




CHAPTER IV

KENNETH TAKES A BOLD STEP


"This man Hopkins gets on my nerves," said Mr. Watson, a week or two
after the eventful meeting in the school-house. He was at the breakfast
table opposite Kenneth, and held up a big, glaring post-card which was
in his mail.

"What is it now?" asked the boy, rousing himself from a fit of
abstraction.

"An announcement offering himself for renomination at the primaries.
It's like a circus advertisement. Isn't it a shame to think that modern
politics has descended to such a level in our free and enlightened
republic?"

Kenneth nodded, stirring his coffee thoughtfully. He had lost his spirit
and enthusiasm since the meeting, and was fast relapsing into his old
state of apathy and boredom. It grieved Mr. Watson to note this.

"Hopkins isn't fit to be the Representative for this district," observed
the old gentleman, with sudden energy.

The boy looked at him.

"Who is Hopkins?" he asked.

"His mother once kept a stationery shop in town, and he was stable boy
at the hotel. But he was shrewd and prospered, and when he grew up
became a county-clerk or tax-collector; then an assessor, and finally he
ran last term for State Representative from this district and was
elected by a mighty small majority."

"Why small?" asked Kenneth.

"Because he's a Democrat, and the district is strongly Republican. But
Thompson ran against him on the Republican ticket and couldn't win his
party vote."

"Who's Thompson?"

"The general store keeper. He has a reputation for short weights and
measures."

The boy sipped his coffee thoughtfully.

"Tell me, sir; how did you happen to know all this?" he asked.

"I've been looking up Hopkins's record. I have disliked the man ever
since he treated us so shabbily on the night of the meeting."

"Never mind him. We've done with him."

Mr. Watson shifted uneasily in his chair.

"I wonder if we have?" he said.

"Why not, sir?"

"Well, Kenneth, we have to reside at Elmhurst, which is Hopkins's
district. Also I believe Elmhurst to be the most important estate in the
district, and you to be the largest taxpayer. This man wishes to go to
the State Legislature and make laws for you to obey."

"Well?"

"Well, it's our duty to watch him. If he isn't a fit man it's our duty
to prevent him from representing us."

The young man nodded somewhat dreamily.

"Some of these country yokels must represent us," he observed. "It
doesn't matter much whether it's Hopkins or someone else."

"Except that you, being a prominent man, owe it to the community to
protect its interests," added the lawyer.

"Do you want me to mix in these petty politics?" asked the boy,
irritably.

"Oh, do as you like, my boy. If you can shirk your duties with a clear
conscience, I've nothing to say."

For a time the young man was silent. Finally he asked:

"Why isn't Hopkins a good Representative?"

"He's what is called a 'grafter'; a term signifying that he is willing
to vote for any measure that he is paid to vote for, whether it benefits
his constituents or not."

"Oh. Is he singular in this?"

"By no means. The 'grafter' is all too common in politics."

Again the boy fell into a thoughtful mood.

"Mr. Watson, am I a Democrat or a Republican?"

The old gentleman laughed outright.

"Don't you know, Ken?"

"No, sir, I haven't asked myself before."

"Then I advise you to be a Republican."

"Why?"

"Because Hopkins is a Democrat, and we may then fight him openly."

"What is the difference, sir, between the two parties?"

"There is no difference of importance. All Americans are loyal citizens,
whichever side they adopt in politics. But the two parties are the
positive and negative poles that provide the current of electricity for
our nation, and keep it going properly. Also they safeguard our
interests by watching one another."

"What is your preference, sir?"

"I've always been a Republican, whenever I dabbled in politics, which
hasn't been often."

"Then I will be a Republican."

"Very good."

"I am sorry to say that I know nothing about politics and have no
convictions on the subject. Who is to oppose the Honorable Erastus on
the--on _our_ side?"

"I don't know yet. The primaries for the nomination are not to be held
for two weeks, and the Republican candidates seem shy about coming
forward."

"Didn't you say the district was Republican?"

"Yes; but since Hopkins defeated them last term they seem to be
terrified, and no one likes to offer himself as a possible sacrifice."

"That feeling will probably elect Mr. Hopkins," declared Kenneth, with
conviction.

"Unless--"

"Unless what, sir?"

"Unless we come to the rescue of the Republicans and take a hand in
local politics ourselves, my lad."

Kenneth pushed back his chair and rose from the table. He walked to the
window and stood there whistling for a few moments, and then left the
room without a word.

For a time Mr. Watson sat silently musing.

"Perhaps I'm inviting trouble," he murmured; "but I am sure I am doing
right. The boy needs a good shaking up and more knowledge of his
fellow-men. If I can get Kenneth interested, this plan of mine will be
of great benefit to him."

Then he, too, left the breakfast table, and wandering into the garden
saw Kenneth busy at his easel in a shady corner.

For a day or so the, subject was not resumed, and then Mr. Watson
casually introduced it.

"A law could be passed in the State Legislature forbidding the display
of all advertising signs in public places in this county," he suggested.

The boy looked at him eagerly.

"Are you sure?" he asked.

"I am positive," was the answer. "It is merely a question of privilege."

"And you think we might hire Hopkins to pass such a law?"

"No; we couldn't trust him."

"Then what do you propose?"

"I'll think it over, my lad, and let you know."

Then he walked away, leaving Kenneth much pleased with the idea he had
advanced. Indeed, he was so much interested in the suggestion that he
himself referred to the subject at the first opportunity.

"I don't like to be beaten, sir, once I've undertaken to do a thing," he
said. "So if such a law can be passed I'll do all I can to elect the man
who will pass it."

"I thought as much," the old lawyer replied, smiling. "But there's only
one man who could go to the legislature with enough influence to win the
votes to carry such a unique measure through."

"And who is that, sir?"

"Kenneth Forbes, the owner of Elmhurst, and the largest taxpayer in the
county."

"Me, sir?"

"You're the man."

"A State Representative?"

"It's an honorable office. It's an important office, properly filled.
You might not only beautify your district by having those objectionable
signs prohibited, but do many other things to better the condition of
the farmers. And that isn't all."

"What's the rest, Mr. Watson?"

"You owe something to yourself, lad. All your young life you've been too
self-contained and exclusive in your habits. 'The noblest study of
mankind is man.' It would broaden you to go into politics for a time,
and do much to develop your character and relieve the monotony of your
existence."

Kenneth frowned.

"It won't be easy, you know. It'll be a fight, and a hard one, for
Hopkins won't give up his job if he can help it."

The boy brightened again.

"I like a good fight," he said, wistfully. "If I thought--if I believed
I could fill the position with credit--I might undertake it."

"I'll answer for that," retorted the old man, highly pleased with his
easy victory. "You win the fight, Ken, and I'll guarantee you'll
outclass the majority of your fellow Representatives. It's a good state,
too."

So the thing was undertaken, and both the young man and the old threw
themselves into the contest with energy and determination.

Mr. Watson rode in his buggy all over their district during the next
fortnight, and interviewed the farmers and townsmen of the legislative
district. When it became noised about that the young owner of Elmhurst,
now barely twenty-one, had determined to enter politics, and asked for
the nomination of Representative, no other Republican ventured to oppose
him.

It was understood to mean a hard fight, and even the most sturdy
Republican was inclined to fear that the present incumbent of the office
would be elected to succeed himself.

So the primaries were held and Kenneth attended and made a speech, and
was warmly applauded. His nomination was a matter of course, and he went
home the unanimous choice of his party, because none of the older and
more discreet politicians ventured to risk defeat.

The Hon. Erastus Hopkins well knew this feeling, and smiled in his
pompous and most sardonic manner when he learned who was his opponent.
Having conquered an old and tried Republican warrior in the last
campaign, he had no fears in regard to this mere boy, who could know
little of political intrigue.

"He won't put up enough of a fight to make it interesting, I'm afraid,"
Mr. Hopkins confided to his cronies.

But he didn't intend to take chances, so he began the campaign with his
usual vigor.

It was now the middle of September, and the election was to be early in
November.




CHAPTER V

PLANNING THE WORK


The Honorable Erastus Hopkins was thoroughly enjoying his campaign.

He was not an especially popular man in his district, and he knew it.
Physically he was big and stout, with a florid face and small eyes that
blinked continually. His head was bald, his hands fat and red and his
feet enormous.

To offset this Mr. Hopkins wore a silk hat and a "Prince Albert" coat
morning, noon and night. His gold watch-chain was huge and imposing; he
had a big diamond shirt-stud, and upon his puffy fingers several rings.
He conveyed, nevertheless, the impression that he was more prosperous
than refined, and the farmers and townsmen were as quick to recognize
this as was Mr. Watson himself.

Moreover, the Honorable Erastus was dubbed "close-fisted" by his
neighbors. He never spent a penny on anyone but himself, and being
unscrupulous in politics he was naturally unscrupulous in smaller things
of a business nature. But since he had risen from a stable-boy to his
present affluent position he had never been unwise or careless enough to
be caught in any crooked action; and while his acquaintances had an
indefinite fear of dealing with him they could not accuse him openly.

It seems strange that such a man should have been chosen to represent a
wealthy and important district in the State Legislature, but politics
can show many a similar case. In the first place, Mr. Hopkins was
aggressive, and knew political methods thoroughly. He had usurped the
position of Democratic leader in his community and the others were
afraid to antagonize him openly. When he was nominated for
Representative he managed to dictate, by shrewd methods, the nomination
of Thompson, the store-keeper, on the Republican ticket. Thompson owed
Hopkins a large sum of money and Hopkins held a mortgage on the stock.
Therefore Thompson dared not make a fight, and although the Republican
vote was normally the largest in the district, Hopkins had managed to
win enough of them to his side to win.

He had been a little anxious about his renomination, because he knew
that he had not represented his district very satisfactorily; but when
Kenneth Forbes received the nomination on the Republican ticket he felt
that "all was over but the shouting" and that he would "win in a walk."
Had it been an issue between the personality of the two men, Hopkins
would have had little chance of success; but young Forbes had already
raised another issue by his anti-sign speech at the school-house, and
Hopkins intended to force that issue and so defeat Kenneth because of
the ridicule the latter's position had already brought upon him.

He began to circulate humorous stories about Kenneth's antipathy to
sign-boards, saying that the young man demanded that the signs be taken
off the Zodiac, and that he wouldn't buy goods of the village grocer
because the man had a sign out.

Mr. Hopkins also printed thousands of large hand-bills reading "The
Signs of the Times vs. Aristocratic Snobbery. Vote for the Hon. Erastus
Hopkins, the man who believes in advertising."

These things had their effect upon all classes of people. There were
many good-natured laughs at young Forbes's expense. All this was soon
realized at Elmhurst, and had the effect of plunging the youthful
aspirant for political honors into the depths of despair. The campaign
was hot against him, but Kenneth made no defense.

At this juncture, with election but three weeks away, he received a
telegram asking him to send the drag and baggage wagon to the noon
train. It was signed by John Merrick, and the boy was overjoyed at the
prospect of seeing his jolly old friend again. And the girls? Well, some
of them surely must be coming, or Uncle John wouldn't have asked for the
drag.

"Now then, the election can go to blazes," said Kenneth, cheerfully, to
Mr. Watson. "The sight of some friendly faces will be a great relief."

The old lawyer sighed. His attempt to "wake up" Kenneth had resulted in
failure, mainly because the boy had become discouraged so early in the
game. Kenneth felt keenly the humiliating experiences he had passed
through, and had sunk back into his old moody reserve.

But here was a welcome diversion. The visitors, whoever they might prove
to be, would afford relief to the situation and brighten the dullness of
life at the big house. So both Kenneth and Mr. Watson were with the drag
at the station when the noon train drew in.

And there were Patsy Doyle, Beth DeGraf, and Louise Merrick, a bevy of
dainty and sprightly girls, alighting eagerly from the coaches, with
Uncle John handing out the grips and packages and giving the checks for
the baggage, with business-like celerity, to Thomas the groom.

"We've come for a visit, Ken!" cried Palsy, laughing at his eager
delight. "Are you glad to see us, boy? And do you suppose old Martha has
our rooms aired?"

"And it's a long visit, too," added Uncle John, "as you'll believe when
you see the pile of baggage. You'd think these minxes were prepared for
a tour of the world. Each one of 'em brought a carload of clothes."

But they couldn't phase Kenneth in that way. His sensitive face had not
beamed with so much animation for months.

The guests were helped into the tall drag and merrily they drove the
five miles to Elmhurst, not a word of politics being spoken on the way.

The girls had not been to the house since Aunt Jane's death, two years
ago, and after a hasty luncheon they began an inspection of every room,
as well as the garden, grounds and stables. The horses, cows, pig and
chickens were alike inspected, the roses and dahlias visited and
admired, and after all this they returned to their rooms with old
Martha, the housekeeper, and proceeded to unpack their trunks and get
settled. Kenneth had been their guide and companion in these various
explorations, but when the girls went to their rooms he wandered into
the library where Uncle John and Mr. Watson had been having a quiet talk
over their pipes of tobacco. They welcomed the young man, but adroitly
turned the topic of conversation, and again the subject of was rejoined.

It was a merry dinner party that graced the table during dinner that
evening, and the boy forgot his troubles and was as jolly and sociable
as he had ever been in his life.

But when they were all assembled in the long living room where they
grouped themselves around the fireplace, a sudden change took place in
the demeanor of the young ladies. Patsy, the delegated leader, looked
gravely at the boy and asked:

"How goes the campaign, Ken?"

"Wh--what campaign?" he stammered, to gain time.

"Why, this election business. Tell us about it," said Patsy.

"Some other time, girls," answered the boy, red and distressed. "It--it
wouldn't interest you a bit."

"Why not?" asked Louise, softly.

"Because it doesn't interest me," he replied.

"Are you so sure of election?" inquired Beth.

"I'm sure of defeat, if you must know," he declared, scowling at the
recollection of his predicament.

"You haven't been cowardly enough to give up?" asked Patricia, boldly.

"What do you mean by that, Patsy Doyle?" he asked, the scowl deepening.

"Just what I say, Ken. A brave man doesn't know when he's beaten, much
less beforehand."

He looked at her fixedly.

"I'm not brave, my dear," he replied, more gently than they had
expected. "The people here don't understand me, nor I them. I'm laughed
at and reviled, a subject for contemptuous jeers, and--and it hurts me.
I don't like to be beaten. I'd fight to the last gasp, if I had any show
to win. But these conditions, which I foolishly but honestly brought
about myself, have defeated me so far in advance that I have absolutely
no hope to redeem myself. That's all. Don't speak of it again, girls.
Play me that nocturne that I like, Beth."

"We've got to speak of this, Kenneth, and speak of it often. For we
girls have come down here to electioneer, and for no other reason on
earth," declared Patsy.

"_What! You_ electioneer?"--a slight smile curled his lips.

"Exactly. We're here to brace up and get to work."

"And to win," added Beth, quietly.

"And to put you in the Legislature where you belong," declared Louise.

Kenneth turned to Mr. Merrick.

"Talk to them, Uncle John," he begged.

"I have," said the little man, smiling, "and they've convinced me that
they mean business. It's all up with you, my boy, as a private citizen.
You're as good as elected."

Ken's eyes filled.

"You're all very kind, sir," he said, "as you were bound to be. And--and
I appreciate it all--very much. But Mr. Watson will tell you that the
case is hopeless, and there's nothing to be done."

"How about it, Watson?" inquired Uncle John, turning to the lawyer.

"I'll explain the proposition, sir, so you will all understand it," he
replied, and drew his chair into the circle. "To begin with, Kenneth
visited the glen one day, to make a sketch, and found his old table-rock
covered with an advertising sign."

"How preposterous!" exclaimed Louise.

"There were three of these huge signs in different parts of the glen,
and they ruined its natural beauty. Kenneth managed to buy up the spaces
and then he scrubbed away the signs. By that time he had come to detest
the unsightly advertisements that confronted him every time he rode out,
and he began a war of extermination against them."

"Quite right," said Patsy, nodding energetically.

"But our friend made little headway because the sympathies of the people
were not with him."

"Why not, sir?" inquired Beth, while Kenneth sat inwardly groaning at
this baring of his terrible experiences.

"Because through custom they had come to tolerate such things, and could
see no harm in them," replied the lawyer. "They permit their buildings
which face the roads to be covered with big advertisements, and the
fences are decorated in the same way. In some places a sign-board has
been built in their yards or fields, advertising medicines or groceries
or tobacco. In other words, our country roads and country homes have
become mere advertising mediums to proclaim the goods of more or less
unscrupulous manufacturers, and so all their attractiveness is
destroyed. Kenneth, being a man of artistic instincts and loving country
scenes, resented this invasion of commercialism and tried to fight it."

"And so ran my head against a stone wall," added the young man, with a
bitter laugh.

"But you were quite right," said Patsy, decidedly. "Such things ought
not to be permitted."

"The people think differently," he replied.

"Then we must educate the people to a different way of thinking,"
announced Louise.

"In three weeks?"

"That is long enough, if we get to work. Isn't it, girls?" said Beth.

"Kenneth accepted the nomination with the idea of having a law passed
prohibiting such signs," explained the lawyer. "But Mr. Hopkins, his
opponent, has used this very thing to arouse public sentiment against
him. Farmers around here are thrifty people, and they fear to lose the
trifling sums paid them for the privilege of painting signs on their
premises."

Patsy nodded gravely.

"We will change all that," she said. "The thing is really more serious
than we expected, and more difficult. But we came here to work and win,
and we're going to do it. Aren't we, Uncle John?"

"I'll bet on your trio, Patsy," replied her uncle. "But I won't bet all
I'm worth."

"It's all foolishness," declared Kenneth.

"I do not think so," said the lawyer, gravely. "The girls have a fine
show to win. I know our country people, and they are more intelligent
than you suppose. Once they are brought to a proper way of thinking they
will support Kenneth loyally."

"Then we must bring them to a proper way of thinking," said Patsy, with
decision. "From this time on, Ken, we become your campaign managers.
Don't worry any more about the matter. Go on with your painting and be
happy. We may require you to make a few speeches, but all the details
will be arranged for you."

"Do you intend to permit this, Uncle John?" asked Kenneth.

"I'm wholly in sympathy with the girls, Ken, and I believe in them."

"But consider the humiliation to which they will subject themselves!
I've had a taste of that medicine, myself."

"We're going to be the most popular young ladies in this district!"
exclaimed Patsy. "Don't you worry about us, Ken. But tell me, how big is
your district?"

"It includes parts of three counties--Monroe, Washington and Jackson
Counties."

"What county is this?"

"Monroe."

"Any cities?"

"No; only a few towns. It's mostly a rural district. Fairview, just
across the border in Washington County, is the biggest village."

"Have you an automobile?"

"No; I don't like the things. I've always loved horses and prefer them
to machines."

"How much money are you prepared to spend?"

"How much--what's that?" he asked, bewildered.

"You can't win a political election without spending money," declared
Patsy, wisely. "I'll bet the bad man is scattering money in every
direction. It will cost something on our side to run this campaign in a
way to win."

The young man frowned.

"I don't mind spending money, Patsy," he said, "but I don't approve of
buying votes, and I won't allow it, either!"

"Tut-tut! Who said anything about buying votes? But we're going to work
on a broad and liberal basis, I assure you, and we need money."

"Spend all you like, then, so long as you don't try to corrupt the
voters."

"Very good. Now, then, how much land do you own at Elmhurst?"

Kenneth looked inquiringly at the lawyer.

"About twelve hundred acres," said Mr. Watson. "It is divided into small
farms which are let out on shares."

"How many votes do you control among your servants and tenants?"
proceeded Patsy, in a business-like tone.

"Perhaps thirty or forty."

"And what is the total vote of the district?"

"Thirty-five hundred."

Patsy gasped.

"So many?"

"Fully that many," said Mr. Watson, smiling.

"Then we've got to have over seventeen hundred and fifty votes to elect
Kenneth?"

"Exactly."

The girl drew a long breath and looked at Beth and Louise. Then they all
laughed.

"Suppose you resign as campaign managers," said Kenneth, beginning to be
amused.

"Oh, no! It's--it's easier than we expected. Isn't it, girls?"

"It's child's play," observed Louise, languidly.

The boy was astonished.

"Very well," said he. "Try it and see."

"Of course," said Patsy, cheerfully. "Tomorrow morning we begin work."




CHAPTER VI

A GOOD START


At an early breakfast next morning Patsy announced the program for the
day.

"Uncle John and I will drive over to the village," she said, "and
perhaps we'll be gone all day. Don't worry if we're not back for
luncheon. Louise and Mr. Watson are going in the phaeton to visit some
of the near-by farmers. Take one road, dear, and follow it straight
along, as far as it keeps within our legislative district, and visit
every farm-house on the way."

"The farmers will all be busy in the fields," said Kenneth.

"Louise doesn't care about the farmers," retorted Patsy. "She's going to
talk to their wives."

"Wives don't vote, Patsy."

"They tell their husbands how to vote, though," declared Louise, with a
laugh. "Let me win the women and I'll win the men."

"What am I to do?" asked Beth.

"You're to stay at home and write several articles for the newspapers.
There are seven important papers in our district, and five of them are
Republican. Make a strong argument, Beth. You're our publicity
department. Also get up copy for some hand-hills and circular letters. I
want to get a circular letter to every voter in the district."

"All right," said Beth. "I know what you want."

There was an inspiring air of business about these preparations, and the
girls were all eager to begin work. Scarcely was breakfast finished when
the two equipages were at the door. Louise and Mr. Watson at once
entered the phaeton and drove away, the girl delighted at the prospect
of visiting the farmers' wives and winning them by her plausible
speeches. Conversation was Louise's strong point. She loved to talk and
argue, and her manner was so confiding and gracious that she seldom
failed to interest her listeners.

Patsy and Uncle John drove away. In Kenneth's buggy to the town, and
during the five-mile drive Patsy counseled gravely with her shrewd uncle
in regard to "ways and means."

"This thing requires prompt action, Patsy," he said, "and if we're going
to do things that count they've got to be done on a big scale."

"True," she admitted. "But oughtn't we to be a little careful about
spending Kenneth's money?"

"I'll be your temporary banker," said the old gentleman, "and keep track
of the accounts. If we win we'll present Kenneth our bill, and if we
fail I'll have the satisfaction of getting rid of some of that dreadful
income that is swamping me."

This was always Uncle John's cry. His enormous fortune was a constant
bugbear to him. He had been so interested in his business enterprises
for many years that he had failed to realize how his fortune was
growing, and it astounded him to wake up one day and find himself
possessed of many millions. He had at once retired from active business
and invested his millions in ways that would cause him the least
annoyance; but the income on so large a sum was more than he could take
care of, and even Major Doyle, who managed these affairs for his
brother-in-law, was often puzzled to know what to do with the money that
accumulated.

Doubtless no one will ever know how much good these two kindly men
accomplished between them in their quiet, secretive way. Dozens of
deserving young men were furnished capital to start them in business;
dozens more were being educated at universities at Uncle John's expense.
Managers of worthy charities were familiar with John Merrick's signature
on checks, and yet the vast fortune grew with leaps and bounds. Mr.
Merrick's life was so simple and unostentatious that his personal
expenses, however erratic some of his actions, could not make much
headway against his interest account, and nothing delighted him more
than to find a way to "get even with fate by reckless squandering," as
he quaintly expressed it. He was far too shrewd to become the prey of
designing people, but welcomed any legitimate channel in which to unload
his surplus.

So Mr. Merrick had been revolving the possibilities of this unique
political campaign in his mind, and had decided to do some things that
would open the bucolic eyes of Kenneth's constituents in wonder. He did
not confide all his schemes to Patsy, but having urged his nieces to
attempt this conquest he had no intention of allowing them to suffer
defeat if he could help it.

The little town of Elmwood was quiet and practically deserted when they
drove into it. The farmers were too busy with the harvest to "come to
town for trading" except on Saturdays, and the arrival and departure of
the two daily trains did not cause more than a ripple of excitement in
the village.

Patsy decided she would shop at each and every store in the place, and
engage the store-keepers in conversation about the election.

"It's important to win these people," she declared, "because they are
close to every farmer who comes to town to trade; and their own votes
count, too."

"I'll run over to the bank," said Uncle John, "and get acquainted
there."

So he tied the horses to a post and let Patsy proceed alone upon her
mission, while he wandered over to a little brick building of neat
appearance which bore the inscription "Bank" in gold letters on its
plate-glass window.

"Mr. Warren in?" he asked the clerk at the window.

The banker, a dignified old gentleman of considerable ability, came out
of his private office and greeted his visitor very cordially. He had
known Uncle John when the millionaire visited Elmhurst two years before,
and since then had learned more particulars concerning him. So there was
no need of an introduction, and Mr. Warren was delighted at the prospect
of business relations with this famous personage.

The bank, although small and only one story high, was the most modern
and imposing building in the village; and it was fitted with modern
conveniences, for Mr. Warren had been successful and prosperous. In his
private office were local and long distance telephones, a direct
connection with the telegraph operator at the station, and other
facilities for accomplishing business promptly. Uncle John had
remembered this fact, and it had a prominent place in his plans.

He followed the banker into his private office and told him briefly his
intention to forward the interests of his young friend Kenneth Forbes
for Member of the Legislature.

The old gentleman shook his head, at first, predicting failure. Young
Forbes was his most important customer, and he respected him highly; but
this anti-sign issue bade fair to ruin all his chances.

"The idea is too progressive and advanced to be considered at this
time," he stated, positively. "The encroachments of advertisers on
personal property may lead to a revolt in the future, but it is still
too early to direct popular opinion against them."

"Isn't Forbes a better man for the place than Hopkins?" asked Uncle
John.

"Undoubtedly, sir. And I think Forbes would have won, had not Hopkins
forced this unfortunate issue upon him. As it is, our young friend
cannot avoid the consequences of his quixotic action."

"He doesn't wish to avoid them," was the quiet reply. "We're going to
win on that issue or not at all."

"I'm afraid it's hopeless, sir."

"May I count on your assistance?"

"In every way."

"Thank you, Mr. Warren, I'm going to spend a lot of money. Put this
draft for fifty thousand to my credit as a starter."

"Ah, I begin to understand. But--"

"You don't understand at all, yet. May I use your long distance
telephone?"

"Of course, sir."

Uncle John had secured considerable information from Mr. Watson, and
this enabled him to act comprehensively. The advertising sign business
in this part of the state was controlled by two firms, who contracted
directly with the advertisers and then had the signs painted upon spaces
secured from the farmers by their wide-awake agents. These signs were
contracted for by the year, but the firms controlling the spaces always
inserted protective clauses that provided for the removal of any sign
when certain conditions required such removal. In such cases a rebate
was allowed to the advertiser. This protective clause was absolutely
necessary in case of fire, alteration or removal of buildings or
destruction of fences and sign-boards by weather or the requirements of
the owners. It was this saving clause in the contracts of which Uncle
John had decided to take advantage. The contracting sign painters were
merely in the business to make money.

Mr. Merrick got the head of the concern in Cleveland over the telephone
within half an hour. He talked with the man at length, and talked with
the convincing effect that the mention of money has. When he hung up the
receiver Uncle John was smiling. Then he called for the Chicago firm.
With this second advertising company he met with more difficulties, and
Mr. Warren had to come to the telephone and assure the man that Mr.
Merrick was able to pay all he agreed to, and that the money was on
deposit in his bank. That enabled Mr. Merrick to conclude his
arrangements. He knew that he was being robbed, but the co-operation of
the big Chicago firm was necessary to his plans.

Then, the telephone having served its purpose, Mr. Warren took Uncle
John across the street to the newspaper office and introduced him to
Charley Briggs, the editor.

Briggs was a man with one eye, a sallow complexion and sandy hair that
stuck straight up from his head. He set type for his paper, besides
editing it, and Uncle John found him wearing a much soiled apron, with
his bare arms and fingers smeared with printer's ink.

"Mr. Merrick wants to see you on business, Charley," said the banker.
"Whatever he agrees to I will guarantee, to the full resources of my
bank."

The editor pricked up his ears and dusted a chair for his visitor with
his apron. It wasn't easy to make a living running a paper in Elmwood,
and if there was any business pending he was anxious to secure it.

Uncle John waited until Mr. Warren had left him alone with the newspaper
man. Then he said:

"I understand your paper is Democratic, Mr. Briggs."

"That's a mistake, sir," replied the editor, evasively. "The _Herald_ is
really independent, but in political campaigns we adopt the side we
consider the most deserving of support."

"You're supporting Hopkins just now."

"Only mildly; only mildly, sir."

"What is he paying you?"

"Why, 'Rast and I haven't come to a definite settlement yet. I ought to
get a hundred dollars out of this campaign, but 'Rast thinks fifty is
enough. You see, he plans on my support anyhow, and don't like to spend
more than he's obliged to."

"Why does he plan on your support?"

"He's the only live one in the game, Mr. Merrick. 'Rast is one of
us--he's one of the people--and it's policy for me to support him
instead of the icicle up at Elmhurst, who don't need the job and don't
care whether he gets it or not."

"Is that true?"

"I think so. And there's another thing. Young Forbes is dead against
advertising, and advertising is the life of a newspaper. Why, there
isn't a paper in the district that's supporting Forbes this year."

"You've a wrong idea of the campaign, Mr. Briggs," said Uncle John. "It
is because Mr. Forbes believes in newspaper advertising, and wants to
protect it, that he's against these signs. That's one reason, anyhow.
Can't you understand that every dollar spent for painting signs takes
that much away from your newspapers?"

"Why, perhaps there's something in that, Mr. Merrick. I'd never looked
at it that way before."

"Now, see here, Mr. Briggs. I'll make you a proposition. I'll give you
two hundred and fifty to support Mr. Forbes in this campaign, and if
he's elected I'll give you five hundred extra."

"Do you mean that, sir?" asked the editor, scarcely able to believe the
evidence of his ears.

"I do. Draw up a contract and I'll sign it. And here's a check for your
two-fifty in advance."

The editor drew up the agreement with a pen that trembled a little.

"And now," said Uncle John, "get busy and hustle for Kenneth Forbes."

"I will, sir," said Briggs, with unexpected energy. "I mean to win that
extra five hundred!"




CHAPTER VII

PATSY MAKES PROGRESS


Meantime Patsy was in the thick of the fray. The druggist was a
deep-dyed Democrat, and sniffed when she asked him what he thought of
Forbes for Representative.

"He's no politician at all--just an aristocrat," declared Latham, a
dapper little man with his hair slicked down to his ears and a waxed
moustache. "And he's got fool notions, too. If he stopped the
advertising signs I wouldn't sell half as many pain-killers and
liver-pills."

"He's my cousin," said Patsy, mendaciously; for although they called
themselves cousins there was no relationship even of marriage, as
Patsy's Aunt Jane had merely been betrothed to Kenneth's uncle when he
died.

"I'm sorry for that, miss," replied the druggist. "He's going to be
badly beaten."

"I think I'll take two ounces of this perfumery. It is really
delightful. Some druggists have so little taste in selecting such
things."

"Yes, miss, I do rather pride myself on my perfumes," replied Latham,
graciously. "Now here's a sachet powder that gives fine satisfaction."

"I'll take a couple of packets of that, too, since you recommend it."

Latham began doing up the purchases. There was no other customer in the
store.

"You know, miss, I haven't anything against Mr. Forbes myself. His
people are good customers. It's his ideas I object to, and he's a
Republican."

"Haven't you ever voted for a Republican?" asked the girl. "Don't you
think it better to vote for the best man, rather than the best party, in
a case like this?"

"Why, perhaps it is. But in what way is Mr. Forbes the best man?"

"He's honest. He doesn't want to make any money out of the office. On
the contrary, he's willing and able to spend a good deal in passing laws
that will benefit his district."

"And Hopkins?"

"Don't you know Mr. Hopkins?" she asked, pointedly.

"Yes, miss; I do." And Latham frowned a little.

"As regards the advertising signs," continued the girl, "I've heard you
spoken of as a man of excellent taste, and I can believe it since I've
examined the class of goods you keep. And your store is as neat and
attractive as can be. The fight is not against the signs themselves, but
against putting them on fences and barns, and so making great glaring
spots in a landscape where all should be beautiful and harmonious. I
suppose a man of your refinement and good taste has often thought of
that, and said the same thing."

"Why--ahem!--yes; of course, miss. I agree with you that the signs are
often out of place, and--and inharmonious."

"To be sure; and so you must sympathize with Mr. Forbes's campaign."

"In that way, yes; of course," said Mr. Latham, puzzled to find himself
changing front so suddenly.

"Mr. Hopkins has taken a lot of money out of this town," remarked Patsy,
examining a new kind of tooth wash. "But I can't find that he's ever
given much of it back."

"That's true. He buys his cigars of Thompson, the general store man, and
I keep the finest line ever brought to this town."

"Oh, that reminds me!" exclaimed Patsy. "Mr. Forbes wanted me to
purchase a box of your choicest brand, and have you just hand them out
to your customers with his compliments. He thinks he ought to show a
little cordiality to the men who vote for him, and he said you would
know just the people to give them to."

Latham gasped, but he assumed an air of much importance.

"I know every man that comes to this town, miss, as well as any you'll
find," he said.

"The best brand, mind you, Mr. Latham," said the girl. "How much will
they be?"

"Why, the very best--these imported perfectos, you know--are worth six
dollars a box of fifty. Perhaps for election purposes something a little
cheaper--"

"Oh, no; the best is none too good for the friends of Mr. Forbes, you
know. And fifty--why fifty will scarcely go around. I'll pay for a
hundred, Mr. Latham, and you'll see they go to the right persons."

"Of course; of course, miss. And much obliged. You see, young Forbes is
well liked, and he's quite a decent fellow. I wouldn't be surprised if
he gave Hopkins a hard fight."

"I'll tell you a secret," said Patsy, sweetly. "Mr. Forbes is bound to
be elected. Why, it's all arranged in advance, Mr. Latham, and the
better element, like yourself, is sure to support him. By the way, you
won't forget to tell people about those signs, I hope? That the fight is
not against advertising, but for beautiful rural homes and scenes."

"Oh, I'll fix that, Miss--"

"Doyle. I'm Miss Doyle, Mr. Forbes's cousin."

"I'll see that the people understand this campaign, Miss Doyle. You can
depend on me."

"And if the cigars give out, don't hesitate to open more boxes. I'll
call in, now and then, and settle for them."

I really think this young lady might have been ashamed of herself; but
she wasn't. She smiled sweetly upon the druggist when he bowed her out,
and Mr. Latham from that moment began to seek for friends of Mr. Forbes
to give cigars to. If they were not friends, he argued with them until
they were, for he was an honest little man, in his way, and tried to act
in good faith.

So the girl went from one shop to another, making liberal purchases and
seeking for every opening that would enable her to make a convert. And
her shrewd Irish wit made her quick to take advantage of any weakness
she discovered in the characters of the people she interviewed.

When noon came Uncle John hunted her up, which was not difficult, in
Elmwood, and together they went to the village "hotel" to get something
to eat. The mid-day dinner was not very inviting, but Patsy praised the
cooking to the landlord's wife, who waited upon the table, and Uncle
John bought one of the landlord's cigars after the meal and talked
politics with him while he smoked it.

Then Patsy went over to the general store, and there she met her first
rebuff. Thompson, the proprietor, was a sour-visaged man, tall and lanky
and evidently a dyspeptic. Having been beaten by Hopkins at the last
election, when he ran against him on the Republican ticket, Thompson had
no desire to see Forbes more successful than he had been himself. And
there were other reasons that made it necessary for him to support
Hopkins.

So he was both gruff and disagreeable when Patsy, after buying a lot of
ribbons of him, broached the subject of politics. He told her plainly
that her cousin hadn't a "ghost of a show," and that he was glad of it.

"The young fool had no business to monkey with politics," he added, "and
this will teach him to keep his fingers out of someone else's pie."

"It isn't Mr. Hopkins's pie," declared Patsy, stoutly. "It belongs to
whoever gets the votes."

"Well, that's Hopkins. He knows the game, and Forbes don't."

"Can't he learn?" asked the girl.

"No. He's an idiot. Always was a crank and an unsociable cuss when a
boy, and he's worse now he's grown up. Oh, I know Forbes, all right; and
I haven't got no use for him, neither."

Argument was useless in this case. The girl sighed, gathered up her
purchases, and went into the hardware store.

Immediately her spirits rose. Here was a man who knew Kenneth, believed
in him and was going to vote for him. She had a nice talk with the
hardware man, and he gave her much useful information about the most
important people in the neighborhood--those it would be desirable to win
for their candidate. When he mentioned Thompson, she said:

"Oh, he's impossible. I've talked with him."

"Thompson is really a good Republican," replied Mr. Andrews, the
hardware man. "But he's under Hopkins's thumb and doesn't dare defy
him."

"Doesn't he like Mr. Hopkins?" asked Patsy, in surprise.

"No; he really hates him. You see, Thompson isn't a very successful
merchant. He has needed money at times, and borrowed it of Hopkins at a
high rate of interest. It's a pretty big sum now, and Hopkins holds a
mortgage on the stock. If he ever forecloses, as he will do some day,
Thompson will be ruined. So he's obliged to shout for Hopkins, whether
he believes in him or not."

"I think I understand him now," said Patsy, smiling. "But he needn't
have been so disagreeable."

"He's a disagreeable man at any time," returned Mr. Andrews.

"Has he any political influence?" asked the girl.

"Yes, considerable. Otherwise he couldn't have secured the nomination
when he pretended to run against Hopkins--for it was only a pretense.
You see, he's a well known Republican, and when he sides for Hopkins
he's bound to carry many Republicans with him."

But there were other important people whom Mr. Andrews thought might be
influenced, and he gave Patsy a list of their names. He seemed much
amused at the earnestness of this girlish champion of the Republican
candidate.

"I do not think we can win," he said, as she left him; "but we ought to
make a good showing for your cousin, and I'll do my very best to help
you."

As she rode home with Uncle John in the afternoon, after a day of really
hard work, Patsy sized up the situation and declared that she was
satisfied that she had made progress. She told Mr. Merrick of the
mortgage held over Thompson by Mr. Hopkins, and the little man made a
mental note of the fact. He also was satisfied with his day's work, and
agreed to ride over to Fairview the next day with her and carry the war
into this, the largest village in Kenneth's district.

Meantime Louise and Mr. Watson were having some interesting interviews
with the farmers' wives along the Marville road. The old lawyer knew
nearly everyone in this part of the country, for he had lived here all
his life. But he let Louise do the talking and was much pleased at the
tact and good nature she displayed in dealing with the widely different
types of character she encountered.

Her method was quite simple, and for that reason doubly effective. She
sat down in Mrs. Simmons's kitchen, where the good woman was ironing,
and said:

"I'm a cousin of Mr. Forbes, up at Elmhurst, you know. He's running for
a political office, so as to do some good for his county and district,
and I've come to see if you'll help me get votes for him."

"Law sakes, child!" exclaimed Mrs. Simmons, "I ain't got nuthin' to do
with politics."

"No; but you've got a lot to do with Mr. Simmons, and that's where we
need your help. You see, Mr. Forbes thinks Mr. Simmons is one of the
most important men in this district, and he's very anxious to win his
vote."

"Why don't you see Dan, then? He's out'n the rye field," replied the
woman.

"It's because I'm only a girl, and he wouldn't listen to me," replied
Louise, sweetly. "But he takes your advice about everything, I hear--"

"He don't take it as often as he orter, don't Dan," interrupted Mrs.
Simmons, pausing to feel whether her iron was hot.

"Perhaps not," agreed Louise; "but in important things, such as this,
he's sure to listen to you; and we women must stick together if we want
to win this election."

"But I don't know nothin' about it," protested Mrs. Simmons; "an' I
don't believe Dan does."

"You don't need to know much, Mrs. Simmons," replied the girl. "What a
pretty baby that is! All you need do is to tell Dan he must vote for Mr.
Forbes, and see that he agrees to do so."

"Why?" was the pointed query.

"Well, there are several reasons. One is that Mr. Hopkins--Mr. Erastus
Hopkins, you know, is the other candidate, and a person must vote for
either one or the other of them."

"Dan's a friend o' 'Rastus," said the woman, thoughtfully. "I seen 'em
talkin' together the other day."

"But this isn't a matter of friendship; it's business, and Mr. Forbes is
very anxious to have your husband with him. If Mr. Forbes is elected it
means lighter taxes, better roads and good schools. If Mr. Hopkins is
elected it does not mean anything good except for Mr. Hopkins."

"I guess you're right about that," laughed the woman. "'Rast don't let
much get away from him."

"You're very clever, Mrs. Simmons. You have discovered the fact without
being told."

"Oh, I know 'Rast Hopkins, an' so does Dan."

"Then I can depend on you to help us?" asked the girl, patting the
tousled head of a little girl who stood by staring at "the pretty lady."

"I'll talk to him, but I dunno what good it'll do," said Mrs. Simmons,
thoughtfully.

"I know. He won't refuse to do what you ask him, for a man always
listens to his wife when he knows she's right. You'll win, Mrs. Simmons,
and I want to thank you for saving the election for us. If we get Mr.
Simmons on our side I believe we'll be sure to defeat Hopkins."

"Oh, I'll do what I kin," was the ready promise, and after a few more
remarks about the children and the neatness of the house, Louise took
her leave.

"Will she win him over?" asked the girl of Mr. Watson, when they were
jogging on to the next homestead.

"I really can't say, my dear," replied the old lawyer, thoughtfully;
"but I imagine she'll try to, and if Dan doesn't give in Mrs. Simmons
will probably make his life miserable for a time. You flattered them
both outrageously; but that will do no harm."

And so it went on throughout the day. Sometimes the farmer himself was
around the house, and then they held a sort of conference; Louise asked
his advice about the best way to win votes, and said she depended a
great deal upon his judgment. She never asked a man which side he
favored, but took it for granted that he was anxious to support Mr.
Forbes; and this subtle flattery was so acceptable that not one declared
outright that he was for Hopkins, whatever his private views might have
been.

When evening came and they had arrived at Elmhurst again, Louise was
enthusiastic over her work of the day, and had many amusing tales to
tell of her experiences.

"How many votes did you win?" asked Uncle John, smiling at her.

"I can't say," she replied; "but I didn't lose any. If one sows plenty
of seed, some of it is bound to sprout."

"We can tell better after election," said Mr. Watson. "But I'm satisfied
that this is the right sort of work, Mr. Merrick, to get results."

"So am I," returned Uncle John heartily. "Are you willing to keep it up,
Louise?"

"Of course!" she exclaimed. "We start again bright and early tomorrow
morning."




CHAPTER VIII

THE HONORABLE ERASTUS IS ASTONISHED


The Honorable Erastus Hopkins had been absent at the state capital for
several days, looking after various matters of business; for he was a
thrifty man, and watched his investments carefully.

Whenever his acquaintances asked about his chances for re-election, the
Honorable Erastus Hopkins winked, laughed and declared, "it's a regular
walk-over."

"Who is opposing you?" once asked a gray-haired Senator of much
political experience, who had met Mr. Hopkins at luncheon.

"Young feller named Forbes--a boy, sir--with no notion about the game at
all. He was pledged to an unpopular issue, so I was mighty glad to have
him run against me."

"What issue is he pledged to?" asked the Senator.

"Oh, he's agin putting advertising signs on fences and barns, and wants
to have them prohibited, like the infernal fool he is."

"Indeed. Then he's a progressive fellow. And you say his issue is
unpopular?"

"That's what it is. It'll kill his chances--if he ever had any."

"Strange," mused the Senator. "That issue has been a winning one
usually."

"What do you mean?" asked the astonished Hopkins.

"Why, the anti-sign fight has won in several places throughout the
country, and local laws have been passed prohibiting them. Didn't you
know that?"

"No!" said Hopkins.

"Well, it's true. Of course I do not know the temper of your people, but
in a country district such as yours I would think an issue of that sort
very hard to combat."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the Honorable Erastus. "Ev'ry man Jack's agin the
fool notion."

"Then perhaps the people don't understand it."

"Forbes has given up already," continued Hopkins, laughing at the
recollection. "He's gone back into his shell like a turtle, an' won't
come out to fight. I tell you, Senator, he's the worst licked candidate
that ever ran for office."

Nevertheless, the suggestion that the anti-sign issue had been
successful in other localities made Mr. Hopkins a trifle uneasy, and he
decided to return home and keep the fight going until after election,
whether young Forbes came out of his shell or not.

He arrived at Hilldale on the early morning train and went to his house
for breakfast. To his amazement he found two great banners strung across
the village streets bearing the words: "_Vote for Forbes--the People's
Champion!_"

"Who in thunder could 'a' done that?" murmured Mr. Hopkins, staring
open-mouthed at the great banners. Then he scratched his head with a
puzzled air and went home.

Mrs. Hopkins, a tired-looking woman in a bedraggled morning wrapper, was
getting the breakfast. She did not participate largely in the prosperity
of her husband, and often declared she was "worked to death," although
there were no children to care for.

"When did those Forbes banners go up?" asked Mr. Hopkins, irritably.

"I dunno, 'Rast. I don't keep track o' such things. But all the town was
out to the girls' meetin' last night, an' I went along to watch the
fun."

"What girls' meeting?"

"The girls thet air workin' fer to elect Mr. Forbes. It was in the town
hall, an' all three of the girls made speeches."

"What about?"

"About Mr. Forbes, and how he orter be elected. He wants to beautify the
farm places by doin' away with signs, an' he wants better roads, an'
three new school-houses, 'cause the ones we've got now ain't big enough.
An--"

"You blamed idiot! What are you talking about?" roared the exasperated
Hopkins.

"Oh, you needn't rave at me, 'Rast Hopkins, just 'cause you're gettin'
licked. I thought your goose was cooked the minnit these girls got to
work."

Mr. Hopkins stared at her with a dazed expression.

"Be sensible, Mary, and tell me who these girls are. I haven't heard of
'em."

"Why, they're cousins o' Kenneth Forbes, it seems, an' come from New
York to git him elected."

"What are they like?"

"They're swell dressers, 'Rast, an' nice appearin' girls, and mighty
sharp with their tongues. They had a good meetin' last night and
there'll be another at the town hall next week."

"Pah! Girls! Forbes oughter be ashamed of himself, to send a bunch o'
girls out electioneerin'. I never heard of such an irregular thing. What
do the boys say?"

"Folks don't say much to me, 'Rast. They wouldn't, you know. But I guess
your game is up."

He made no reply. Here, indeed, was information of a startling
character. And it came upon him like thunder out of a clear sky. Yet the
thing might not be so important as Mrs. Hopkins feared.

Very thoughtfully he unfolded the morning paper, and the next moment
uttered a roar of wrath and vexation. Briggs was one of his stand-bys,
and the _Herald_ heretofore had always supported him; yet here across
the first page were big black letters saying: _"Vote for Forbes!"_ And
the columns were full of articles and paragraphs praising Forbes and
declaring that he could and would do more for the district than Hopkins.

"I must see Briggs," muttered the Honorable Erastus. "He's tryin' to
make me put up that hundred--an' I guess I'll have to do it."

He looked over the other newspapers which were heaped upon his desk in
the sitting-room, and was disgusted to find all but one of the seven
papers in the district supporting Forbes. Really, the thing began to
look serious. And he had only been absent a week!

He had not much appetite for breakfast when Mrs. Hopkins set it before
him. But the Honorable Erastus was a born fighter, and his discovery had
only dismayed him for a brief time. Already he was revolving ways of
contesting this new activity in the enemy's camp, and decided that he
must talk with "the boys" at once.

So he hurried away from the breakfast table and walked down-town. Latham
was first on his route and he entered the drug store.

"Hullo, Jim."

"Good morning, Mr. Hopkins. Anything I can do for you?" asked the polite
druggist.

"Yes, a lot. Tell me what these fool girls are up to, that are plugging
for Forbes. I've been away for a week, you know."

"Can't say, Mr. Hopkins, I'm sure. Business is pretty lively these days,
and it keeps me hustling. I've no time for politics."

"But we've got to wake up, Jim, we Democrats, or they'll give us a run
for our money."

"Oh, this is a Republican district, sir. We can't hope to win it often,
and especially in a case like this."

"Why not?"

"Looks to me as if you'd bungled things, Hopkins. But I'm not interested
in this campaign. Excuse me; if there's nothing you want, I've got a
prescription to fill."

Mr. Hopkins walked out moodily. It was very evident that Latham had
changed front. But they had never been very staunch friends; and he
could find a way to even scores with the little druggist later.

Thompson was behind his desk at the general store when Hopkins walked
in.

"Look here," said the Honorable Representative, angrily, "what's been
going on in Elmwood? What's all this plugging for Forbes mean?"

Thompson gave him a sour look over the top of his desk.

"Addressin' them remarks to me, 'Rast?"

"Yes--to you! You've been loafing on your job, old man, and it won't
do--it won't do at all. You should have put a stop to these things. What
right have these girls to interfere in a game like this?"

"Oh, shut up, 'Rast."

"Thompson! By crickey, I won't stand this from you. Goin' back on me,
eh?"

"I'm a Republication, 'Rast."

"So you are," said Mr. Hopkins slowly, his temper at white heat "And
that mortgage is two months overdue."

"Go over to the bank and get your money, then. It's waiting for you,
Hopkins--interest and all. Go and get it and let me alone. I'm busy."

Perhaps the politician had never been so surprised in his life. Anger
gave way to sudden fear, and he scrutinized the averted countenance of
Thompson carefully.

"Where'd you raise the money, Thompson?"

"None of your business. I raised it."

"Forbes, eh? Forbes has bought you up, I see. Grateful fellow, ain't
you--when I loaned you money to keep you from bankruptcy!"

"You did, Hopkins. You made me your slave, and threatened me every
minute, unless I did all your dirty work. Grateful? You've led me a
dog's life. But I'm through with you now--for good and all."

Hopkins turned and walked out without another word. In the dentist's
office Dr. Squiers was sharpening and polishing his instruments.

"Hello, Archie."

"Hello, 'Rast. 'Bout time you was getting back, old man. We're having a
big fight on our hands, I can tell you."

"Tell me more," said Mr. Hopkins, taking a chair with a sigh of relief
at finding one faithful friend. "What's up, Archie?"

"An invasion of girls, mostly. They took us by surprise, the other day,
and started a campaign worthy of old political war-horses. There's some
shrewd politician behind them, I know, or they wouldn't have nailed us
up in our coffins with such business-like celerity."

"Talk sense, Archie. What have they done? What _can_ they do? Pah!
Girls!"

"Don't make a mistake, 'Rast. That's what I did, before I understood.
When I heard that three girls were electioneering for Forbes I just
laughed. Then I made a discovery. They're young and rich, and evidently
ladies. They're pretty, too, and the men give in at the first attack.
They don't try to roast you. That's their cleverness. They tell what
Forbes can do, with all his money, if he's Representative, and they
swear he'll do it."

"Never mind," said Hopkins, easily. "We'll win the men back again."

"But these girls are riding all over the country, talking to farmers'
wives, and they're organizing a woman's political club. The club is to
meet at Elmhurst and to be fed on the fat of the land; so every woman
wants to belong. They've got two expensive automobiles down from the
city, with men to make them go, and they're spending money right and
left."

"That's bad," said Hopkins, shifting uneasily, "for I haven't much to
spend, myself. But most money is fooled away in politics. When I spend a
cent it counts, I can tell you."

"You'll have to spend some, 'Rast, to keep your end up. I'm glad you're
back, for we Democrats have been getting demoralized. Some of the boys
are out for Forbes already."

Hopkins nodded, busy with his thoughts.

"I've talked with Latham. But he didn't count. And they've bought up
Thompson. What else they've done I can't tell yet. But one thing's
certain, Doc; we'll win out in a canter. I'm too old a rat to be caught
in a trap like this. I've got resources they don't suspect."

"I believe you, 'Rast. They've caught on to the outside fakes to win
votes; but they don't know the inside deals yet."

"You're right. But I must make a bluff to offset their daylight
campaign, so as not to lose ground with the farmers. They're the ones
that count, after all; not the town people. See here, Doc, I had an idea
something might happen, and so I arranged with my breakfast food company
to let me paint a hundred signs in this neighborhood. A hundred, mind
you! and that means a big laugh on Forbes, and the good will of the
farmers who sell their spaces, and not a cent out of my pocket. How's
that for a checkmate?"

"That's fine," replied Dr. Squiers. "There's been considerable talk
about this sign business, and I'm told that at the meeting last night
one of the girls made a speech about it, and said the farmers were being
converted, and were now standing out for clean fences and barns."

"That's all humbug!"

"I think so, myself. These people are like a flock of sheep. Get them
started a certain way and you can't head them off," observed the
dentist.

"Then we must start them our way," declared Hopkins. "I've got the order
for these signs in my pocket, and I'll have 'em painted all over the
district in a week. Keep your eyes open, Doc. If we've got to fight we
won't shirk it; but I don't look for much trouble from a parcel of
girls."

Mr. Hopkins was quite cheerful by this time, for he had thought out the
situation and his "fighting blood was up," as he expressed it.

He walked away whistling softly to himself and decided that he would go
over to the livery stable, get a horse and buggy, drive out into the
country, and spend the day talking with the farmers.

But when he turned the corner into the side street where the livery was
located he was astonished to find a row of horses and wagons lining each
side of the street, and in each vehicle two men in white jumpers and
overalls. The men were in charge of huge cans of paints, assorted
brushes, ladders, scaffolds and other paraphernalia.

There must have been twenty vehicles, altogether, and some of the rigs
were already starting out and driving briskly away in different
directions.

Mr. Hopkins was puzzled. He approached one of the white-overalled men
who was loading cans of paint into a wagon and inquired:

"Who are you fellows?"

"Sign painters," answered the man, with an amused look.

"Who do you work for?"

"The Carson Advertising Sign Company of Cleveland."

"Oh, I see," replied Hopkins. "Got a big job in this neighborhood?"

"Pretty big, sir."

"Who's your foreman?"

"Smith. He's in the livery office."

Then the man climbed into his wagon and drove away, and Hopkins turned
into the livery office. A thin-faced man with sharp eyes was Talking
with the proprietor.

"Is this Mr. Smith?" asked Hopkins.

"Yes."

"Of the Carson Advertising Sign Company?"

"Yes."

"Well, I've got a big job for you. My name's Hopkins. I want a hundred
big signs painted mighty quick."

"Sorry, sir; we've got all we can handle here for two or three weeks."

"It's got to be done quick or not at all. Can't you send for more men?"

"We've got thirty-eight on this job, and can't get any more for love or
money. Had to send to Chicago for some of these."

"Rush job?"

"Yes, sir. You'll have to excuse me. I've got to get started. This is
only our second day and we're pretty busy."

"Wait a minute," called the bewildered Hopkins, following Smith to his
buggy. "What concern is your firm doing all this painting for?"

"A man named Merrick."

Then the foreman drove away, and Mr. Hopkins was left greatly puzzled.

"Merrick--Merrick!" he repeated. "I don't remember any big advertiser by
that name. It must be some new concern. Anyhow, it all helps in my fight
against Forbes."

He again returned to the livery office and asked for a rig.

"Everything out, Mr. Hopkins. I've hired everything to be had in town
for this sign-painting gang."

But Mr. Hopkins was not to be balked. As long as these sign-painters
were doing missionary work for his cause among the farmers, he decided
to drive over to Fairview and see the party leaders in that important
town. So he went back to Dr. Squiers's house and borrowed the Doctor's
horse and buggy.

He drove along the turnpike for a time in silence. Then it struck him
that there was a peculiar air of neatness about the places he passed.
The barns and fences all seemed newly painted, and he remembered that he
hadn't seen an advertising sign since he left town.

A mile farther on he came upon a gang of the sign painters, who with
their huge brushes were rapidly painting the entire length of a
weather-worn fence with white paint.

Mr. Hopkins reined in and watched them for a few moments.

"You sign-painters don't seem to be getting any signs started," he
observed.

"No," replied one of the men, laughing. "This is a peculiar job for our
firm to tackle. We've made a contract to paint out every sign in the
district."

"Paint 'em out!"

"Yes, cover them up with new paint, and get rid of them."

"But how about the advertisers? Don't they own the spaces now?"

"They did; but they've all been bought up. John Merrick owns the spaces
now, and we're working for John Merrick."

"Who's he?"

"Some friend of Mr. Forbes, up at Elmhurst."

Mr. Hopkins was not a profane man, but he said a naughty word. And then
he cut his horse so fiercely with the whip that the poor beast gave a
neigh of terror, and started down the road at a gallop.




CHAPTER IX

OL' WILL ROGERS


Beth had her folding table out in the rose garden where Kenneth was
working at his easel, and while the boy painted she wrote her campaign
letters and "editorials."

At first Ken had resented the management of his campaign by his three
girl friends; but soon he was grateful for their assistance and proud of
their talents. It was at their own request that he refrained from any
active work himself, merely appearing at the meetings they planned,
where he made his speeches and impressed his hearers with his
earnestness. He was really an excellent speaker, and his youth and
enthusiasm counted much in his favor.

He protested mildly when Louise invited the Women's Political Club to
meet at Elmhurst on Thursday afternoon, but Mr. Watson assured him that
this was an important play for popularity, so he promised to meet them.
Tables were to be spread upon the lawn, for the late October weather was
mild and delightful, and Louise planned to feed the women in a way that
they would long remember.

Patsy had charge of the towns and Louise of the country districts, but
Beth often aided Louise, who had a great deal of territory to cover.

The automobiles Uncle John had ordered sent down were a great assistance
to the girls, and enabled them to cover twice as much territory in a day
as would have been done with horses.

But, although they worked so tirelessly and earnestly, it was not all
plain sailing with the girl campaigners. Yet though they met with many
rebuffs, they met very little downright impertinence. Twice Louise was
asked to leave a house where she had attempted to make a proselyte, and
once a dog was set upon Beth by an irate farmer, who resented her
automobile as much as he did her mission. As for Patsy, she was often
told in the towns that "a young girl ought to be in better business than
mixing up in politics," and she was sensitive enough once or twice to
cry over these reproaches when alone in her chamber. But she maintained
a cheerful front; and, in truth, all the girls enjoyed their work
immensely.

While Beth and Kenneth were in the garden this sunny afternoon James
came to say that a man wanted to see "one of the politics young ladies."

"Shall we send him about his business, Beth?" asked the boy.

"Oh, no; we can't afford to lose a single vote. Bring him here, James,
please," said the girl.

So presently a wizened little man in worn and threadbare garments, his
hat in his hand, came slowly into the garden. His sunken cheeks were
covered with stubby gray whiskers, his shoulders were stooped and bent
from hard work, and his hands bore evidences of a life of toil. Yet the
eyes he turned upon Beth, as she faced him had a wistful and pleading
look that affected her strangely.

"Afternoon, miss," he said, in a hesitating voice. "I--I'm Rogers, miss;
ol' Will Rogers. I--I s'pose you hain't heerd o' me before."

"I'm glad to meet you, Mr. Rogers," replied the girl in her pleasant
voice. "Have you come to see me about the election?"

"It's--it's sump'n 'bout the 'lection, an' then agin it ain't. But I run
the chanct o' seein' ye, because we're in desprit straits, an' Nell
advised that I hev a talk with ye. 'Frank an' outright,' says Nell.
'Don't beat about the bush,' says she. 'Go right to th' point an'
they'll say yes or no."

Beth laughed merrily, and the boy smiled as he wielded his brush with
delicate strokes.

"Ye mustn't mind me, miss," said Will Rogers, in a deprecating tone.
"I'm--I'm sommut broke up an' discouraged, an' ain't th' man I used to
be. Nell knows that, an' she orter came herself; but it jes' made her
cry to think o' it, an' so I says I'll come an' do the best I kin."

Beth was really interested now.

"Sit down on this bench, Mr. Rogers," she said, "and I'll listen to
whatever you have to say."

He sat down willingly, bent forward as he rested upon the garden bench,
and twirled his hat slowly in his hands.

"'Taint easy, ye know, miss, to say some things, an' this is one o' the
hardest," he began.

"Go on," said Beth, encouragingly, for old Will had suddenly stopped
short and seemed unable to proceed.

"They say, miss, as you folks is a-spendin' uv a lot o' money on this
election, a-gittin' votes, an' sich like," he said, in an altered tone.

"It costs a little to run a political campaign," acknowledged Beth.

"They say money's bein' poured out liken water--to git votes," he
persisted.

"Well, Mr. Rogers?"

"Well, thet's how it started, ye see. We're so agonizin' poor, Nell
thought we orter git some o' the money while it's goin'."

The girl was much amused. Such frankness was both unusual and
refreshing.

"Have you a vote to sell?" she asked.

He did not answer at once, but sat slowly twirling his hat.

"That's jet' what Nell thought ye'd ask," he said, finally, "an' she
knew if ye did it was all up with our plan. Guess I'll be goin', miss."

He rose slowly from his seat, but the girl did not intend to lose any of
the fun this queer individual might yet furnish.

"Sit down, Mr. Rogers," she said, "and tell me why you can't answer my
questions?"

"I guess I'll hev to speak out an' tell all," said he, his voice
trembling a little, "although I thought fer a minnit I could see my way
without. I can't sell my vote, miss, 'cause I've been plannin' t'vote
fer Mr. Forbes anyhow. But we wanted some uv th' money that's being
wasted, an' we wanted it mighty bad."

"Why?"

"Thet's the hard part uv it, miss; but I'm goin' to tell you. Did ye
ever hear o' Lucy?"

"No, Mr. Rogers."

"Lucy's our girl--the on'y chick er child we ever had. She's a pretty
girl, is Lucy; a good deal liken her mother; wi' the same high spirits
my Nell had afore she broke down. Mostly Nell cries, nowadays."

"Yes. Go on."

"Lucy had a schoolin', an' we worked hard to give it her, fer my land
ain't much account, nohow. An' when she grew up she had more boys comin'
to see her than any gal this side o' Fairview, an' one o' 'em caught
Lucy's fancy. But she was too young to marry, an' she wanted to be
earnin' money; so she got a job workin' fer Doc Squiers, over to
Elmwood. He's the dentist there, an' Lucy helped with the housework an'
kept the office slicked up, an' earned ev'ry penny she got."

He stopped here, and looked vacantly around.

Beth tried to help the old man.

"And then?" she asked, softly.

"Then come the trouble, miss. One day ol' Mis' Squiers, the Doc's
mother, missed a di'mon' ring. She laid it on the mantel an' it was
gone, an' she said as Lucy took it. Lucy didn't take it, an' after
they'd tried to make my gal confess as she was a thief they give 'er
three days to hand up the ring or the money it was worth, or else they'd
hev her arrested and sent t' jail. Lucy didn't take it, ye know. She
jes' _couldn't_ do sech a thing, natcherly."

"I know," said Beth, sympathetically.

"So she comes home, heartbroken, an' told us about it, an' we didn't hev
th' money nuther. It were sixty dollars they wanted, or th' ring; an' we
didn't hev neither of 'em."

"Of course not."

"Well, Tom come over thet night to see Lucy, hearin' she was home,
an'--"

"Who is Tom?"

"Thet's Tom Gates, him thet--but I'm comin' to thet, miss. Tom always
loved Lucy, an' wanted to marry her; but his folks is as poor as we are,
so the young 'uns had to wait. Tom worked at the mill over t'
Fairview--the big saw-mill where they make the lumber an' things."

"I know."

"He was the bookkeeper, fer Tom had schoolin', too; an' he took private
lessons in bookkeepin' from ol' Cheeseman. So he had got hired at the
mill, an' had a likely job, an' was doin' well. An' when Tom heerd about
Lucy's trouble, an' thet she had only two days left before goin' to
jail, he up an' says: 'I'll get the money, Lucy: don' you worry a bit.'
'Oh, Tom!' says she, 'hev you got sixty dollars saved already?' 'I've
got it, Lucy,' says he, 'an' I'll go over tomorrow an' pay Doc Squiers.
Don' you worry any more. Forget all about it.' Well o' course, miss,
that helped a lot. Nell an' Lucy both felt the disgrace of the thing,
but it wouldn't be a public disgrace, like goin' to jail; so we was all
mighty glad Tom had that sixty dollars."

"It was very fortunate," said Beth, filling in another pause.

"The nex' day Tom were as good as his word. He paid Doc Squiers an' got
a receipt an' giv it to Lucy. Then we thought th' trouble was over, but
it had on'y just begun. Monday mornin' Tom was arrested over t' the mill
fer passin' a forged check an' gettin' sixty dollars on it. Lucy was
near frantic with grief. She walked all the way to Fairview, an' they
let her see Tom in the jail. He tol' her it was true he forged th'
check, but he did it to save her. He was a man an' it wouldn't hurt fer
him to go to jail so much as it would a girl. He said he was glad he did
it, an' didn't mind servin' a sentence in prison. I think, miss, as Tom
meant thet--ev'ry word uv it. But Lucy broke down under the thing an'
raved an' cried, an' nuther Nell ner I could do anything with her. She
said she'd ruined Tom's life an' all thet, an' she didn't want to live
herself. Then she took sick, an' Nell an' I nursed her as careful as we
could. How'n the wurld she ever got away we can't make out, nohow."

"Did she get away?" asked the girl, noting that the old man's eyes were
full of tears and his lips trembling.

"Yes, miss. She's bin gone over ten days, now, an' we don't even know
where to look fer her; our girl--our poor Lucy. She ain't right in her
head, ye know, or she'd never a done it. She'd never a left us like this
in th' world. 'Taint like our Lucy."

Kenneth had turned around on his stool and was regarding old Will Rogers
earnestly, brush and pallet alike forgotten. Beth was trying to keep the
tears out of her own eyes, for the old man's voice was even more
pathetic than his words.

"Ten days ago!" said Kenneth. "And she hasn't been found yet?"

"We can't trace her anywhere, an' Nell has broke down at las', an' don't
do much but cry. It's hard, sir--I can't bear to see Nell cry. She'd
sich high sperrits, onct."

"Where's the boy Tom?" asked Kenneth, somewhat gruffly.

"He's in the jail yet, waitin' to be tried. Court don't set till next
week, they say."

"And where do you live, Rogers?"

"Five miles up the Fairview road. 'Taint much of a place--Nell says I've
always bin a shif'les lot, an' I guess it's true. Yesterday your hired
men painted all the front o' my fence--painted it white--not only where
th' signs was, but th' whole length of it. We didn't ask it done, but
they jes' done it. I watched 'em, an' Nell says if we on'y had th' money
thet was wasted on thet paint an' labor, we might find our Lucy. 'It's a
shame,' says Nell, 'all thet 'lection money bein' thrown away on paint
when it might save our poor crazy child.' I hope it ain't wrong, sir;
but thet's what I thought, too. So we laid plans fer me to come here
today. Ef I kin get a-hold o' any o' thet money honest, I want to do
it."

"Have you got a horse?" asked Kenneth.

"Not now. I owned one las' year, but he died on me an' I can't get
another nohow."

"Did you walk here?" asked Beth.

"Yes, miss; o' course. I've walked the hull county over a-tryin' to find
Lucy. I don' mind the walking much."

There was another pause, while old Will Rogers looked anxiously at the
boy and the girl, and they looked at each other. Then Beth took out her
purse.

"I want to hire your services to help us in the election," she said,
briskly. "I'll furnish you a horse and buggy and you can drive around
and talk with people and try to find Lucy at the same time. This twenty
dollars is to help you pay expenses. You needn't account for it; just
help us as much as you can."

The old man straightened up and his eyes filled again.

"Nell said if it was a matter o' charity I mustn't take a cent," he
observed, in a low voice.

'"It isn't charity. It's business. And now that we know your story we
mean to help you find your girl. Anyone would do that, you know. Tell
me, what is Lucy like?"

"She's like Nell used to be."

"But we don't know your wife. Describe Lucy as well as you can. Is she
tall?"

"Middlin', miss."

"Light or dark?"

"Heh?"

"Is her hair light or dark colored?"

"Middlin'; jes' middlin', miss."

"Well, is she stout or thin?"

"I should say sorter betwixt an' between, miss."

"How old is Lucy?"

"Jes' turned eighteen, miss."

"Never mind, Beth," interrupted the boy; "you won't learn much from old
Will's description. But we'll see what can be done tomorrow. Call James
and have him sent home in the rig he's going to use. It seems to me
you're disposing rather freely of my horses and carts."

"Yes, Ken. You've nothing to say about your belongings just now. But if
you object to this plan--"

"I don't. The girl must be found, and her father is more likely to find
her than a dozen other searchers. He shall have the rig and welcome."

So it was that Will Rogers drove back to his heartbroken wife in a smart
top-buggy, with twenty dollars in his pocket and a heart full of wonder
and thanksgiving.




CHAPTER X

THE FORGED CHECK


Kenneth and Beth refrained from telling the other girls or Uncle John of
old Will Rogers's visit, but they got Mr. Watson in the library and
questioned him closely about the penalty for forging a check.

It was a serious crime indeed, Mr. Watson told them, and Tom Gates bade
fair to serve a lengthy term in state's prison as a consequence of his
rash act.

"But it was a generous act, too," said Beth.

"I can't see it in that light," said the old lawyer. "It was a
deliberate theft from his employers to protect a girl he loved. I do not
doubt the girl was unjustly accused. The Squierses are a selfish,
hard-fisted lot, and the old lady, especially, is a well known virago.
But they could not have proven a case against Lucy, if she was innocent,
and all their threats of arresting her were probably mere bluff. So this
boy was doubly foolish in ruining himself to get sixty dollars to pay an
unjust demand."

"He was soft-hearted and impetuous," said Beth; "and, being in love, he
didn't stop to count the cost."

"That is no excuse, my dear," declared Mr. Watson. "Indeed there is
never an excuse for crime. The young man is guilty, and he must suffer
the penalty."

"Is there no way to save him?" asked Kenneth.

"If the prosecution were withdrawn and the case settled with the victim
of the forged check, then the young man would be allowed his freedom.
But under the circumstances I doubt if such an arrangement could be
made."

"We're going to try it, anyhow," was the prompt decision.

So as soon as breakfast was over the next morning Beth and Kenneth took
one of the automobiles, the boy consenting unwillingly to this sort of
locomotion because it would save much time. Fairview was twelve miles
away, but by ten o'clock they drew up at the county jail.

They were received in the little office by a man named Markham, who was
the jailer. He was a round-faced, respectable appearing fellow, but his
mood was distinctly unsociable.

"Want to see Tom Gates, eh? Well! what for?" he demanded.

"We wish to talk with him," answered Kenneth.

"Talk! what's the good? You're no friend of Tom Gates. I can't be
bothered this way, anyhow."

"I am Kenneth Forbes, of Elmhurst. I'm running for Representative on the
Republican ticket," said Kenneth, quietly.

"Oh, say! that's different," observed Markham, altering his demeanor.
"You mustn't mind my being gruff and grumpy, Mr. Forbes. I've just
stopped smoking a few days ago, and it's got on my nerves something
awful!"

"May we see Gates at once?" asked Kenneth.

"Sure-ly! I'll take you to his cell, myself. It's just shocking how such
a little thing as stoppin' smoking will rile up a fellow. Come this way,
please."

They followed the jailer along a succession of passages.

"Smoked ever sence I was a boy, you know, an' had to stop last week
because Doc said it would kill me if I didn't," remarked the jailer,
leading the way. "Sometimes I'm that yearning for a smoke I'm nearly
crazy, an' I dunno which is worst, dyin' one way or another. This is
Gates' cell--the best in the shop."

He unlocked the door, and called:

"Here's visitors, Tom."

"Thank you, Mr. Markham," replied a quiet voice, as a young man came
forward from the dim interior of the cell. "How are you feeling, today?"

"Worse, Tom; worse 'n ever," replied the jailer, gloomily.

"Well, stick it out, old man; don't give in."

"I won't, Tom. Smokin' 'll kill me sure, an' there's a faint hope o'
livin' through this struggle to give it up. This visitor is Mr. Forbes
of Elmhurst, an' the young lady is--"

"Miss DeGraf," said Kenneth, noticing the boy's face critically, as he
stood where the light from the passage fell upon it. "Will you leave us
alone, please, Mr. Markham?"

"Sure-ly, Mr. Forbes. You've got twenty minutes according to
regulations. I'll come and get you then. Sorry we haven't any reception
room in the jail. All visits has to be made in the cells."

Then he deliberately locked Kenneth and Beth in with the forger, and
retreated along the passage.

"Sit down, please," said Gates, in a cheerful and pleasant voice.
"There's a bench here."

"We've come to inquire about your case, Gates," said Kenneth. "It seems
you have forged a check."

"Yes, sir, I plead guilty, although I've been told I ought not to
confess. But the fact is that I forged the check and got the money, and
I'm willing to stand the consequences."

"Why did you do it?" asked Beth.

He was silent and turned his face away.

A fresh, wholesome looking boy, was Tom Gates, with steady gray eyes, an
intelligent forehead, but a sensitive, rather weak mouth. He was of
sturdy, athletic build and dressed neatly in a suit that was of coarse
material but well brushed and cared for.

Beth thought his appearance pleasing and manly. Kenneth decided that he
was ill at ease and in a state of dogged self-repression.

"We have heard something of your story," said Kenneth, "and are
interested in it. But there is no doubt you have acted very foolishly."

"Do you know Lucy, sir?" asked the young man.

"No."

"Lucy is very proud. The thing was killing her, and I couldn't bear it.
I didn't stop to think whether it was foolish or not. I did it; and I'm
glad I did."

"You have made her still more unhappy," said Beth, gently.

"Yes; she'll worry about me, I know. I'm disgraced for life; but I've
saved Lucy from any disgrace, and she's young. She'll forget me before
I've served my term, and--and take up with some other young fellow."

"Would you like that?" asked Beth.

"No, indeed," he replied, frankly. "But it will be best that way. I had
to stand by Lucy--she's so sweet and gentle, and so sensitive. I don't
say I did right. I only say I'd do the same thing again."

"Couldn't her parents have helped her?" inquired Kenneth.

"No. Old Will is a fine fellow, but poor and helpless since Mrs. Rogers
had her accident."

"Oh, did she have an accident?" asked Beth.

"Yes. Didn't you know? She's blind."

"Her husband didn't tell us that," said the girl.

"He was fairly prosperous before that, for Mrs. Rogers was an energetic
and sensible woman, and kept old Will hard at work. One morning she
tried to light the fire with kerosene, and lost her sight. Then Rogers
wouldn't do anything but lead her around, and wait upon her, and the
place went to rack and ruin."

"I understand now," said Beth.

"Lucy could have looked after her mother," said young Bates, "but old
Will was stubborn and wouldn't let her. So the girl saw something must
be done and went to work. That's how all the trouble came about."

He spoke simply, but paced up and down the narrow cell in front of them.
It was evident that his feelings were deeper than he cared to make
evident.

"Whose name did you sign to the check?" asked Kenneth.

"That of John E. Marshall, the manager of the mill. He is supposed to
sign all the checks of the concern. It's a stock company, and rich. I
was bookkeeper, so it was easy to get a blank check and forge the
signature. As regards my robbing the company, I'll say that I saved them
a heavy loss one day. I discovered and put out a fire that would have
destroyed the whole plant. But Marshall never even thanked me. He only
discharged the man who was responsible for the fire."

"How long ago were you arrested?" asked Beth.

"It's nearly two weeks now. But I'll have a trial in a few days, they
say. My crime is so serious that the circuit judge has to sit on the
case."

"Do you know where Lucy is?"

"She's at home, I suppose. I haven't heard from her since the day she
came here to see me--right after my arrest."

They did not think best to enlighten him at that time. It was better for
him to think the girl unfeeling than to know the truth.

"I'm going to see Mr. Marshall," said Kenneth, "and discover what I can
do to assist you."

"Thank you, sir. It won't be much, but I'm grateful to find a friend.
I'm guilty, you know, and there's no one to blame but myself."

They left him then, for the jailer arrived to unlock the door, and
escort them to the office.

"Tom's a very decent lad," remarked the jailer, on the way. "He ain't a
natural criminal, you know; just one o' them that gives in to temptation
and is foolish enough to get caught. I've seen lots of that kind in my
day. You don't smoke, do you, Mr. Forbes?"

"No, Mr. Markham."

"Then don't begin it; or, if you do, never try to quit. It's--it's
_awful_, it is. And it ruins a man's disposition."

The mill was at the outskirts of the town. It was a busy place, perhaps
the busiest in the whole of the Eighth District, and in it were employed
a large number of men. The office was a small brick edifice, separated
from the main buildings, in which the noise of machinery was so great
that one speaking could scarcely be heard. The manager was in, Kenneth
and Beth learned, but could not see them until he had signed the letters
he had dictated for the noon mail.

So they sat on a bench until a summons came to admit them to Mr.
Marshall's private office.

He looked up rather ungraciously, but motioned them to be seated.

"Mr. Forbes, of Elmhurst?" he asked, glancing at the card Kenneth had
sent in.

"Yes, sir."

"I've been bothered already over your election campaign," resumed the
manager, arranging his papers in a bored manner. "Some girl has been
here twice to interview my men and I have refused to admit her. You may
as well understand, sir, that I stand for the Democratic candidate, and
have no sympathy with your side."

"That doesn't interest me, especially, sir," answered Kenneth, smiling.
"I'm not electioneering just now. I've come to talk with you about young
Gates."

"Oh. Well, sir, what about him?"

"I'm interested in the boy, and want to save him from prosecution."

"He's a forger, Mr. Forbes; a deliberate criminal."

"I admit that. But he's very young, and his youth is largely responsible
for his folly."

"He stole my money."

"It is true, Mr. Marshall."

"And he deserves a term in state's prison."

"I agree to all that. Nevertheless, I should like to save him," said
Kenneth. "His trial has not yet taken place, and instead of your
devoting considerable of your valuable time appearing against him it
would be much simpler to settle the matter right here and now."

"In what way, Mr. Forbes?"

"I'll make your money loss good."

"It has cost me twice sixty dollars in annoyance."

"I can well believe it, sir. I'll pay twice sixty dollars for the
delivery to me of the forged check, and the withdrawal of the
prosecution."

"And the costs?"

"I'll pay all the costs besides."

"You're foolish. Why should you do all this?"

"I have my own reasons, Mr. Marshall. Please look at the matter from a
business standpoint. If you send the boy to prison you will still suffer
the loss of the money. By compromising with me you can recover your loss
and are paid for your annoyance."

"You're right. Give me a check for a hundred and fifty, and I'll turn
over to you the forged check and quash further proceedings."

Kenneth hesitated a moment. He detested the grasping disposition that
would endeavor to take advantage of his evident desire to help young
Gates. He had hoped to find Mr. Marshall a man of sympathy; but the
manager was as cold as an icicle.

Beth, uneasy at his silence, nudged him.

"Pay it, Ken," she whispered.

"Very well, Mr. Marshall," said he, "I accept your terms."

The check was written and handed over, and Marshall took the forged
check from his safe and delivered it, with the other papers in the case,
to Mr. Forbes. He also wrote a note to his lawyer directing him to
withdraw the prosecution.

Kenneth and Beth went away quite happy with their success, and the
manager stood in his little window and watched them depart. There was a
grim smile of amusement on his shrewd face.

"Of all the easy marks I ever encountered," muttered Mr. Marshall, "this
young Forbes is the easiest. Why, he's a fool, that's what he is. He
might have had that forged check for the face of it, if he'd been sharp.
You wouldn't catch 'Rast Hopkins doing such a fool stunt. Not in a
thousand years!"

Meantime Beth was pressing Kenneth's arm as she sat beside him and
saying happily:

"I'm so glad, Ken--so glad! And to think we can save all that misery and
despair by the payment of a hundred and fifty dollars! And now we must
find the girl."

"Yes," replied the boy, cheerfully, "we must find Lucy."




CHAPTER XI

A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE


A woman was sitting in a low room, engaged in knitting. Her feet were
stretched out toward a small fire that smouldered in an open hearth. She
wore a simple calico gown, neat and well-fitting, and her face bore
traces of much beauty that time and care had been unable wholly to
efface.

Suddenly she paused in her work, her head turned slightly to one side to
listen.

"Come in, sir," she called in a soft but distinct voice; "come in,
miss."

So Kenneth and Beth entered at the half-open porch door and advanced
into the room.

"Is this Mrs. Rogers?" asked Beth, looking at the woman curiously. The
woman's eyes were closed, but the lashes fell in graceful dark curves
over her withered cheeks. The girl wondered how she had been able to
know her visitors' sex so accurately.

"Yes, I am Mrs. Rogers," said the sweet, sad voice. "And I think you are
one of the young ladies from Elmhurst--perhaps the one Will talked to."

"You are right, Mrs. Rogers. I am Elizabeth DeGraf."

"And your companion--is it Mr. Forbes?" the woman asked.

"Yes, madam," replied Kenneth, astonished to find Will's wife speaking
with so much refinement and gracious ease.

"You are very welcome. Will you please find seats? My affliction renders
me helpless, as you may see."

"We are very comfortable, I assure you, Mrs. Rogers," said Beth. "We
have come to ask if you have heard anything of your daughter."

"Not a word as yet, Miss DeGraf, Will is out with the horse and buggy
doing his best to get information. But Lucy has been gone so long now
that I realize it will be difficult to find her, if, indeed, the poor
girl has not--is not--"

Her voice broke.

"Oh, you don't fear _that_, do you, Mrs. Rogers?" asked Beth, quickly.

"I fear anything--everything!" wailed the poor creature, the tears
streaming from between her closed lids. "My darling was frantic with
grief, and she couldn't bear the humiliation and disgrace of her
position. Will told you, didn't he?"

"Yes, of course. But it wasn't so bad, Mrs. Rogers; it wasn't a
desperate condition, by any means."

"With poor Tom in prison for years--and just for trying to help her."

"Tom isn't in prison, you know, any more," said Beth quietly. "He has
been released."

"Released! When?"

"Last evening. His fault has been forgiven, and he is now free."

The woman sat silent for a time. Then she asked:

"You have done this, Mr. Forbes?"

"Why, Miss DeGraf and I assisted, perhaps. The young man is not really
bad, and--"

"Tom's a fine boy!" she cried, with eagerness. "He's honest and true,
Mr. Forbes--he is, indeed!"

"I think so," said Kenneth.

"If he wasn't my Lucy would never have loved him. He had a bright future
before him, sir, and that's why my child went mad when he ruined his
life for her sake."

"Was she mad, do you think?" asked Beth, softly.

"She must have been," said the mother, sadly. "Lucy was a sensible girl,
and until this thing happened she was as bright and cheerful as the day
is long. But she is very sensitive--she inherited that from me, I
think--and Tom's action drove her distracted. At first she raved and
rambled incoherently, and Will and I feared brain fever would set in.
Then she disappeared in the night, without leaving a word or message for
us, which was unlike her--and we've never heard a word of her since.
The--the river has a strange fascination for people in that condition.
At times in my life it has almost drawn _me_ into its depths--and I am
not mad. I have never been mad."

"Let us hope for the best, Mrs. Rogers," said Beth. "Somehow, I have an
idea this trouble will all turn out well in the end."

"Have you?" asked the woman, earnestly.

"Yes. It all came about through such a little thing--merely an unjust
accusation."

"The little things are the ones that ruin lives," she said. "Will you
let me tell you something of myself? You have been so kind to us, my
dear, that I feel you ought to know."

"I shall be glad to know whatever you care to tell me," said Beth,
simply.

"I am the wife of a poor farmer," began the woman, speaking softly and
with some hesitation, but gaining strength as she proceeded. "As a girl
I was considered attractive, and my father was a man of great wealth and
social standing. We lived in Baltimore. Then I fell in love with a young
man who, after obtaining my promise to marry him, found some one he
loved better and carelessly discarded me. As I have said, I have a
sensitive nature. In my girlhood I was especially susceptible to any
slight, and this young man's heartless action made it impossible for me
to remain at home and face the humiliation he had thrust upon me. My
father was a hard man, and demanded that I marry the man he had himself
chosen; but I resented this command and ran away. My mother had passed
on long before, and there was nothing to keep me at home. I came west
and secured a position to teach school in this county, and for a time I
was quite contented and succeeded in living down my disappointment. I
heard but once from my father. He had married again and disinherited me.
He forbade me to ever communicate with him again.

"At that time Will Rogers was one of the most promising and manly of the
country lads around here. He was desperately in love with me, and at
this period, when I seemed completely cut off from my old life and the
future contained no promise, I thought it best to wear out the remainder
of my existence in the seclusion of a farm-house. I put all the past
behind me, and told Will Rogers I would marry him and be a faithful
wife; but that my heart was dead. He accepted me on that condition, and
it was not until after we were married some time that my husband
realized how impossible it would ever be to arouse my affection. Then he
lost courage, and became careless and reckless. When our child came--our
Lucy--Will was devoted to her, and the baby wakened in me all the old
passionate capacity to love. Lucy drew Will and me a little closer
together, but he never recovered his youthful ambition. He was a
disappointed man, and went from bad to worse. I don't say Will hasn't
always been tender and true to me, and absolutely devoted to Lucy. But
he lost all hope of being loved as he loved me, and the disappointment
broke him down. He became an old man early in life, and his lack of
energy kept us very poor. I used to take in sewing before the accident
to my eyes, and that helped a good deal to pay expenses. But now I am
helpless, and my husband devotes all his time to me, although I beg him
to work the farm and try to earn some money.

"I wouldn't have minded the poverty; I wouldn't mind being blind, even,
if Lucy had been spared to me. I have had to bear so much in my life
that I could even bear my child's death. But to have her disappear and
not know what has become of her--whether she is living miserably or
lying at the bottom of the river--it is this that is driving me
distracted."

Kenneth and Beth remained silent for a time after Mrs. Rogers had
finished her tragic story, for their hearts were full of sympathy for
the poor woman. It was hard to realize that a refined, beautiful and
educated girl had made so sad a mistake of her life and suffered so many
afflictions as a consequence. That old Will had never been a fitting
mate for his wife could readily be understood, and yet the man was still
devoted to his helpless, unresponsive spouse. The fault was not his.

The boy and the girl both perceived that there was but one way they
could assist Mrs. Rogers, and that was to discover what had become of
her child.

"Was Lucy like you, or did she resemble her father?" asked Beth.

"She is--she was very like me when I was young," replied the woman.
"There is a photograph of her on the wall there between the windows; but
it was taken five years ago, when she was a child. Now she is--she was
eighteen, and a well-developed young woman."

"I've been looking at the picture," said Kenneth.

"And you mustn't think of her as dead, Mrs. Rogers," said Beth,
pleadingly. "I'm sure she is alive, and that we shall find her. We're
going right to work, and everything possible shall be done to trace your
daughter. Don't worry, please. Be as cheerful as you can, and leave the
search to us."

The woman sighed.

"Will believes she is alive, too," she said. "He can't sleep or rest
till he finds her, for my husband loves her as well as I do. But
sometimes I feel it's wicked to hope she is alive. I know what she
suffers, for I suffered, myself; and life isn't worth living when
despair and disappointment fills it."

"I cannot see why Lucy shouldn't yet be happy," protested Beth. "Tom
Gates is now free, and can begin life anew."

"His trouble will follow him everywhere," said Mrs. Rogers, with
conviction. "Who will employ a bookkeeper, or even a clerk who has been
guilty of forgery?"

"I think I shall give him employment," replied Kenneth.

"You, Mr. Forbes!"

"Yes. I'm not afraid of a boy who became a criminal to save the girl he
loved."

"But all the world knows of his crime!" she exclaimed.

"The world forgets these things sooner than you suppose," he answered.
"I need a secretary, and in that position Tom Gates will quickly be able
to live down this unfortunate affair. And if he turns out as well as I
expect, he will soon be able to marry Lucy and give her a comfortable
home. So now nothing remains but to find your girl, and we'll try to do
that, I assure you."

Mrs. Rogers was crying softly by this time, but it was from joy and
relief. When they left her she promised to be as cheerful as possible
and to look on the bright side of life.

"I can't thank you," she said, "so I won't try. You must know how
grateful we are to you."

As Beth and Kenneth drove back to Elmhurst they were both rather silent,
for they had been strongly affected by the scene at the farm-house.

"It's so good of you, Ken, to take Tom Gates into your employ," said the
girl, pressing her cousin's arm. "And I'm sure he'll be true and
grateful."

"I really need him, Beth," said the boy. "There is getting to be too
much correspondence for Mr. Watson to attend to, and I ought to relieve
him of many other details. It's a good arrangement, and I'm glad I
thought of it."

They had almost reached Elmhurst when they met the Honorable Erastus
Hopkins driving along the road. On the seat beside him was a young girl,
and as the vehicles passed each other Beth gave a start and clung to the
boy's arm.

"Oh, Ken!" she cried, "did you see? Did you see that?"

"Yes; it's my respected adversary."

"But the girl! It's Lucy--I'm sure it's Lucy! She's the living image of
Mrs. Rogers! Stop--stop--and let's go back!"

"Nonsense, Beth," said the boy. "It can't be."

"But it is. I'm sure it is!"

"I saw the girl," he said. "She was laughing gaily and talking with the
Honorable Erastus. Is that your idea of the mad, broken-hearted Lucy
Rogers?"

"N-no. She _was_ laughing, Ken, I noticed it."

"And she wasn't unhappy a bit. You mustn't think that every pretty girl
with dark eyes you meet is Lucy Rogers, you know. And there's another
thing."

"What, Ken?"

"Any companion of Mr. Hopkins can be easily traced."

"That's true," answered the girl, thoughtfully. "I must have been
mistaken," she added, with a sigh.




CHAPTER XII

BETH MEETS A REBUFF


The campaign was now growing warm. Mr. Hopkins had come to realize that
he had "the fight of his life" on his hands, and that defeat meant his
political ruin. Close-fisted and miserly as he was, no one knew so well
as the Honorable Erastus how valuable this position of Representative
was to him in a financial way, and that by winning re-election he could
find means to reimburse himself for all he had expended in the fight.
So, to the surprise of the Democratic Committee and all his friends, Mr.
Hopkins announced that he would oppose Forbes's aggressive campaign with
an equal aggressiveness, and spend as many dollars in doing so as might
be necessary.

He did not laugh at his opponents any longer. To himself he admitted
their shrewdness and activity and acknowledged that an experienced head
was managing their affairs.

One of Mr. Hopkins's first tasks after calling his faithful henchmen
around him was to make a careful canvass of the voters of his district,
to see what was still to be accomplished.

This canvass was quite satisfactory, for final report showed only about
a hundred majority for Forbes. The district was naturally Republican by
six hundred majority, and Hopkins had previously been elected by a
plurality of eighty-three; so that all the electioneering of the girl
politicians, and the expenditure of vast sums of money in painting
fences and barns, buying newspapers and flaunting Forbes banners in the
breezes, had not cut into the Hopkins following to any serious extent.

But, to offset this cheering condition, the Democratic agents who made
the canvass reported that there was an air of uncertainty throughout the
district, and that many of those who declared for Hopkins were lukewarm
and faint-hearted, and might easily be induced to change their votes.
This was what must be prevented. The "weak-kneed" contingency must be
strengthened and fortified, and a couple of hundred votes in one way or
another secured from the opposition.

The Democratic Committee figured out a way to do this. Monroe County,
where both Forbes and Hopkins resided, was one of the Democratic
strongholds of the State. The portions of Washington and Jefferson
Counties included in the Eighth District were as strongly Republican,
and being more populous gave to the district its natural Republican
majority. On the same ticket that was to elect a Representative to the
State Legislature was the candidate for Sheriff of Monroe County. A man
named Cummings was the Republican and Seth Reynolds, the liveryman, the
Democratic nominee. Under ordinary conditions Reynolds was sure to be
elected, but the Committee proposed to sacrifice him in order to elect
Hopkins. The Democrats would bargain with the Republicans to vote for
the Republican Sheriff if the Republicans would vote for the Democratic
Representative. This "trading votes," which was often done, was
considered by the politicians quite legitimate. The only thing necessary
was to "fix" Seth Reynolds, and this Hopkins arranged personally. The
office of Sheriff would pay about two thousand a year, and this sum
Hopkins agreed to pay the liveryman and so relieve him of all the
annoyance of earning it.

Reynolds saw the political necessity of this sacrifice, and consented
readily to the arrangement. Mr. Cummings, who was to profit by the deal,
was called to a private consultation and agreed to slaughter Kenneth
Forbes to secure votes for himself. It was thought that this clever
arrangement would easily win the fight for Hopkins.

But the Honorable Erastus had no intention of "taking chances," or
"monkeying with fate," as he tersely expressed it. Every scheme known to
politicians must be worked, and none knew the intricate game better than
Hopkins. This was why he held several long conferences with his friend
Marshall, the manager at the mill. And this was why Kenneth and Beth
discovered him conversing with the young woman in the buggy. Mr. Hopkins
had picked her up from the path leading from the rear gate of the
Elmhurst grounds, and she had given him accurate information concerning
the movements of the girl campaigners. The description she gave of the
coming reception to the Woman's Political League was so humorous and
diverting that they were both laughing heartily over the thing when the
young people passed them, and thus Mr. Hopkins failed to notice who the
occupants of the other vehicle were.

He talked for an hour with the girl, gave her explicit instructions,
thrust some money into her hand, and then drove her back to the bend in
the path whence she quickly made her way up to the great house.

Louise was making great preparations to entertain the Woman's Political
League, an organization she had herself founded, the members of which
were wives of farmers in the district. These women were flattered by the
attention of the young lady and had promised to assist in electing Mr.
Forbes. Louise hoped for excellent results from this organization and
wished the entertainment to be so effective in winning their good-will
that they would work earnestly for the cause in which they were
enlisted.

Patsy and Beth supported their cousin loyally and assisted in the
preparations. The Fairview band was engaged to discourse as much harmony
as it could produce, and the resources of the great house were taxed to
entertain the guests. Tables were spread on the lawn and a dainty but
substantial repast was to be served.

The day of the entertainment was as sunny and mild as heart could
desire.

By ten o'clock the farm wagons began to drive up, loaded with women and
children, for all were invited except the grown men. This was the first
occasion within a generation when such an entertainment had been given
at Elmhurst, and the only one within the memory of man where the
neighbors and country people had been invited guests. So all were eager
to attend and enjoy the novel event.

The gardens and grounds were gaily decorated with Chinese and Japanese
lanterns, streamers and Forbes banners. There were great tanks of
lemonade, and tables covered with candies and fruits for the children,
and maids and other servants distributed the things and looked after the
comfort of the guests. The band played briskly, and before noon the
scene was one of great animation. A speakers' stand, profusely
decorated, had been erected on the lawn, and hundreds of folding chairs
provided for seats. The attendance was unexpectedly large, and the girls
were delighted, foreseeing great success for their fte.

"We ought to have more attendants, Beth," said Louise, approaching her
cousin. "Won't you run into the house and see if Martha can't spare one
or two more maids?"

Beth went at once, and found the housekeeper in her little room. Martha
was old and somewhat feeble in body, but her mind was still active and
her long years of experience in directing the household at Elmhurst made
her a very useful and important personage. She was very fond of the
young ladies, whom she had known when Aunt Jane was the mistress here,
and Beth was her especial favorite.

So she greeted the girl cordially, and said:

"Maids? My dear, I haven't another one to give you, and my legs are too
tottering to be of any use. I counted on Eliza Parsons, the new girl I
hired for the linen room and to do mending; but Eliza said she had a
headache this morning and couldn't stand the sun, So I let her off. But
she didn't seem very sick to me."

"Perhaps she is better and will help us until after the luncheon is
served," said Beth. "Where is she, Martha? I'll go and ask her."

"I'd better show you the way, miss. She's in her own room."

The housekeeper led the way and Beth followed. When she rapped upon the
door, a sweet, quiet voice said:

"Come in."

The girl entered, and gave an involuntary cry of surprise. Standing
before her was the young girl she had seen riding with Mr. Hopkins--the
girl she had declared to be the missing daughter of Mrs. Rogers.

For a moment Beth stood staring, while the new maid regarded her with
composure and a slight smile upon her beautiful face. She was dressed in
the regulation costume of the maids at Elmhurst, a plain black gown with
white apron and cap.

"I--I beg your pardon," said Beth, with a slight gasp; for the likeness
to Mrs. Rogers was something amazing. "Aren't you Lucy Rogers?"

The maid raised her eyebrows with a gesture of genuine surprise. Then
she gave a little laugh, and replied:

"No, Miss Beth. I'm Elizabeth Parsons."

"But it can't be," protested the girl. "How do you know my name, and why
haven't I seen you here before?"

"I'm not a very important person at Elmhurst," replied Eliza, in a
pleasant, even tone. "I obtained the situation only a few days ago. I
attend to the household mending, you know, and care for the linen. But
one can't be here without knowing the names of the young ladies, so I
recognize you as Miss Beth, one of Mr. Forbes's cousins."

"You speak like an educated person," said Beth, wonderingly. "Where is
your home?"

For the first time the maid seemed a little confused, and her gaze
wandered from the face of her visitor.

"Will you excuse my answering that question?" she asked.

"It is very simple and natural," persisted Beth. "Why cannot you answer
it?"

"Excuse me, please. I--I am not well today. I have a headache."

She sat down in a rocking chair, and clasping her hands in her lap,
rocked slowly back and forth.

"I'm sorry," said Beth. "I hoped you would be able to assist me on the
lawn. There are so many people that we can't give them proper
attention."

Eliza Parsons shook her head.

"I am not able," she declared. "I abhor crowds. They--they excite me, in
some way, and I--I can't bear them. You must excuse me."

Beth looked at the strange girl without taking the hint to retire.
Somehow, she could not rid herself of the impression that whether or not
she was mistaken in supposing Eliza to be the missing Lucy, she had
stumbled upon a sphinx whose riddle was well worth solving.

But Eliza bore the scrutiny with quiet unconcern. She even seemed mildly
amused at the attention she attracted. Beth was a beautiful girl--the
handsomest of the three cousins, by far; yet Eliza surpassed her in
natural charm, and seemed well aware of the fact. Her manner was neither
independent nor assertive, but rather one of well-bred composure and
calm reliance. Beth felt that she was intruding and knew that she ought
to go; yet some fascination held her to the spot. Her eyes wandered to
the maid's hands. However her features and form might repress any
evidence of nervousness, these hands told a different story. The thin
fingers clasped and unclasped in little spasmodic jerks and belied the
quiet smile upon the face above them.

"I wish," said Beth, slowly, "I knew you."

A sudden wave of scarlet swept over Eliza's face. She rose quickly to
her feet, with an impetuous gesture that made her visitor catch her
breath.

"I wish I knew myself," she cried, fiercely. "Why do you annoy me in
this manner? What am I to you? Will you leave me alone in my own room,
or must I go away to escape you?"

"I will go," said Beth, a little frightened at the passionate appeal.

Eliza closed the door behind her with a decided slam, and a key clicked
in the lock. The sound made Beth indignant, and she hurried back to
where her cousins were busy with the laughing, chattering throng of
visitors.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BOOMERANG


The lawn fte was a tremendous success, and every farmer's wife was
proud of her satin badge bearing the monogram: "W. P. L.," and the
words: "FORBES FOR REPRESENTATIVE."

Certain edibles, such as charlotte-russe, Spanish cream, wine jellies
and mousses, to say nothing of the caviars and anchovies, were wholly
unknown to them; but they ate the dainties with a wise disregard of
their inexperience and enjoyed them immensely.

The old butler was a general in his way, and in view of the fact that
the staff of servants at Elmhurst was insufficient to cope with such a
throng, he allowed Louise to impress several farmers' daughters into
service, and was able to feed everyone without delay and in an abundant
and satisfactory manner.

After luncheon began the speech-making, interspersed with music by the
band.

Louise made the preliminary address, and, although her voice was not
very strong, the silent attention of her hearers permitted her to be
generally understood.

She called attention to the fact that this campaign was important
because it promised more beautiful and attractive houses for the farmers
and townsmen alike.

"We had all grown so accustomed to advertising signs," she said, "that
we failed to notice how thick they were becoming or how bold and
overpowering. From a few scattered announcements on fence boards, they
had crowded themselves into more prominent places until the barns and
sheds and the very rocks were daubed with glaring letters asking us to
buy the medicines, soaps, tobaccos, and other wares the manufacturers
were anxious to sell. Every country road became an advertising avenue.
Scarcely a country house was free from signs of some sort. Yet the
people tamely submitted to this imposition because they knew no way to
avoid it. When Mr. Forbes began his campaign to restore the homesteads
to their former beauty and dignity, a cry was raised against him. But
this was because the farmers did not understand how much this reform
meant to them. So we gave them an object lesson. We painted out all the
signs in this section at our own expense, that you might see how much
more beautiful your homes are without them. We believe that none of you
will ever care to allow advertising signs on your property again, and
that the quiet refinement of this part of the country will induce many
other places to follow our example, until advertisers are forced to
confine themselves to newspapers, magazines and circulars, their only
legitimate channels. This much Mr. Forbes has already done for you, and
he will now tell you what else, if he is elected, he proposes to do."

Kenneth then took the platform and was welcomed with a hearty cheer. He
modestly assured them that a Representative in the State Legislature
could accomplish much good for his district if he honestly desired to do
so. That was what a Representative was for--to represent his people. It
was folly to elect any man who would forget that duty and promote only
his own interests through the position of power to which the people had
appointed him. Mr. Forbes admitted that he had undertaken this campaign
because he was opposed to offensive advertising signs; but now he had
become interested in other issues, and was anxious to be elected so that
he could carry on the work of reform. They needed more school-houses for
their children, and many other things which he hoped to provide as their
Representative.

During this oration Beth happened to glance up at the house, and her
sharp eyes detected the maid, Eliza, standing shielded behind the
half-closed blind of an upper window and listening to, as well as
watching, the proceedings below. Then she remembered how the girl had
been laughing and talking with Mr. Hopkins, when she first saw her, and
with sudden dismay realized that Eliza was a spy in the service of the
enemy.

Her first impulse was to denounce the maid at once, and have her
discharged; but the time was not opportune, so she waited until the
festivities were ended.

It had been a great day for the families of the neighboring farmers, and
they drove homeward in the late afternoon full of enthusiasm over the
royal manner in which they had been entertained and admiration for the
girls who had provided the fun and feasting. Indeed, there were more
kindly thoughts expressed for the inhabitants of Elmhurst than had ever
before been heard in a single day in the history of the county, and the
great and the humble seemed more closely drawn together.

When the last guest had departed Beth got her cousins and Kenneth
together and told them of her discovery of the spy.

Kenneth was at first greatly annoyed, and proposed to call Martha and
have the false maid ejected from the premises; but Patsy's wise little
head counselled caution in handling the matter.

"Now that we know her secret," she said, "the girl cannot cause us more
real harm, and there may be a way to circumvent this unscrupulous
Hopkins and turn the incident to our own advantage. Let's think it over
carefully before we act."

"There's another thing," said Beth, supporting her cousin. "I'm
interested in the mystery surrounding the girl. I now think I was wrong
in suspecting her to be the lost Lucy Rogers; but there is surely some
romance connected with her, and she is not what she seems to be. I'd
like to study her a little."

"It was absurd to connect her with Lucy Rogers," observed Kenneth, "for
there is nothing in her character to remind one of the unhappy girl."

"Except her looks," added Beth. "She's the living image of Mrs. Rogers."

"That isn't important," replied Louise. "It is probably a mere
coincidence. None of us have ever seen the real Lucy, and she may not
resemble her mother at all."

"Mrs. Rogers claims she does," said Beth. "But anyhow, I have a wish to
keep this girl at the house, where I can study her character."

"Then keep her, my dear," decided Kenneth. "I'll set a couple of men to
watch the gates, and if she goes out we'll know whom she meets. The most
she can do is to report our movements to Mr. Hopkins, and there's no
great harm in that."

So the matter was left, for the time; and as if to verify Beth's
suspicions Eliza was seen to leave the grounds after dusk and meet Mr.
Hopkins in the lane. They conversed together a few moments, and then the
maid calmly returned and went to her room.

The next day Mr. Hopkins scattered flaring hand-bills over the district
which were worded in a way designed to offset any advantage his opponent
had gained from the lawn fte of the previous day. They read: "Hopkins,
the Man of the Times, is the Champion of the Signs of the Times. Forbes,
who never earned a dollar in his life, but inherited his money, is
trying to take the dollars out of the pockets of the farmers by
depriving them of the income derived by selling spaces for advertising
signs. He is robbing the farmers while claiming he wants to beautify
their homes. The farmers can't eat beauty; they want money. Therefore
they are going to vote for the Honorable Erastus Hopkins for
Representative." Then followed an estimate of the money paid the farmers
of the district by the advertisers during the past five years, amounting
to several thousands of dollars in the aggregate. The circular ended in
this way: "Hopkins challenges Forbes to deny these facts. Hopkins is
willing to meet Forbes before the public at any time and place he may
select, to settle this argument in joint debate."

The girls accepted the challenge at once. Within two days every farmer
had received a notice that Mr. Forbes would meet Mr. Hopkins at the
Fairview Opera House on Saturday afternoon to debate the question as to
whether advertising signs brought good or evil to the community.

The campaign was now getting hot. Because of the activity of the
opposing candidates every voter in the district had become more or less
interested in the fight, and people were taking one side or the other
with unusual earnestness.

Mr. Hopkins was not greatly pleased that his challenge had been
accepted. He had imagined that the Forbes party would ignore it and
leave him the prestige of crowing over his opponent's timidity. But he
remembered how easily he had subdued Kenneth at the school-house meeting
before the nominations, and had no doubt of his ability to repeat the
operation.

He was much incensed against the girls who were working for Kenneth
Forbes, for he realized that they were proving an important factor in
the campaign. He even attributed to them more than they deserved, for
Uncle John's telling activities were so quietly conducted that he was
personally lost sight of entirely by Mr. Hopkins.

Mr. Hopkins had therefore become so enraged that, against the advice of
his friends, he issued a circular sneering at "Women in Politics." The
newspapers having been subsidized by the opposition so early in the
game, Mr. Hopkins had driven to employ the circular method of
communicating with the voters. Scarcely a day passed now that his corps
of distributors did not leave some of his literature at every dwelling
in the district.

His tirade against the girls was neither convincing nor in good taste.
He asked the voters if they were willing to submit to "petticoat
government," and permit a "lot of boarding-school girls, with more
boldness than modesty" to dictate the policies of the community. "These
frizzle-headed females," continued the circular, "are trying to make
your wives and daughters as rebellious and unreasonable as they are
themselves; but no man of sense will permit a woman to influence his
vote. It is a disgrace to this district that Mr. Forbes allows his
girlish campaign to be run by a lot of misses who should be at home
darning stockings; or, if they were not able to do that, practicing
their music-lessons."

"Good!" exclaimed shrewd Miss Patsy, when she read this circular. "If
I'm not much mistaken, Mr. Hopkins has thrown a boomerang. Every woman
who attended the fte is now linked with us as an ally, and every one of
them will resent this foolish circular."

"I'm sorry," said Kenneth, "that you girls should be forced to endure
this. I feared something like it when you insisted on taking a hand in
the game."

But they laughed at him and at Mr. Hopkins, and declared they were not
at all offended.

"One cannot touch pitch without being defiled," said Mr. Watson,
gravely, "and politics, as Mr. Hopkins knows it, is little more than
pitch."

"I cannot see that there is anything my girls have done to forfeit
respect and admiration," asserted Uncle John, stoutly. "To accuse them
of boldness or immodesty is absurd. They have merely gone to work in a
business-like manner and used their wits and common-sense in educating
the voters. Really, my dears, I'm more proud of you today than I've ever
been before," he concluded.

And Uncle John was right. There had been no loss of dignity by any one
of the three, and their evident refinement, as well as their gentleness
and good humor, had until now protected them from any reproach. It had
remained for Mr. Hopkins to accuse them, and his circular had a wide
influence in determining the issue of the campaign.




CHAPTER XIV

LUCY'S GHOST


Kenneth had sent word to Tom Gates, asking the young man to come to
Elmhurst, but it was not until two days after the lawn party that Tom
appeared and asked permission to see Mr. Forbes.

Beth and Louise were with Kenneth at the time, and were eager to remain
during the interview, so the young man was shown into the library.

Beth could scarcely recognize in him the calm and cheerful Tom Gates
they had visited in the county jail; for his face was drawn with care
and anxiety, eyes were bloodshot, and his former neat appearance was
changed to one careless and untidy.

Kenneth scrutinized him closely.

"What have you been up to, Tom?" he asked.

"I've been searching for Lucy, sir, night and day. I haven't slept a
wink since I heard the awful news of her sickness and escape. Where do
you think she can be, sir?"

His question was full of agonized entreaty, and his manner pitifully
appealing.

"I don't know," answered Kenneth. "Where have you searched?"

"Everywhere, sir, that she might be likely to go. I've inquired in every
town, and along every road leading out of the county. She didn't take a
train, because poor Lucy hadn't any money--and I've asked at all the
stations. And--and--along the river they say no girl answering her
description has been seen."

"It's strange," remarked Kenneth, thoughtfully, while the girls regarded
the youth with silent sympathy.

"If you knew Lucy, sir, you'd realize how strange it is," went on young
Gates, earnestly. "She was such a gentle, shrinking girl, as shy and
retiring as a child. And she never did a thing that would cause anyone
the least worry or unhappiness. But she was out of her head, sir, and
didn't know what she was about. That was the reason she went away. And
from the moment she left her home all trace of her was lost."

"One would think," observed Kenneth, "that a poor, demented girl,
wandering about the country, would be noticed by scores of people. Did
she take any clothing with her?"

"Only the dress she had on, sir, and not even a hat or a shawl."

"What was her dress like?" asked Beth, quickly.

"It was a light grey in color, and plainly made. She wore a white
collar, but that is all we can be certain she had on. You see her mother
is blind, and old Will doesn't observe very closely."

"Does Lucy resemble her mother?" inquired Beth.

"Very much, miss. She was a beautiful girl, everyone acknowledged. And
it's all my fault--all my fault. I thought to save her, and drove her
mad, instead!"

"You might have known that," declared Kenneth. "A girl of her character,
sensitive to a fault, would be greatly shocked to find the man she loved
a criminal."

"It was for her sake."

"That is a poor excuse. If you had waited Lucy would have proved her
innocence."

"They threatened to arrest her, sir. It would have killed her."

"They wouldn't dare arrest her on suspicion."

"The Squierses would dare do anything. You don't know old Mrs. Squiers."

"I know the law, sir, and in any event it was a foolish thing, as well
as criminal, to forge a check to get the money they demanded."

"You are right, sir," replied Tom Gates, despondently. "It was foolish
and criminal. I wouldn't mind my own punishment, but it drove my Lucy
mad."

"See here," said Kenneth, sternly, "you are getting morbid, young man,
and pretty soon you'll be mad yourself. If Lucy is found do you want her
to see you in this condition?"

"Can she be found, sir, do you think?"

"We are trying to find her," replied Kenneth. "You have failed, it
seems, and Will Rogers had failed. I've had one of the cleverest
detectives of Chicago trying to find her for the last three days."

"Oh, Kenneth!" exclaimed Beth. "I didn't know that. How good of you!"

"It must have been the detective that came to see Mrs. Rogers," said
Tom, musingly. "She told me a strange man had been there from Mr.
Forbes, to inquire all about Lucy."

"Yes; he makes a report to me every evening," remarked Kenneth; "and Mr.
Burke says this is the most mystifying case he has ever encountered. So
far there isn't a clew to follow. But you may rest assured that what any
man can do, Burke will do."

"I'm so grateful, sir!" said Tom.

"Then you must show it by being a man, and not by giving way to your
trouble in this foolish manner."

"I'll try, sir, now that there's something to hope for."

"There's a good deal to hope for. Despair won't help you. You must go to
work."

"I will. It won't be very easy to get work, for I've disgraced myself in
this neighborhood, and I can't leave here till something is known of
Lucy's fate. But I'll do something--any kind of work--if I can get it."

"I need someone to assist me in my correspondence," said Kenneth. "Would
you like to be my secretary?"

"Me, Mr. Forbes--me!"

"Yes, Tom. I'll pay you twenty dollars a week to start with, and more if
you serve me faithfully. And you'll board here, of course."

Then Tom Gates broke down and began to cry like a child, although he
tried hard to control himself.

"You--you must forgive me, Mr. Forbes," he said, penitently; "I--I've
been without sleep for so long that I haven't any nerves left."

"Then you must go to sleep now, and get a good rest." He turned to Beth.
"Will you see Martha," he asked, "and have her give Tom Gates a room?"

She went on her errand at once, and gradually the young man recovered
his composure.

"I can do typewriting and stenography, Mr. Forbes," he said, "and I can
keep accounts. I'll serve you faithfully, sir."

"We'll talk of all this by and by, Tom," replied Kenneth, kindly. "Just
now you must have some sleep and get your strength back. And don't worry
about Lucy. Burke will do everything that can be done, and I am
confident he will be able to trace the girl in time."

"Thank you, sir."

Then he followed the butler away to his room, and after the girls had
discussed him and expressed their sympathy for the unfortunate fellow,
they all turned their attention to the important matter of the campaign.
The debate with Hopkins was the thing that occupied them just now, and
when Patsy joined the group of workers they began to discuss some means
of scoring a decisive victory at the Fairview Opera House. The Honorable
Erastus still insisted upon making the anti-sign fight the prominent
issue of the campaign, and they must reply forcibly to the misleading
statements made in his last hand-bill.

Meantime Tom Gates was sunk in the deep sleep of physical exhaustion,
and the day wore away before he wakened. When at last he regained
consciousness he found the sun sinking in the west and feared he had
been guilty of indiscretion. He remembered that he was Mr. Forbes's
secretary now, and that Mr. Forbes might want him. He was not yet
thoroughly rested, but night was approaching and he reflected that he
could obtain all the sleep that he needed then.

So, greatly refreshed, and in a quieter mood than he had been for days,
the young man dressed and entered the hall to find his way downstairs.

It happened that Beth, whose room was near this rear corridor, had just
gone there to dress for dinner, and as she was closing her door she
heard a wild, impassioned cry:

"Lucy!"

Quickly she sprang out into the hall and turned the corner in time to
see a strange tableau.

Young Gates was standing with his arms outstretched toward Eliza
Parsons, who, a few paces away, had her back to the door of her own
chamber, from which she had evidently just stepped. She stood
motionless, looking curiously at the youth who confronted her.

"Lucy! don't you know me?" he asked, his voice trembling with emotion.

"To begin with," said the girl, composedly, "my name happens to be
Eliza. And as we've not been properly introduced I really don't see why
I should know you," she added, with a light laugh.

Tom Gates shrank away from her as if he had been struck.

"You can't be Lucy!" he murmured. "And yet--and yet--oh, you _must_ be
Lucy! You must know me! Look at me, dear--I'm Tom. I'm your own Tom,
Lucy!"

"It's very gratifying, I'm sure, young man," said the girl, a touch of
scorn in her tones. "If you're my own Tom you'll perhaps stand out of my
way and let me go to my work."

Without another word he backed up again; the wall and permitted her to
sweep by him, which she did with a gesture of disdain.

When Eliza Parsons had disappeared down the back stairs Beth drew a long
breath and approached Tom Gates, who still stood by the wall staring at
the place where the girl had disappeared.

"I overheard," said Beth. "Tell me, Tom, is she really like Lucy?"

He looked at her with a dazed expression, as if he scarcely comprehended
her words.

"Could you have been mistaken?" persisted the questioner.

He passed his hand over his eyes and gave a shudder.

"Either it was Lucy or her ghost," he muttered.

"Eliza Parsons is no ghost," declared Beth. "She's one of the maids here
at Elmhurst, and you're quite likely to see her again."

"Has she been here long?" he asked, eagerly.

"No; only a few days."

"Oh!"

"When I first saw her I was struck by her resemblance to Mrs. Rogers,"
continued the girl.

"But she's so different," said Tom, choking back a sob. "Lucy couldn't
be so--so airy, so heartless. She isn't at all that style of a girl,
miss."

"She may be acting," suggested Beth.

But he shook his head gloomily.

"No; Lucy couldn't act that way. She's quick and impulsive, but she--she
couldn't act. And she wouldn't treat me that way, either, Miss Beth.
Lucy and I have been sweethearts for years, and I know every expression
of her dear face. But the look that this girl gave me was one that my
Lucy never could assume. I must have been mistaken. I--I'm sure I was
mistaken."

Beth sighed. She was disappointed.

"I suppose," continued Tom, "that I've thought of Lucy so long and so
much, lately, and worried so over her disappearance, that I'm not quite
myself, and imagined this girl was more like her than she really is.
What did you say her name was?"

"Eliza Parsons."

"Thank you. Can you tell me where I'll find Mr. Forbes?"

"He's getting ready for dinner, now, and won't need you at present."

"Then I'll go back to my room. It--it was a great shock to me, that
likeness, Miss DeGraf."

"I can well believe it," said Beth; and then she went to her own
apartment, greatly puzzled at a resemblance so strong that it had even
deceived Lucy Rogers's own sweetheart.




CHAPTER XV

SIGNS OF THE TIMES


"If she is really Lucy Rogers, she'll be missing tomorrow morning," said
Beth when she had told her cousins of the encounter in the corridor.

But Eliza Parsons was still at Elmhurst the next day, calmly pursuing
her duties, and evidently having forgotten or decided to ignore the
young man who had so curiously mistaken her for another. Beth took
occasion to watch her movements, so far as she could, and came to the
conclusion that the girl was not acting a part. She laughed naturally
and was too light-hearted and gay to harbor a care of any sort in her
frivolous mind.

But there was a mystery about her; that could not be denied. Even if she
were but a paid spy of Erastus Hopkins there was a story in this girl's
life, brief as it had been.

Beth was full of curiosity to know this story.

As for Tom Gates, he had been so horrified by his mistake that he tried
to avoid meeting Eliza again. This was not difficult because the girl
kept pretty closely to the linen room, and Tom was chiefly occupied in
the library.

Kenneth had little chance to test his secretary's abilities just then,
because the girls pounced upon the new recruit and used his services in
a variety of ways. Tom Gates's anxiety to give satisfaction made him
willing to do anything, but they refrained from sending him often to
town because he was sensitive to the averted looks and evident repulsion
of those who knew he had recently been a "jail-bird." But there was
plenty for him to do at Elmhurst, where they were all as busy as bees;
and whatever the young man undertook he accomplished in a satisfactory
manner.

Saturday forenoon the three girls, with Kenneth, Mr. Watson and Uncle
John, rode over to Fairview to prepare for the debate that was to take
place in the afternoon, leaving only Tom Gates at home. As Mr. Hopkins
had thrust upon his opponent the task of naming the place and time, the
Republican candidate was obliged to make all the arrangements, and pay
all the costs. But whatever the girl managers undertook they did well.
So the Opera House had been in the hands of a special committee for two
days, the orchestra had been hired, and the news of the joint debate had
spread far and wide.

The party from Elmhurst lunched at the Fairview Hotel, and then the
girls hurried to the Opera House while Kenneth remained to attend a
conference of the Republican Committee. These gentlemen were much
worried over the discovery of a scheme to trade votes that had been
sprung, and that Forbes and Reynolds were being sacrificed for Hopkins
and Cummings. Mr. Cummings was called into the meeting, and he denied
that the trading was being done with his consent, but defiantly refused
to make a public announcement to that effect.

The matter was really serious, because every vote lost in that way
counted as two for the other side, and Hopkins's rabid hand-bills had
influenced many of the more ignorant voters and created endless disputes
that were not of benefit to the Republican party.

"As nearly as we can figure from our recent canvass," said Mr.
Cunningham, the chairman, "we are fast losing ground, and our chances of
success are smaller than if no interest in the election had been
aroused. Hopkins has cut our majority down to nothing, and it will be a
hard struggle to carry our ticket through to success. This is the more
discouraging because Mr. Forbes has spent so much money, while Hopkins's
expenses have been very little."

"I do not mind that," said Kenneth, quietly. "It was my desire that the
voters should fully understand the issues of the campaign. Then, if they
vote against me, it is because they are not worthy of honest
representation in the Legislature, and I shall in the future leave them
to their own devices."

The committee adjourned a little before two o'clock with rather grave
faces, and prepared to attend the debate at the Opera House. Mr.
Cunningham feared this debate would prove a mistake, as it would give
Hopkins a chance to ridicule and brow-beat his opponent in public, and
his greatest talent as a speaker lay in that direction.

As Kenneth and his supporters approached the Opera House they heard loud
cheering, and from a band-wagon covered with bunting and banners, in
which he had driven to the meeting, descended the Honorable Erastus. He
met Kenneth face to face, and the latter said pleasantly:

"Good afternoon, Mr. Hopkins."

"Ah, it's Forbes, isn't it?" replied Hopkins, slightingly. "I've met you
before, somewheres, haven't I?"

"You have, sir."

"Glad you're here, Forbes; glad you're here," continued the
Representative, airily, as he made his way through the crowd that
blocked the entrance. "These meetings are educational to young men.
Girls all well, I hope?"

There was a boisterous laugh at this sally, and Mr. Hopkins smiled and
entered the Opera House, while Kenneth followed with the feeling that he
would take great delight in punching the Honorable Erastus's nose at the
first opportunity.

The house was packed full of eager spectators who had come to see "the
fun." Although the girls had taken charge of all the arrangements they
had devoted the left side of the ample stage to the use of the Hopkins
party, where a speaker's table and chairs for important guests had been
placed. The right side was similarly arranged for the Forbes party, and
between the two the entire center of the stage was occupied by a group
of fifty young girls. Above this group a great banner was suspended,
reading: "The Signs of the Times," a catchword Mr. Hopkins had employed
throughout the campaign. But the most astonishing thing was the
appearance of the group of girls. They all wore plain white slips, upon
which a variety of signs had been painted in prominent letters. Some
costumes advertised baking-powders, others patent medicines, others
soaps, chewing tobacco, breakfast foods, etc. From where they were
seated in full view of the vast audience the girls appeared as a mass of
advertising signs, and the banner above them indicated quite plainly
that these were the "Signs of the Times."

Mr. Hopkins, as he observed this scene, smiled with satisfaction. He
believed some of his friends had prepared this display to assist him and
to disconcert the opposition, for nothing could have clinched his
arguments better than the pretty young girls covered with advertisements
of well known products. Even the Eagle Eye Breakfast Food was well
represented.

After the orchestra had finished a selection, Mr. Hopkins rose to make
the first argument and was greeted with cheers.

"We are having a jolly campaign, my dear friends," he began; "but you
musn't take it altogether as a joke; because, while Mr. Forbes's erratic
views and actions have done little real harm, we have been educated to
an appreciation of certain benefits we enjoy which otherwise might have
escaped our attention.

"This is a progressive, strenuous age, and no section of the country has
progressed more rapidly than this, the Eighth District of our great and
glorious State. I may say without danger of contradiction that the
people I have the honor to represent in the State Legislature, and
expect to have the honor of representing the next term, are the most
intelligent, the most thoughtful and the most prosperous to be found in
any like district in the United States. (Cheers.) Who, then, dares to
denounce them as fools? Who dares interfere with these liberties, who
dares intrude uninvited into their premises and paint out the signs they
have permitted to occupy their fences and barns and sheds? Who would do
these things but an impertinent meddler who is so inexperienced in life
that he sets his own flimsy judgment against that of the people?"

The orator paused impressively to wait for more cheers, but the audience
was silent. In the outskirts of the crowd a faint hissing began to be
heard. It reached the speaker's ear and he hurriedly resumed the
oration.

"I do not say Mr. Forbes is not a good citizen," said he, "but that he
is misguided and unreasonable. A certain degree of deference is due the
young man because he inherited considerable wealth from his uncle,
and--"

Again the hisses began, and Mr. Hopkins knew he must abandon personal
attacks or he would himself be discredited before his hearers. Kenneth
and his supporters sat silent in their places, the three girls, who were
now well known in the district, forming part of the Republican group;
and none of them displayed the least annoyance at the vituperation Mr.
Hopkins had employed.

"I have already called your attention in my circulars," resumed the
speaker, "to the fact that advertising signs are the source of large
income to the farmers of this district. I find that three thousand,
seven hundred and eighty-three dollars have been paid the farmers in the
last five years, without the least trouble or expense on their part; and
this handsome sum of money belongs to them and should not be taken away.
Stop and think for a moment. Advertising is the life of every business,
and to fight successfully the great army of advertisers whose business
is the life-blood of our institutions is as impossible as it is absurd.
Suppose every farmer in this district refused to permit signs upon his
property; what would be the result? Why, the farmers of other sections
would get that much more money for letting privileges, and you would be
that much out of pocket without suppressing the evil--if evil can attach
to an industry that pays you good money without requiring either
investment or labor in return."

After continuing in this strain for some time, Mr. Hopkins announced
that "he would now give way to his youthful and inexperienced opponent,"
and asked the audience to be patient with Mr. Forbes and considerate of
"his extraordinary prejudices."

Hopkins's policy of discrediting his opponent in advance was not very
effective, for when Kenneth arose he was more enthusiastically cheered
than Hopkins had been. The meeting was disposed to be fair-minded and
quite willing to give Mr. Forbes a chance to explain his position.

"The arguments of our distinguished Representative are well worthy of
your consideration," he began, quietly. "It is only by understanding
fully both sides of an argument that you can hope to arrive at a just
and impartial decision. Mr. Hopkins has advocated advertising signs on
the ground that your financial gain warrants permitting them to be
placed upon your premises. I will not deny his statement that three
thousand, seven hundred and eighty-three dollars have been paid the
farmers of this district by advertisers in the last five years. It is
quite likely to be true. I have here the report of the Department of
Agriculture showing that the total amount paid to farmers of the eighth
district in the last five years, for produce of all kinds, is eleven
millions, five-hundred thousand dollars."

A murmur of amazement rose from the audience. Kenneth waited until it
had subsided.

"This seems surprising, at first," he said, "and proves how startling
aggregate figures are. You must remember I have covered five years in
this estimate, as did Mr. Hopkins in his, and if you will figure it out
you will see that the yearly average of earnings is about six hundred
dollars to each farmer. That is a good showing, for we have a wealthy
district; but it is not surprising when reduced to that basis. Mr.
Hopkins slates that the farmers of this district received three
thousand, seven hundred and eighty-three dollars during the last five
years for advertising signs. Let us examine these figures. One-fifth of
that sum is seven hundred and fifty-six dollars and sixty cents as the
income to you per year. We have, in this district, twenty-five hundred
farmers according to the latest reports of the Bureau of Statistics, and
dividing seven hundred and fifty-six dollars and sixty cents by
twenty-five hundred, we find that each farmer receives an average of
thirty and one-quarter cents per year for allowing his fences and
buildings to be smothered in lurid advertising signs. So we find that
the money received by the farmers from the advertising amounts to about
one-quarter of one per cent of their income, a matter so insignificant
that it cannot affect them materially, one way or another.

"But, Mr. Hopkins states that you give nothing in return for this
one-quarter of one per cent, while I claim you pay tremendously for it.
For you sacrifice the privacy of your homes and lands, and lend
yourselves to the selfish desire of advertisers to use your property to
promote their sales. You have been given an example of clean barns and
fences, and I cannot tell you how proud I am of this district when I
ride through it and see neatly painted barns and fences replacing the
flaring and obtrusive advertising signs that formerly disfigured the
highways. Why should you paint advertising signs upon your barns any
more than upon your houses? Carry the thing a step farther, and you may
as well paint signs upon your children's dresses, in the manner you see
illustrated before you."

At this, Louise made a signal and the fifty children so grotesquely
covered with signs rose and stepped forward upon the stage. The
orchestra struck up an air and the little girls sang the following
ditty:

  "Teas and soaps,
  Pills and dopes,
We all must advertise.
  Copper cents,
  Not common sense.
Are the things we prize.
  We confess
  Such a dress
Isn't quite becoming,
  But we suppose
  Hopkins knows
This keeps business humming."

As the girls ceased singing, Kenneth said:

"To the encroaching advertiser these signs of
the times are considered legitimate. There is no
respect for personal privacy on the advertiser's
part. Once they used only the newspapers, the
legitimate channels for advertising. Then they
began painting their advertising on your fences.
When the farmers protested against this the advertisers
gave them a few pennies as a sop to
quiet them. After this they gave you small sums
to paint the broad sides of your barns, your
board fences, and to place signs in your field. If
you allowed them to do so they would paint signs
on the dresses of your children and wives, so
callous are they to all decency and so regardless
of private rights. Look on this picture, my
friends, and tell me, would you prefer to see this--or this?"

At the word each child pulled away the sign-painted
slip and stood arrayed in a pretty gown
of spotless white.

The surprise was so complete that the audience
cheered, shouted and laughed for several minutes
before silence was restored. Then the children
sang another verse, as follows:

  "Now it is clear
  That we appear
Just as we should be;
  We are seen
  Sweet and clean
From corruption free:
  We're the signs
  Of the times--
Fair as heaven's orbs.
  If we look good,
  Then all men should
Vote for Kenneth Forbes!"

The cheering was renewed at this, and Mr. Hopkins became angry. He tried
to make himself heard, but the popular fancy had been caught by the
object lesson so cleverly placed before them, and they shouted: "Forbes!
Forbes! Forbes!" until the Honorable Erastus became so furious that he
left the meeting in disgust.

This was the most impolite thing he could have done, but he vowed that
the meeting had been "packed" with Forbes partisans and that he was
wasting his time in addressing them.

After he was gone Kenneth resumed his speech and created more
enthusiasm. The victory was certainly with the Republican candidate, and
the Elmhurst people returned home thoroughly satisfied with the result
of the "joint debate."




CHAPTER XVI

A CLEW AT LAST


The servants at Elmhurst all ate in a pleasant dining room with windows
facing a garden of geraniums. Tom Gates had been at the house two days
before he encountered Eliza Parsons at the table, for the servants were
not all able to take their meals at the same time.

It was at luncheon, the day of the joint debate at Fairview, that the
young man first met Eliza, who sat opposite him. The only other person
present was old Donald, the coachman, who was rather deaf and never paid
any attention to the chatter around him.

As he took his seat Tom gave a half-frightened glance into Eliza's face
and then turned red as she smiled coquettishly and said:

"Dear me! It's the young man who called me his dear Lucy."

"You--you're very like her," stammered Tom, unable to take his eyes from
her face. "Even now I--I can't believe I'm mistaken."

She laughed merrily in a sweet, musical voice, and then suddenly stopped
with her hand on her heart and cast at him a startled look that was in
such sharp contrast to her former demeanor that he rose from his chair.

"Sit down, please," she said, slowly. And then she studied his face with
sober earnestness--with almost wistful longing. But she shook her head
presently, and sighed; and a moment later had regained her lightness of
manner.

"It's a relief to have a quiet house for a day, isn't it?" she asked,
eating her soup calmly. "I'll be glad when the election's over."

"Have you been here long?" he asked, although Beth had told him of
Eliza's coming to Elmhurst.

"Only a short time. And you?"

"Two days," said he. "But where did you live before you came here?"

She shook her head.

"I wish you would answer me," he begged. "I have a reason for asking."

"What reason?" she demanded, suddenly serious again.

"Two people have never lived that were so near alike as you and Lucy
Rogers."

"Indeed?"

"Will you show me your left arm?"

"No."

She was again studying his face.

"If you are Lucy Rogers you have a scar there--a scar where you burned
yourself years ago."

She seemed frightened for a moment. Then she said:

"I have no scar on my left arm."

"Will you prove it?"

"No. You are annoying me. What did you say your name is?"

"Tom Gates."

She was thoughtful for a moment and then shook her head.

"I have never heard of you," she declared, positively, and resumed her
eating.

Tom was nonplussed. One moment he believed she was Lucy, and the next
told himself that it was impossible. This girl possessed mannerisms that
Lucy had never exhibited in all the years he had known her. She was bold
and unabashed where Lucy was shy and unassuming. This girl's eyes
laughed, while Lucy's were grave and serious; yet they were the same
eyes.

"Let me tell you about my lost Lucy," he said, with a glance at the
unconscious Donald.

"Go ahead, if it will relieve you," she answered, demurely.

"She lived on a farm five miles from here, and she was my sweetheart.
Her mother is blind and her father old and feeble. She worked for a
dentist in the town and was accused of stealing a ring, and it nearly
broke her heart to be so unjustly suspected. In order to make good the
loss of the ring, a valuable diamond--I--I got into trouble, and Lucy
was so shocked and distressed that she--she lost her head--became mad,
you know--and left home during the night without a word to any one. We
haven't been able to find her since."

"That's too bad," remarked Eliza Parsons, buttering her bread.

"About the time that Lucy went away, you appeared at Elmhurst,"
continued Tom. "And in face and form you're the image of my Lucy. That
is why I asked you to tell me where you came from and how you came
here."

"Ah, you think I'm mad, do you?" asked the girl, with a quizzical smile.
"Well, I'm not going to satisfy your curiosity, even to prove my sanity;
and I'm not anxious to pose as your lost Lucy. So please pass the sugar
and try to be sociable, instead of staring at me as if I scared you."

Tom passed the sugar, but he could not eat, nor could he tear himself
away from this strange girl's presence. He tried again to draw her into
conversation, but she showed annoyance and resented his persistence.
Presently she went away, giving him an amused smile as she left the
room--a smile that made him feel that this was indeed a case of mistaken
identity.

In fact, Tom Gates, on sober reflection, knew that the girl could not be
Lucy, yet he could not still the yearning in his heart whenever he saw
her. His heart declared that she was Lucy, and his head realized that
she could not be.

While he waited in the library for Mr. Forbes to return from Fairview a
man was shown into the room and sat down quietly in a corner.

He was a small, lean man, of unassuming appearance, with a thin face and
gray eyes set close together. When he looked at Tom Gates he scarcely
seemed to see him, and his manner conveyed the impression that he
disliked to attract notice.

"Waiting for Mr. Forbes, sir?" asked Tom.

"Yes," was the quiet reply.

Suddenly it struck the young man that this might be the detective who
called every evening to give his report, and if so Tom was anxious to
talk with him. So he ventured to say:

"It's Mr. Burke, isn't it?"

The man nodded, and looked out of the window.

"I'm Tom Gates, sir."

"Yes; I know."

"You've seen me before?" asked the youth, astonished.

"No; I've heard of you. That's all."

Tom flushed, remembering his recent crime. But he was eager to question
the detective.

"Have you heard anything of Lucy Rogers, Mr. Burke?"

"Not yet."

"Is there no trace of her at all?"

"A slight trace--nothing worth mentioning," said Mr. Burke.

For a few moments Tom sat in silence. Then he said:

"I thought I'd found her, day before yesterday."

"Yes?" There was little interest in the tone.

"There's a girl in the house, sir, one of the maids, who is the living
image of Lucy Rogers."

"You ought to be able to identify her," suggested the detective, his
gaze still out of the window.

"But they are not alike except in looks. Her form and face are identical
with Lucy's. I was so sure that I begged her to let me see if there was
a scar on her left arm; but she refused."

"Was there a scar on Lucy Rogers's left arm?"

"Yes, sir. Several years ago, when we were children, we were making
candy in the kitchen and Lucy burned herself badly. It left a broad scar
on her left forearm, which she will bear as long as she lives."

"It is well to know that," said Mr. Burke.

"This girl," continued Tom, musingly, "says her name is Eliza Parsons,
and she says it in Lucy's voice. But her manner is not the same at all.
Eliza laughs at me and quizzes me; she is forward and scornful, and--and
perfectly self-possessed, which Lucy could not be, under the
circumstances."

"Have you seen her closely?" asked the detective.

"Yes, sir."

"And are still unable to decide who she is?"

"That's it, sir; I'm unable to decide. It's Lucy: and yet it isn't
Lucy."

"Who is Eliza Parsons?"

"She refuses to say where she came from. But it seems she arrived at
Elmhurst only a day or two after Lucy disappeared from home. It's that
coincidence that makes me doubt the evidence of my own senses."

"Who hires the servants here?"

"I don't know, sir."

Mr. Burke abandoned the conversation, then, and confined his gaze to the
landscape as it showed through the window. Tom busied himself addressing
circulars of instruction to the Republicans who were to work at the
polling places. This was Saturday, and the election was to be on the
following Tuesday. The meeting at Fairview was therefore the last
important rally of the campaign.

At dusk the party arrived from Fairview in the automobiles, the girls
greatly delighted with the success of the meeting. They all followed
Kenneth into the library, where the butler had just lighted the lamps.
The evenings were getting cool, now, and a grate fire was burning.

Kenneth greeted Mr. Burke and introduced him to the young ladies, who
begged to remain during the interview.

"We are all alike interested in Lucy Rogers, Mr. Burke," said the boy;
"so you may speak freely. Is there any news?"

"Nothing of importance, sir, unless a clew has been found in your own
house," replied the detective.

"Here at Elmhurst?" asked the astonished Kenneth.

"Yes. Tom Gates has seen a girl--one of your maids--who so strongly
resembles Lucy Rogers that he at first believed she was the missing
girl."

"I know," said Beth, quickly. "It's Eliza Parsons. But Tom was mistaken.
He saw her in the dim light of a corridor, and the resemblance confused
him."

"I've seen her since," remarked Tom, "and the likeness is really
bewildering. It's only her manner that is different."

"When I first saw her, before Tom came, I was astonished at her
resemblance to Mrs. Rogers," announced Beth. "I have never seen Lucy,
but I know Mrs. Rogers, and it seemed to me that Eliza was exactly like
her in features. Mr. Forbes and I first saw her riding in a buggy with
Mr. Hopkins. That was before either of us knew she was employed at
Elmhurst. You see she isn't one of the servants who come much in contact
with the family; she does the mending and takes charge of the linen
room."

Beth then related the manner in which they first noticed Eliza, and how
they had discovered her to be a spy in the service of Mr. Hopkins.

The detective was much interested in the recital and seemed surprised
that he had not been informed of this before.

"Of course," said Kenneth, "the girl is not Lucy Rogers. It is not
possible they could be the same."

"Why not?" asked Mr. Burke.

"Well, Lucy was a gentle, sweet country girl, of little experience in
life. Her nature was so susceptible, so very sensitive, that when she
discovered Tom Gates, whom she loved, to be guilty of a forgery, she
worried herself into an attack of brain-fever; or at least she became
insane, reproaching herself for having driven the boy to this dreadful
deed. Under the influence of her mania she wandered away from her home,
and has not been seen since. That's the story of Lucy Rogers. Now look
at Eliza Parsons. She appeared the very day after Lucy's disappearance,
to be sure; but that proves they are not the same person. For Eliza is
not demented. She is a cold, hard woman of the world, in spite of her
tender years. She is doing the work of an experienced spy, while any
deceit was foreign to Lucy's nature. Instead of being plunged in grief
Eliza is happy and gay, reckless of consequences and fully
self-possessed. She is also well and healthy, to all appearances. Taking
all these things into consideration, it is impossible to connect the two
girls in any way--save the coincidence of personal resemblance."

Mr. Burke listened to this quietly, and then shook his head.

"Your arguments all tend to make me suspect that she is Lucy Rogers," he
said, quietly.

For a moment there was an impressive silence, while everyone eagerly,
inquiringly or doubtfully looked at the detective, according to their
diverse acceptance of his statement.

"In pursuance of the task set me," began Mr. Burke, "I had met with such
absolute failure to trace the missing girl that I began to suspect no
ordinary conditions were attached to this case. In my experience, which
covers many years, I have had occasion to study sudden dementia, caused
by shocks of grief or horror, and I have come to comprehend the fact
that the human mind, once unbalanced, is liable to accomplish many
surprising feats. Usually the victim is absolutely transformed, and
becomes the very opposite, in many ways, of the normal personality. I
imagine this is what happened to Lucy Rogers."

"Do you imagine that Lucy would try to deceive _me_, sir?" asked Tom,
reproachfully.

"I am sure she doesn't know who you are," answered the detective,
positively. "She doesn't even know herself. I have known instances where
every recollection of the past was wiped out of the patient's mind."

There was another thoughtful pause, for the detective's assertions were
so astonishing that they fairly overwhelmed his hearers.

Then Louise asked:

"Is such a case of dementia hopeless, Mr. Burke?"

"Not at all hopeless. Often, I admit, it develops into permanent
insanity, but there are many examples of complete recovery. Our first
business must be to assure ourselves that we are right in this
conjecture. I may be entirely wrong, for the unexpected is what I have
been taught to look for in every case of mystery that has come under my
observation. But I believe I have the material at hand to prove the
personality of this Eliza Parsons, and after that I shall know what to
do. Who employs your servants, Mr. Forbes?"

"Martha, my housekeeper, usually employs the maids."

"Will you send for her, please?"

Kenneth at once obeyed the request, and presently Martha entered the
library.

She was a little, withered old woman, but with a pleasant face and
shrewd but kindly eyes.

"Martha," said Kenneth, "did you employ the new linen maid, Eliza
Parsons?"

"Yes, sir," she replied, apparently surprised at the question.

"This is Mr. Burke, Martha. Please answer any questions he may ask you."

"Yes, Master Kenneth."

"Did the girl bring any recommendations?" asked the detective.

Martha reflected.

"I do not think she did, sir."

"Are you accustomed to hiring maids without recommendations?" asked Mr.
Burke.

"Oh, Eliza had a letter from my cousin, Mrs. Hopkins, who lives in
Elmwood."

"Is Mrs. Hopkins your cousin?" asked Kenneth.

"Yes, sir. She were a Phibbs before she married Erastus, and my name is
Phibbs."

"What did the letter from Mrs. Hopkins say?"

"It said she knew Eliza to be a clever and worthy girl, and if I had a
place for her I couldn't do better than take her on. So I needed a linen
maid and Eliza went right to work. Isn't she satisfactory, sir? Has she
been doing anything wrong?"

"No. Please do not mention this interview to her at present, Miss
Phibbs," said the detective. "That is all, I believe."

"Would you like to see Eliza?" asked Kenneth, when the housekeeper had
retired.

"Not at present. I want to interview Mrs. Hopkins first."

"Tonight?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"I will go at once, with Mr. Forbes's permission."

"Certainly, sir," said Kenneth. "Shall we see you tomorrow?"

"Just as soon as I have accomplished anything."

"Would you like a horse or an automobile?"

"Your man may drive me to the town, sir, if it is convenient."

Kenneth gave the required order, and then Mr. Burke asked:

"How far are you prepared to go in this matter, sir?"

"In what way?"

"In expending money."

"Will any large expenditure be required?"

"I cannot say. But we may require the services and advice of an expert
physician--a specialist in brain diseases."

"Do you know of one?" asked Kenneth.

"Yes; but he must be brought from Buffalo. It will be expensive, sir.
That is why I ask if your interest in the girl warrants our going to the
limit to save her."

Kenneth was thoughtful, while the girls looked at him expectantly and
Tom Gates with visible anxiety.

"My original idea was merely to find the missing girl in order to
relieve the anxiety of her blind mother," said young Forbes. "To
accomplish that I was willing to employ your services. But, as a matter
of fact, I have never seen the girl Lucy Rogers, nor am I particularly
interested in her."

"I am," declared Beth.

"And I!"

"And I!" repeated Patsy and Louise.

"I think," said Uncle John, who had been a quiet listener until now,
"that Kenneth has assumed enough expense in this matter."

"Oh, Uncle!" The remonstrance was from all three of the girls.

"Therefore," continued Mr. Merrick, "I propose that I undertake any
further expense that may be incurred, so as to divide the burden."

"That's better!" declared Patsy. "But I might have known Uncle John
would do that."

"You have my authority to wire the physician, if necessary, or to go to
any expense you deem advisable," continued Mr. Merrick, turning to the
detective. "We seem to have undertaken to unravel an interesting
mystery, and we'll see it through to the end."

"Very good, sir," said Mr. Burke, and left them with a brief nod of
farewell.

"Somehow," said Beth, "I've a lot of confidence in that little man."

"Why, he's a detective," replied Uncle John, with a smile, "and the
chief business of detectives is to make mistakes."




CHAPTER XVII

MRS. HOPKINS GOSSIPS


The home of Representative Hopkins was not a very imposing edifice. It
was a modest frame building standing well back in a little yard at the
outskirts of the village, and Mrs. Hopkins did the housework, unaided,
to save the expense of a maid. It never occurred to the politician, who
had risen from the position of a poor stable-boy to one of affluence, to
save his wife from this drudgery. To him poor Mary was merely one of his
possessions, and it would have astonished him to know that her sharp
tongue and irritable temper were due to overwork and neglect. The
Honorable Erastus was not averse to champagne dinners and other costly
excesses while at the state capital, and his fellow legislators
considered him a good fellow, although rather lax in "keeping his end
up." Moreover, he employed a good tailor and was careful to keep up an
appearance of sound financial standing. But his home, which he avoided
as much as possible, had little share in his personal prosperity. Mary
Hopkins's requests for new and decent gowns were more often refused than
acceded to, and he constantly cautioned her to keep down expenses or she
would drive them both to the poor-house.

The woman well knew that Erastus could afford to keep her in luxury, if
he would, but some women are so constituted that they accept their fate
rather than rebel, and Mary Hopkins lived the life of a slave,
contenting herself with petty scoldings and bickerings that did nothing
to relieve her hard lot.

She had little interest in politics and resented the intrusion of the
many who came to the house to see and consult with her husband during
the tiresome political campaigns. On these occasions Mr. Hopkins used
the sitting-room as his office and committee headquarters, but this did
not materially interfere with his wife's comfort, as she was usually
busy in the kitchen.

On this Saturday evening, however, they had an early supper and she
finished her dishes betimes and sat down to darn stockings in the
sitting-room. Erastus had hurried away to a meeting of his henchmen in
the town, and would not be home until after his wife was in bed.

So she was rather surprised when a timid knock sounded upon the door.
She opened it to find a little, lean man standing upon the porch.

"Mrs. Hopkins?" he asked, quietly.

"Yes. What do you want?"

"Your husband asked me to come here and wait for him. It's important or
I wouldn't disturb you."

"Well, then; come in," she replied, tartly. "Thank the Lord this thing
is nearly over, and we'll have a few weeks of peace."

"It is rather imposing on you," remarked the man, following her to the
sitting-room, where he sat down with his hat in his hands. "A political
campaign is trying to everybody. I'm tired out and sick of the whole
thing myself."

"Then why don't you chuck it," she retorted, scornfully, "and go to work
makin' an honest living?"

"Oh, this is honest enough," he said, mildly.

"I don't believe it. All them secret confabs an' trickery to win votes
can't be on the square. Don't talk to me! Politics is another name for
rascality!"

"Perhaps you're right, ma'am; perhaps you're right," he said, with a
sigh.

She looked at him sharply.

"You don't belong in Elmwood."

"No, ma'am; I'm from beyond Fairview. I've come to see your husband on
business."

She sniffed, at that, but picked up her darning and relapsed into
silence. The little man was patient. He sat quietly in his chair and
watched her work.

His mildness disarmed Mary Hopkins. She was not especially averse to
having him sit there. It relieved the loneliness of her occupation. On
occasions she loved to talk, as Erastus had long ago discovered; and
this visitor would not try to shut her up the way Erastus did.

"You don't often get out, ma'am; into society, and such like," ventured
the caller, presently.

"What makes you think that?" she demanded.

"A woman can't keep a house neat and trim like this, and be a social
gadder," he observed.

"You're right about that," she returned, somewhat mollified. "If I was
like them girls up at Elmhurst, fussin' round over politics all the
time, this house would go to rack an' ruin."

"Oh, them!" he said, with mild scorn. "Them girls 'll never be
housekeepers."

"Not for a minute," she affirmed.

There was another pause, then; but the ice was broken. A subtle sympathy
seemed established between the two.

"What do you think of 'Rast's chances?" she asked, presently, as she
threaded new cotton into her needle.

"I guess he'll win. He's worked hard enough, anyhow."

"Has he?"

"Yes; 'Rast's a good worker. He don't leave any stone unturned. He's up
to all the tricks o' the trade, is 'Rast Hopkins!"

Here he began shaking with silent laughter, and Mrs. Hopkins looked at
him curiously.

"What are you laughing at?" she inquired, with a sniff of disdain.

"At--at the way he come it over the gals up at Elmhurst. 'Rast's a
pretty slick one, he is!"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, settin' that 'Liza to watch 'em, and tell all they does. Who'd a
thought of it but 'Rast Hopkins?"

"I don't see anything mighty funny about that," declared Mrs. Hopkins,
contemptuously. "The girl's too pert and forward for anything. I told
'Rast not to fool with her, or she'd make him trouble."

"Did you, now!" exclaimed the man, wonderingly.

"Yes, indeed," said Mrs. Hopkins, pleased to have made an impression. "I
suspected there was something wrong about her the morning she came to
the house here. And she changed her name, too, as brassy as you please."

"Well, I declare!" said the visitor. "Did you know her before that, Mrs.
Hopkins?"

"Why, I didn't exactly know her, but I seen her workin' around Miss
Squiers's place many a time, and she didn't seem to 'mount to much, even
then. One day she stole a di'mond ring off'n old Miss Squiers and dug
out, and I told Nancy then--Nancy's young Miss Squiers--that I'd always
had my suspicions of the hussy. She hid the ring in a vase on the mantle
and they found it after she was gone."

"Well, well! I didn't know that about her," said the man, looking with
admiration at Mrs. Hopkins.

"That's why I told 'Rast not to have any truck with her, when she came
here bright and early one morning and asked for work."

"Oh, she came here, did she?"

"While I was gettin' breakfast. She said her name was Eliza Parsons, an'
she was looking fer a job. I told her I knew her record an' to get out,
and while we was arguin' 'Rast come out and took a hand in the talk. She
laughed and flirted with him outrageous, and said she was a stranger in
these parts, when I'd seen her many a time at Miss Squiers's."

"What was her name then?" asked the man.

"I think it was Rosie--or Lucy, or something--. Anyhow, it wasn't Eliza,
and that I'll swear to. But the girl laughed at me and made such silly
smiles at 'Rast that he told me to shut up, 'cause he had a use for her
in politics."

"Well, well!" repeated the visitor. "Just see how stories get twisted. I
heard you gave the girl a letter to your cousin Martha."

"Well, I did. 'Rast wanted to get her in at Elmhurst, to watch what
Forbes was doing to defeat him, so he made me write the letter. But
how'd you know so much about this girl?" she inquired, with sudden
suspicion.

"Me? I only know what Mr. Hopkins told me. I'm one of his confidential
men. But he never said how he happened to find the girl, or what he knew
about her."

"He didn't know nothing. He'd never seen her 'till that morning when she
came here. But he said she was clever, and she is, if pertness and a
ready tongue counts for cleverness. I suppose he pays her for what she
tells him about Forbes, but he'd better save his money and fight on the
square. I don't like this tricky politics, an' never did."

"I don't either," declared the man. "But I'm in it, and can't get out."

"That's what 'Rast says. But some day they'll put him out, neck and
crop, if he ain't careful."

"Is the girl Eliza much use to him?"

"I can't say. He drove her over to Elmhurst that morning, and he drives
over two or three evenings a week to meet her on the sly and get her
report. That may be politics, but it ain't very respectable, to my
notion."

"Well, the campaign is nearly over, Mrs. Hopkins."

"Thank goodness for that!" she replied.

The visitor sat silent after this, for he had learned all that the poor
gossiping woman could tell him. Finally he said:

"I guess your husband's going to be late."

"Yes; if he ain't more prompt than usual you'll have a long spell of
waiting."

"Perhaps I'd better go over to the hotel and look him up. I have to get
back to Fairview tonight, you know."

"Do as you please," she answered carelessly.

So Mr. Burke, for it was the detective, bade her good-night and took his
leave, and it was not until after he had gone that Mary Hopkins
remembered she had forgotten to ask him his name.

"But it don't matter," she decided. "He's just one o' 'Rast's
politicians, and I probably treated the fellow better than he deserved."




CHAPTER XVIII

ELIZA PARSONS


On Sunday morning Mr. Burke again appeared at Elmhurst, and told Kenneth
he wanted an interview with Eliza Parsons.

"I don't want you to send for her, or anything like that, for it would
make her suspicious," he said. "I'd like to meet her in some way that
would seem accidental, and not startle her."

"That is rather a hard thing to arrange, Mr. Burke," said the boy, with
a smile.

"Why, I think not," declared Louise. "It seems to me quite easy."

"That's the woman of it, sir," laughed Kenneth; "if it's a question of
wits her sex has the advantage of us."

"What do you propose, miss?" asked the detective, turning to Louise.

"I'll have Martha send the girl into the garden to gather flowers," she
replied; "and you can wander around there and engage her in
conversation."

"Excellent!" he exclaimed. "Can this be arranged now?"

"I'll see, sir."

She found Martha and asked her to send Eliza Parsons for some roses and
chrysanthemums, which were in a retired place shut in by evergreen
hedges.

"One of the other maids will know the garden better," suggested the
housekeeper.

"But I wish Eliza to go."

"Very well, Miss Louise."

From an upper window the girl watched until she saw Eliza Parsons leave
the house with a basket and go into the retired garden she had chosen.
Then she returned to the library for Mr. Burke and led him toward the
same place.

"Eliza is just beyond that gap in the hedge," she said, and turned away.

"Wait a moment, please," he said, detaining her. "On second thought I
would like you to come with me, for your tact may be of great
assistance. Have you spoken much with Eliza?"

"Not at all, I think. Beth has talked with her, but I have scarcely been
near her since she came here."

"You are willing to come?"

"I shall be glad to."

"The poet Saxe," said Mr. Burke, walking through the gap beside Louise,
"has never been properly appreciated by his countrymen, although since
his death his verses are in greater demand than while he lived. Do you
care for them?"

"I don't know Saxe very well," she answered, observing that they were
approaching a place where Eliza was bending over a rose-bush. "But one
or two of his poems are so amusing that they linger in my memory."

Eliza turned at the sound of their voices and gave them a quick glance.
But the next moment she resumed her occupation of cutting roses.

"The man's greatest fault was his habit of punning," remarked the
detective, watching the girl's form as he drew nearer. "It is that which
blinded his contemporaries to his real talents. What exquisite roses,
Miss Merrick! May I ask for one for my button-hole?"

"Yes, indeed!" she replied, pausing with him just beside Eliza. "Will
you cut that bud yonder, for Mr. Burke, my dear?"

The maid silently obeyed and as the detective took the flower from her
hand he said:

"Why, isn't this Eliza Parsons?"

"Yes, sir," she replied, carelessly.

"Don't you remember me, Eliza?"

She seemed a little surprised, but answered promptly:

"No, sir."

"I'm William Burke, your mother's cousin. How did you leave your brother
Harry, and have you heard from Josephine lately?"

The girl gave him a startled look and shrank back.

"Why, how nice!" cried Louise. "I did not know you knew Eliza's family,
Mr. Burke."

"Yes, she is one of my relatives, and came from Roanoke, Virginia. Isn't
that correct, Eliza?"

"Yes, sir--no! I--I don't remember!" she said, in a low tone.

"Don't remember, Eliza? That is strange."

The girl stared at him half frightened, and drew her hand over her eyes
with a gesture of bewilderment.

"I hope, my dear, you are not going to be like your mother," said Mr.
Burke, gently. "My poor cousin Nora was subject to a strange lapse of
memory at times," he remarked to Louise. "She always recovered in time,
but for days she could remember nothing of her former life--not even her
own name. Are you ever affected that way Eliza?"

She looked up at him pleadingly, and murmured in a low voice:

"Let me go! Please let me go!"

"In a moment, Eliza."

Her hands were clasped together nervously and she had dropped her basket
and scissors on the path before her. The man looked intently into her
eyes, in a shrewd yet kindly way, and she seemed as if fascinated by his
gaze.

"Tell me, my dear, have you forgotten your old life?" he asked.

"Yes," she whispered.

"Poor girl! And you are trying to keep this a secret and not let anyone
know of your trouble?"

Suddenly she started and sprang away, uttering a cry of terror.

"You're trying to trap me," she panted. "You know my name is not Eliza
Parsons. You--you want to ruin me!"

From the position in which they stood in the corner of the garden, with
high hedges behind the maid, and Mr. Burke and Louise blocking the path
in front, there was little chance of escape. But she looked around
wildly, as if about to make the attempt, when Louise stepped forward and
gently took Eliza's hand in her own.

"Mr. Burke is a good man, my dear, and means well by you," she said in
her sweet, sympathetic tones. "He shall not bother you if you are afraid
of him."

"I--I'm not afraid," said Eliza, with a resumption of her old manner and
a toss of her head.

The detective gave Louise a look which she thought she understood.

"Will you finish cutting these roses, Mr. Burke?" she asked, with a
smile. "Eliza and I are going to my room. Come, my dear," and without
waiting for a reply she led the girl, whose hand was still clasped in
her own, along the path.

Eliza came willingly. Her manner was a little defiant at first, but when
Louise drew her unobserved to the side entrance and up the staircase she
grew gentle and permitted the other girl to take her arm.

Once in her room with the strange maid, Louise locked the door quietly
and said to her companion with a cheerful smile:

"Now we are quite alone, and can talk at our ease. Take that low chair,
dear, and I'll sit here."

Eliza obeyed, looking wistfully into the fair face of her new friend.

"You are very pretty, Eliza; and I'm sure you are as good as you're
pretty," announced Louise. "So you must tell me about yourself, and
whether you are happy here or not. From this time on I'm going to be
your friend, you know, and keep all your secrets; and I'll help you all
I can."

This rambling speech seemed to impress Eliza favorably. She relaxed
somewhat from the tense alertness that was habitual with her, and looked
at the other girl with a softened expression.

"I'm afraid you won't be much interested in me," she replied, "but I
need a friend--indeed I need a friend, Miss Louise!"

"I'm sure you do."

"At first I thought I could do without one. I felt I must stand alone,
and let no one suspect. But--I'm getting puzzled and bewildered, and I
don't know what to do next."

"Of course not. Tell me about it, dear."

"I can't; for I don't know, myself." She leaned forward in her chair and
added, in a whisper: "I don't even know who I am! But that man," with a
shudder, "tried to trap me. He said he knew Eliza Parsons, and there is
no Eliza Parsons. It's a name I--I invented."

"I think I understand," said Louise, with a little nod. "You had to have
a name, so you took that one."

"Yes. I don't know why I am telling you this. I've tried to hide it all
so carefully. And perhaps I'm wrong in letting this thing worry me. In
the main, I've been very happy and content, lately; and--I have a
feeling I was not happy before--before--"

"Before what, dear?"

The girl looked at her steadily and her face grew red.

"Before I lost my memory."

For a few moments they sat silently regarding one another, the
expressive features of Louise showing a silent sympathy.

"Have you really lost your memory?" she asked.

"Absolutely. Think of it! I wakened one morning lying by the roadside,
and shivering with cold. I had on a simple gray dress, with no hat. The
sun was just rising, and no one was near. I examined myself with wonder,
for I had no idea who I was, or how I came there. There was no money in
my pocket, and I had no jewels. To keep warm I began walking along the
road. The scenery was all new to me; so far as I knew I had never been
in the place before.

"The birds were singing and the cows mooed in the meadow. I tried to
sing, too, for my heart was light and gay and I was happy. By and bye I
came to a town; but no one seemed to be awakened because it was yet so
early. As I walked down the street I saw smoke coming from one of the
chimneys, and it suddenly occurred to me that I was hungry. I entered
the yard and went around to the back door. A woman was working in the
kitchen and I laughed joyfully and wished her a good morning. She was
not very pleasant, but it did me good to talk with her; I liked to hear
my own voice and it pleased me to be able to talk easily and well. She
grudgingly gave me something to eat and then bade me begone, calling me
by some strange name and saying I was a thief. It was then that I
invented the name of Eliza Parsons. I don't know why, but it popped into
my head and I claimed it for my name and have clung to it ever since."

"Have you no idea what your real name is?" asked Louise, greatly
interested in this terse relation.

"I have no idea of anything that dates beyond that morning," replied
Eliza. "The first time I looked in the mirror I saw a strange face
reflected there. I had to make my own acquaintance," she added, with one
of her bright laughs. "I suppose I am between seventeen and twenty years
of age, but what my life was during past years is to me a sealed book. I
cannot remember a person I knew or associated with, yet things outside
of my personal life seem to have clung to me. I remembered books I must
have read; I can write, sing and sew--I sew remarkably well, and must
have once been trained to it. I know all about my country's history, yet
I cannot recollect where I lived, and this part of the country is
unknown to me. When I came to Elmhurst I knew all about it and about Mr.
Forbes, but could not connect them with my former life."

"How did you happen to come here?" asked Louise.

"I forgot to tell you that. While I was arguing with the woman, who was
a Mrs. Hopkins, her husband heard us and came out into the kitchen. He
began to question me about myself and I gave any answer that came into
my head, for I could not tell him the truth. It pleased me to hear my
voice, I seemed to have a keen sense of the humorous, and if I said
anything at all clever, I laughed as heartily as anyone. My heart was
light and free from all care. I had no worries or responsibilities at
all. I was like the birds who see the sunshine and feel the breeze and
are content to sing and be happy.

"Mr. Hopkins saw I was wholly irresponsible and reckless, and he decided
to use me to spy upon the people here at Elmhurst and report to him what
they said and did. I agreed to this readily, prompted by a spirit of
mischief, for I cared nothing for Hopkins and had nothing against Mr.
Forbes. Also Hopkins paid me money, which I had sufficient knowledge to
realize was necessary to me.

"Oh, how happy and gay I was in those first few days! There was not a
thought of the past, not an ambition or desire of any sort to bother me.
Just to live seemed pleasure enough. I enjoyed eating and sleeping; I
loved to talk and laugh; I was glad to have work to occupy me--and
that was all! Then things began to happen that puzzled me. The man
Hopkins declared he could not trust me because I had once been a thief,
and I wondered if he could speak truly. I resented the thought that I
may once have been a thief, although I wouldn't mind stealing, even now,
if I wanted anything and could take it."

"Oh, Eliza!" gasped Louise.

"It sounds wicked, doesn't it? But it is true. Nothing seems to
influence me so strongly as my own whims. I know what is good and what
is bad. I must have been taught these things once. But I am as likely to
do evil as good, and this recklessness has begun, in the last few days,
to worry me.

"Then I met a young man here--he says his name is Tom Gates--who called
me his dear Lucy, and said I used to love him. I laughed at him at
first, for it seemed very absurd and I do not want him to love me. But
then he proved to me there was some truth in his statement. He said his
Lucy had a scar on her left arm, and that made me afraid, because I had
discovered a scar on my own arm. I don't know how it got there. I don't
know anything about this old Lucy. And I'm afraid to find out. I'm
afraid of Lucy."

"Why, dear?"

"I cannot tell. I only know I have a horror of her, a sudden shrinking
whenever her name is mentioned. Who was she, do you suppose?"

"Shall I tell you?" asked Louise.

"No--no! Don't, I beg of you!" cried Eliza, starting up. "I--I can't
bear it! I don't want to know her."

The protest was passionate and sincere, and Louise marvelled at the
workings of this evidently unbalanced intellect.

"What would you like to do, dear?" she inquired.

"I'd like to remain Eliza Parsons--always. I'd like to get away from
_her_--far away from anyone who ever heard of that dreadful Lucy who
frightens me so. Will you help me to get away, to escape to some place
where no one will ever be able to trace me?"

"Do you think you would be happy then?"

"I am sure of it. The only thing that makes me unhappy now is the horror
that this past life will be thrust upon me. I must have had a past, of
course, or I shouldn't be a grown woman now. But I'm afraid of it; I
don't want to know anything about it! Will you help me to escape?"

She looked eagerly at Louise as she asked this pitiful question, and the
other girl replied, softly: "I will be your friend, Eliza. I'll think
all this over, and we will see what can be done. Be patient a little
while and as soon as I find a way to free you from all this trouble I'll
send for you, and we'll talk it over together."

"Will you keep my secret?" demanded Eliza, uneasily.

Louise glanced at the door that communicated with Beth's room. It stood
open, but Eliza had not noticed that, as it was behind her. Just now a
shadow cast from the other room wavered an instant over the rug, and
Louise's quick eyes caught it.

"I promise to keep your secret, dear," she said earnestly.

The two girls rose and stood facing each other. Louise kissed the
beautiful Eliza and whispered:

"Here is one thing for you to remember--that we are always to be true
friends, from this time forward. If anyone annoys you, come to me, and I
will protect you."

"Thank you, Miss Louise," said Eliza, and then she went away to her own
room in a quieter and more thoughtful mood than usual.

When she had gone Louise ran to the door communicating with Beth's room,
and to her satisfaction found both her cousins, with Kenneth, Uncle John
and Mr. Burke, seated in a group where they must have overheard all that
had been said.

"Well!" she cried, eagerly, "did you hear? And what do you think of it
all?"

"It's Lucy Rogers, sure enough," said Kenneth.

Louise looked at Mr. Burke.

"It is the most singular case that has ever come under my observation,"
stated that gentleman. "The girl is perfectly sane, but she has suffered
a strange lapse of memory. I have two alternatives to advise. One is to
telegraph at once for a specialist. The other is to permit the girl to
go away, as she suggests. She will be happier to do so, I am sure."

"Oh, no!" cried the girls.

"She owes a duty to her parents and friends, as well as to herself,"
said Kenneth, "and I see no reason why she should be unhappy in the
future as Lucy Rogers."

Mr. Burke merely shrugged his shoulders.

"Please wire for the specialist at once," said Uncle John.




CHAPTER XIX

PATSY INDULGES IN EAVESDROPPING


Miss Patricia Doyle awakened at daybreak next morning with a throbbing
toothache. She wasn't accustomed to such pains and found it hard to
bear. She tried the application of a hot-water bag, and the tooth ached
harder; she tried a cold compress, and it jumped with renewed activity.
So she dressed herself and walked the floor, with the persistent ache as
an intimate companion.

She tried to find a cavity in the tooth, but it seemed perfectly sound.
Evidently she had caught cold and the wicked molar was signaling the
fact.

To be patient under the torture of a toothache was a virtue Patsy did
not possess. Louise and Beth, to whom she appealed, were sorry for her,
but could not relieve the pain. After breakfast Uncle John ordered her
to drive to town and see a dentist.

"Have it pulled, or filled, or something," he said. "The dentist will
know what to do."

So James drove Patsy to town, where they arrived about nine o'clock this
Monday morning. The only dentist at Elmwood was Dr. Squiers, so the girl
ran up the flight of stairs to his office, which was located over the
hardware store.

The pain had eased on the journey, and now the thought of having the
offending tooth pulled was weighing heavily upon Patsy's mind. The door
of Dr. Squiers's office stood ajar, and she hesitated whether to enter
or not.

The dentist's reception room was divided from his operating room by a
thin wooden partition, and as Patsy was deciding whether to employ Dr.
Squiers's services or not she heard high words coming from behind the
partition, and the voice was that of the Honorable Erastus Hopkins.

Softly she slid into the outer room and sank into a chair.

"But you're the clerk of the election, Squiers; you can't deny that,"
Hopkins was saying in a blustering, imperious voice.

"That's true enough," answered the dentist, more calmly.

"Then you've got the registration books in your possession."

"I admit that," was the reply. "But you're asking me to incriminate
myself, 'Rast. If the thing was discovered it would mean prison for both
of us."

"Fiddlesticks!" cried the irascible Hopkins. "These things are done
every day, and no one's the wiser for it. It's merely a part of the
political game."

"I'm afraid, 'Rast," said Dr. Squiers. "Honest Injun, I'm afraid."

"What are you 'fraid of? I've got the other clerks all fixed, and
they'll stand by us. All you need do is to add these sixty-six names to
the registration list, and then we'll vote 'em without opposition and
win out."

Patsy gave a gasp, which she tried to stifle. The toothache was all
forgotten.

"Where are these men?" inquired Dr. Squiers, thoughtfully.

"They're over at the mill. Marshall got 'em from all over the country,
and they'll be set to work today, so everything will seem reg'lar."

"Where do they sleep and eat?" inquired the doctor.

"Forty sleep in Hayes's barn, and the other twenty-six in the stock loft
over the planing mill. Marshall's got a commissary department and feeds
'em regular rations, like so many soldiers. Of course I'm paying for all
this expense," acknowledged Mr. Hopkins, somewhat regretfully.

"And do you suppose these sixty-six votes will turn the scale?" asked
Dr. Squiers.

"They're sure to. We finished the last canvass yesterday, and according
to our figures Forbes has about eighteen votes the best of us. That's
getting it down pretty close, but we may as well make up our minds we're
beaten if we don't vote the men over at the mill. Marshall could have
got me a hundred if necessary, but sixty-six is more than enough. Say
Forbes has twice eighteen for his plurality, instead of eighteen; these
sixty-six for me would wipe that out and let us win in a walk."

When Hopkins ceased there was a brief silence. Perhaps Dr. Squiers was
thinking.

"I simply _must_ have those votes, Doc," resumed the Representative.
"It's the only way I can win."

"You've made a bungle of the whole campaign," said Squiers, bitterly.

"That's a lie. I've done a lot of clever work. But these infernal city
girls came down here and stirred up all the trouble."

"You made a mistake pushing that sign issue. The girls beat you on
that."

"If it hadn't been signs it might have been something worse. But I ain't
beaten yet, Doc. Squiers. This deal is going to win. It's a trick the
boarding-school misses won't understand until after they've cut their
eye-teeth in politics."

"There's a pretty heavy penalty against false registration," observed
the dentist, gloomily.

"There's no penalty unless we're found out, and there ain't the ghost of
a chance of that. The books are in your hands; I got all the clerks
fixed. Not a question will even be raised. I know it. Do you suppose I'd
risk state's prison myself, if I wasn't sure?"

"Look here, 'Rast," said Squiers, doggedly, "you're making a tool of me
in this campaign. Why should I be used and abused just to elect Erastus
Hopkins, I'd like to know. You sacrificed me when I might have been
Sheriff."

"You're well paid for that, Doc."

"And now you want me to put my neck in a noose for your advantage. I
won't do it, 'Rast, and that's a fact."

Mr. Hopkins coughed.

"How much, Doc?" he inquired.

The dentist was silent.

"State the figure. But for mercy's sake don't bleed me any more than you
can help. This fight has cost me a pretty penny already."

"I don't want your money," growled Squiers.

"Yes you do, Doc. I know you better than you know yourself. The trouble
with you is, you'll want too much."

Squiers laughed bitterly.

"Is Marshall to be trusted?" he asked.

"Of course. If he said a word he'd lose his job as manager. Marshall's
all right. There's nothing to worry about, Doc."

Patsy's tooth wasn't aching a bit. But her heart was throbbing as madly
as the tooth ever did, and fortunately there was no pain connected with
the throbbing--only joy.

"It ought to be worth two thousand dollars, 'Rast," said the dentist.

"What! In addition to all other expenses?"

"Why, man; it means the election. It means your whole future. If you're
defeated now, you're a back number in this district, and you know it."

"It's too much, Doc. On my word it is."

"It's too little, come to think of it. I'll make it three thousand."

"Doc!"

"If you don't close with me, 'Rast, by the jumping Jupiter, I'll make it
four thousand," cried the dentist, with exasperation.

"Say twenty-five hundred, Doc."

"Right on the nail. Give me your check here--this minute."

"And you'll enter the names in the books?"

"Before you leave the office. Have you got the list?"

"Yes; in my pocket," said Mr. Hopkins.

"Then make out your check and I'll get the books."

There was a stir behind the partition and a sound of chairs scraping the
floor. Patsy slid out the door and flew down the stairs at the imminent
danger of breaking her neck. James was seated in the buggy outside,
engaged in rumination.

Patsy bounded in beside him and startled him.

"Drive for your life!" she cried. "Drive for home!"

He whipped up the spirited horse and they dashed away. Presently the man
asked, with a grin:

"Did it hurt much, Miss Patsy?"

"Did what hurt, James?"

"The tooth pullin', Miss Patsy."

"The tooth wasn't pulled," answered the girl, sweetly. "It didn't need
it, James. The only thing that was pulled was the Honorable Erastus's
leg."




CHAPTER XX

PRICKING A BUBBLE.


When Patsy arrived home she called a council of war and related the
conversation she had overheard in the dentist's office.

"It isn't a very nice thing to do--listening to a private conversation,"
said the girl, "but when I discovered they were going to play such a
trick on Kenneth I couldn't help eavesdropping."

"I think you were justified," declared Mr. Watson, with a grave face;
"for this matter is very serious indeed. Tomorrow is election day, and
if a toothache hadn't carried you to the dentist's office Kenneth would
surely have been defeated."

"And we'd never have known how it happened," declared Uncle John.

"But can the plot be foiled at this late date?" inquired Louise,
anxiously.

"I think so," said Mr. Watson. "Dr. Squiers was correct in saying that
such a crime was a state's prison offense. Our discovery of it will send
both Erastus Hopkins and Dr. Squiers to prison. Probably Mr. Marshall,
the manager of the mill, will go with them."

"Oh, I don't like that!" exclaimed Patsy.

"Nor do I," added Kenneth. "It would be a sad beginning to my political
career to send three such men to prison. I'd like to avoid it, if I
can."

"Perhaps it may be quietly arranged," said the lawyer. "If they knew you
had discovered the false registration of these men, they would never
dare vote them."

"How would it be to send Mr. Burke, the detective, over to the mill to
talk with Mr. Marshall?" suggested Beth.

"That is an excellent plan, and would be very effective in determining
the manager to abandon the plot."

"I'll go and see Hopkins myself," announced Uncle John. "I know how to
manage men of his sort."

"Very good," approved the lawyer, "and I'll see Squiers."

"If you do," said Patsy, "just ask him to sign a paper saying that Lucy
Rogers was falsely accused of stealing the ring, and that his mother
found it in a vase, where she had forgotten she put it."

"I'll do that," replied Mr. Watson. "And I'll get the sixty dollars back
that Tom Gates paid him. I'll make it a condition of our agreeing not to
prosecute the man."

"It looks as if we were going to win the election," said Uncle John in a
pleased voice. "If Hopkins was driven to such methods as stuffing
ballot-boxes, he must know very well he's defeated."

"He acknowledged it to Dr. Squiers." said Patsy, gaily. "We have
eighteen sure majority, and perhaps more."

"It's likely to be more," predicted Uncle John.

"I suppose congratulations are in order, Ken," said Louise.

"Not yet, cousin," he replied. "Wait until tomorrow night; and then
don't congratulate me, but the campaign managers--three of the nicest
and cleverest girls in existence!"

"You're right, my boy," declared Uncle John. "If you pull through and
take your seat in the Legislature, you'll owe it all to these girls."

"That is true," smiled the lawyer. "Kenneth was badly beaten when you
arrived."

Of course our girls were very happy at receiving this praise, but more
pleased to realize they had actually been of service to their boy
friend. They believed that Kenneth would prove a good Representative and
carry out his promises to the voters; and if he did, that his political
career was assured.

Mr. Burke appeared in the afternoon with a telegram from Dr. Hoyt, the
specialist, saying that he would be at Elmwood on the noon train
Wednesday. His engagements prevented him from coming any sooner, and in
the meantime Mr. Burke advised keeping a close watch on Eliza Parsons,
to see that she did not run away.

"I'll attend to that," said Louise, quickly. "Eliza and I are friends,
and I'll take care of her."

"Aren't you going to the polls?" asked Patsy.

"No, dear; why should I go? Our work is done now, isn't it?"

"Well, I'm going to the polls and work for every vote," declared Patsy.
"I shan't be happy unless Kenneth gets more than eighteen majority."

When the Hopkins plot was explained to Mr. Burke, the detective readily
agreed to go to Fairview and see Mr. Marshall. As no time was to be lost
he was sent over in an automobile, and arrived at the mill just before
the hour for closing.

The next day being election day the mill was to be closed, and the
manager was very busy in his office when Mr. Burke requested to see him.

"You will have to come around Wednesday," said Marshall, fussily. "I
can't attend to you now."

"I'm sorry to disturb you, sir," replied the detective, "but my business
won't wait until Wednesday."

"What is it about, sir?"

"About the election."

"Then I won't be bothered. The election doesn't interest me," said Mr.
Marshall, turning away.

"Very well, I'll call Wednesday, sir, at the jail."

Marshall gave him a quick look.

"Who are you, sir?" he asked.

"John Burke, a detective."

The manager hesitated a moment.

"Come in, Mr. Burke," he said.

"I represent the Forbes interests," said the detective, seating himself
in the private office, "and it has come to our notice that Dr. Squiers
has permitted sixty-six fraudulent registrations to be entered on the
books. These sixty-six men are supposed to have been imported by you and
are now working at this mill."

"This is all nonsense!" protested the manager, growing pale.

"Forty men are sleeping in a near-by barn, and twenty-six in the
stock-room of the mill," added Mr. Burke.

"That isn't criminal, sir."

"No, indeed. The criminal act is their false registration, so far," said
the detective, blandly.

"But mark you, sir; if an attempt is made to vote those men tomorrow, I
shall arrest you, as well as Mr. Hopkins and Dr. Squiers."

"This is preposterous, sir!" blustered the manager. "There will be no
attempt made to vote them."

"I am quite sure of it," was the reply. "You may thank Mr. Forbes for
warning you in time. He wished to save you, and so sent me here."

"Oh, he did!" Mr. Marshall was evidently surprised. "May I ask how you
discovered all this?" he added.

"I am not at liberty to give you the details. But I may say the exposure
of the plot occurred through Mr. Hopkins's own carelessness. I've seen
lots of crooked politicians, Mr. Marshall, but this man is too reckless
and foolish ever to be a success. He deserves to be defeated and he will
be."

The manager was thoughtful.

"This is all news to me," he declared. "I needed these extra men to help
me fill a contract on time, and so employed them. I had no idea Hopkins
and Squiers would try to vote them tomorrow."

This was a palpable falsehood, but Mr. Burke accepted the lame excuse
without question.

"You are a valuable man in this community, Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Forbes
seemed to think the Hopkins people were trying to get you into trouble.
Of course it would have caused trouble had these men voted."

"Of course, Mr. Burke. I'm much obliged to Mr. Forbes for warning me."

"You'll find the next Representative a very agreeable man to get along
with, Mr. Marshall. Good day, sir."

"Good day, Mr. Burke."

When the detective had gone Mr. Marshall sat in a brown study for a few
moments. Then he summoned his superintendent and said:

"Please ask the men to assemble in the yard before they go home. I want
to have a word with them."

The request came just in time, for the men were already beginning to
stream out of the mill. They waited good-naturedly, however, grouping
themselves in the big yard.

Then Marshall mounted a lumber pile and addressed them briefly.

"Boys," he said, "I told you all, a week or so ago, I'd like you to vote
for Hopkins for Representative, as I believed his election would result
in more work for the mill and better wages for the employees. But I've
been watching matters pretty closely, and I've changed my mind. Forbes
is a coming man, and he'll do more for us all than Hopkins could. So
every man who is entitled to vote will please me best by voting for
Kenneth Forbes."

There was a cheer at this, and when it subsided, the manager continued:

"Of course none of the new men, who were not properly registered, have a
right to vote at this election, and I command them to keep away from the
polls. Anyone who attempts to vote illegally will be promptly arrested."

This caused more cheering, for the workmen had suspected that the new
hands would be voted illegally, and they were relieved to find that it
was a "square deal all 'round," as one of them remarked with
satisfaction.

Meantime, Uncle John was having a "barrel of fun" with Mr. Hopkins.

The little millionaire, although a man of simple and unobtrusive ways,
was a shrewd judge of human nature. Moreover he had acquired a fund of
experience in dealing with all sorts of people, and was delighted to
meet Mr. Hopkins under the present circumstances.

So he drove over to Elmwood and was fortunate to find Mr. Hopkins in his
"office" at home where he was busily engaged instructing his "workers"
in their duties at the polls.

At sight of Mr. Merrick, whom he knew by this time to be a friend of
Kenneth Forbes, staying at Elmhurst, the politician scented some pending
difficulty, or at least an argument, and was sufficiently interested to
dismiss his men without delay.

"Ah, this is Mr. Merrick, I believe," began Mr. Hopkins, suavely. "What
can I do for you, sir?"

"Considerable, if you're disposed," answered the other. "For one thing
I'd like to hire Eliza Parsons away from you."

"Eliza Parsons!" gasped the Representative.

"Yes, your spy. Election's about over and you won't need her any longer,
will you?"

"Sir, do you mean to insult me?" asked the Honorable Erastus,
indignantly.

"By no means. I thought you were through with the girl," said Uncle John
with a chuckle.

Mr. Hopkins was distinctly relieved. With a full recollection of his
wicked schemes in his mind, he had feared some more important attack
than this; so he assumed a virtuous look, and replied:

"Sir, you wrong me. Eliza Parsons was no spy of mine. I was merely
trying to encourage her to a higher spiritual life. She is rather
flighty and irresponsible, sir, and I was sorry for the poor girl. That
is all. If she has been telling tales, they are untrue. I have found
her, I regret to say, inclined at times to be--ah--inventive."

"Perhaps that's so," remarked Uncle John, carelessly. "You're said to be
a good man, Mr. Hopkins; a leetle too honest and straightforward for a
politician; but that's an excusable fault."

"I hope I deserve my reputation, Mr. Merrick," said Erastus,
straightening up at this praise. "I do, indeed, try to live an upright
life."

"I guess so, Mr. Hopkins, I guess so. You wouldn't try, for instance, to
encourage false registration."

"Sir!"

"Anything wrong, Mr. Hopkins?" asked Uncle John, innocently.

Erastus looked at his visitor tremblingly, although he tried to control
his nerves. Of course Mr. Merrick couldn't mean anything by this chance
shot, so he must be thrown off the scent.

"You have a disagreeable way of making remarks, sir, and I have no time
to listen to foolish speeches. Tomorrow is election day and I've a good
many details yet to arrange."

"No chance of you're getting in jail, is there?"

"What do you mean by that?"

"I only thought that if you'd done anything liable to make trouble,
you'd have to arrange your affairs for a long spell in jail. Politicians
sometimes make mistakes. But you're such an honest man, Mr. Hopkins, you
couldn't possibly go crooked."

Mr. Hopkins felt shaky again, and looked at his tormentor earnestly,
trying to discern whether there was any real knowledge beneath this
innuendo. But Uncle John met his gaze with a cheerful smile and
continued:

"I guess you've got a hard fight ahead of you. My young friend Forbes is
trying to get elected himself, and you can't both win."

"Oh, yes; Forbes," said Erastus, trying to regain his accustomed ease.
"A worthy young man, sir; but I'm afraid his chances are slim."

"Are they, now?" asked Uncle John, pretending a mild interest.

"Pretty thin, Mr. Merrick. Our majority is too great to overcome."

"What do you think your majority will be? About sixty-six?"

Mr. Hopkins gave a start and turned red.

"About sixty-six," he repeated, vacantly, trying to decide if this was
another chance shot.

"Yes; about sixty-six mill hands."

The cat was out of the bag now. Hopkins realized that Merrick had some
knowledge or at least suspicion of this plot. He tried to think what to
do, and it occurred to him that if his visitor positively knew anything
he would not act in this absurd manner, but come straight to the point.
So he ignored the speech, merely saying:

"Anything else, sir?"

"No," replied Uncle John; "I'll go home, I guess. Folks'll be expecting
me. Sorry Forbes hasn't got that sixty-six mill hands; but Doc. Squiers
probably registered 'em all right, and they'll probably vote for
Hopkins."

"Wait a moment, sir!" cried Erastus, as Uncle John was turning away.
"That speech demands an explanation, and I mean to have it."

"Oh, you do? Well, I don't object. You may not know it, but Squiers has
registered sixty-six non-voters, and I want to know whether you're
prepared to give half of them to Forbes, or mean to keep them all for
yourself."

"If Squiers has made false registrations he must stand the consequences.
I want you to understand, sir, that I do not countenance any underhand
dealing."

"Then it's all off? You won't vote the mill hands?"

"Not a man shall vote who is not properly registered."

"I'm glad to hear it, Mr. Hopkins. Perhaps you can get that twenty-five
hundred back. I don't think Squiers has cashed the check yet."

The Honorable Erastus gave a roar like a wild bull, but Uncle John had
walked quietly out and climbed into his buggy. He looked back, and
seeing Mr. Hopkins's scowling face at the window returned a pleasant
smile as he drove away.

Mr. Watson had just finished his interview with the dentist when Uncle
John picked him up at the corner. The lawyer had accomplished more than
the other two, for he had secured a paper exonerating Lucy Rogers and
another incriminating the Honorable Erastus Hopkins, as well as the
sixty dollars paid by Tom Gates. The dentist was thoroughly frightened,
but determined, now that the conspiracy was defeated, that the man who
had led him to the crime should not escape in case he was himself
arrested. So he made a plain statement of the whole matter and signed
it, and Mr. Watson assured Squiers immunity from arrest, pending good
behavior. The man had already cashed Hopkins's check, and he knew the
Representative could not get the money away from him, so after all the
dentist lost nothing by the exposure.

It was a jolly party that assembled at the dinner-table in Elmhurst that
evening.

"You see," explained Uncle John, "the thing looked as big as a balloon
to us at first; but it was only a bubble, after all, and as soon as we
pricked it--it disappeared."




CHAPTER XXI

THE "RETURNS" FROM FAIRVIEW


Election day dawned sunny and bright; but there was a chill in the air
that betokened the approach of winter.

Uncle John had suggested serving coffee to the voters at the different
polling places, and Kenneth had therefore arranged for a booth at each
place, where excellent coffee was served free all day long. These booths
were decorated with Forbes banners and attracted a great deal of
comment, as the idea was a distinct innovation in this district.

"You wouldn't catch Hopkins giving anything away," remarked one farmer
to another. "'Rast is too close-fisted."

"Why, as fer that," was the reply, "the thing is done to catch votes.
You know that as well as I do."

"S'pose it is," said the first speaker. "I'd ruther my vote was caught
by a cup of hot coffee on a cold day, than by nothin' at all. If we've
got to bite anyhow, why not take a hook that's baited?"

Patsy and Beth made the rounds of the polling places in an automobile
covered with flags and bunting, and wherever they appeared they were
greeted with cordial cheers.

Mr. Hopkins was noticeable by his absence, and this was due not so much
to his cowardice as to an unfortunate accident.

Neither Squiers nor Hopkins knew just how their secret had leaked out,
for Patsy's presence in the dentist's office had not been disclosed; so
each one suspected the other of culpable foolishness if not downright
rascality. After Uncle John's visit Erastus stormed over to Squiers's
office and found his accomplice boiling with indignation at having been
trapped in a criminal undertaking.

As the two men angrily faced each other they could not think of any
gentle words to say, and Dr. Squiers became so excited by the other's
reproaches that he indulged in careless gestures. One of these gestures
bumped against the Honorable Erastus's right eye with such force that
the eye was badly injured.

The candidate for re-election, therefore, wakened on election morning
with the damaged optic swollen shut and sadly discolored. Realizing that
this unfortunate condition would not win votes, Mr. Hopkins remained at
home all day and nagged his long-suffering spouse, whose tongue was her
only defence.

The Representative had promptly telephoned to Marshall at Fairview
telling him not to vote the men as arranged. He was not especially
charmed with the manager's brief reply:

"Don't be alarmed. We're not _all_ fools!"

"I guess, 'Rast," remarked Mary Hopkins, looking at her damaged and
irritable husband with a blending of curiosity and contempt, "that
you're 'bout at the end of your rope."

"You wait," said Erastus, grimly. "This thing ain't over yet."

The day passed very quietly and without any especial incident. A full
vote was polled, and by sundown the fate of the candidates had been
decided. But the counting seemed to progress slowly and the group
assembled around the telephone in Kenneth's library thought the returns
would never arrive.

The Republican Committee had given Mr. Forbes a table showing what the
vote of each precinct should be, according to their canvass.

The first report was from Elmwood, and showed a gain of seventeen over
the estimate. Patsy was delighted, for she had worked hard in Elmwood,
and this proved that her efforts had been successful. Then came a report
from Longville, in Jefferson County. It showed a gain of forty-three
votes for Hopkins, and a consequent loss for Forbes. This was a
startling surprise, and the next advice from a country precinct in
Washington County showed another gain of twelve for Hopkins.

The little group of workers looked at one another with inquiring eyes,
and Patsy could hardly refrain from crying.

The butler announced dinner, but only Louise and Mr. Watson could eat
anything. The others were too intent on learning their fate and could
not leave the telephone.

It seemed queer that the precincts furthest away should be first to
respond, but so it was. Jefferson County returns began to come in
rapidly, and were received in dismal silence. Hopkins gained four here,
seven there, and twenty-two in another precinct.

"It looks," said Kenneth, quietly, "like a landslide for Hopkins, and I
wonder how our Committee was so badly informed."

"You see," said Uncle John, "voters won't usually tell the truth about
how they've decided to vote. Lots of them tell both sides they're going
to vote their way. And people change their minds at the last minute,
too. You can't do much more than average the thing by means of a
canvass."

By nine o'clock, complete returns from the part of Jefferson County
included in the Eighth District showed a net gain of one hundred and
eight for Hopkins--a lead that it seemed impossible to overcome.
Washington County was not so bad. Incomplete returns indicated a slight
gain for Hopkins, but not more than a dozen votes altogether.

"Everything now depends upon Dupree and Fairview," announced Kenneth,
"but I can't get any connection with them yet. We won in Elmwood,
anyhow, and Hopkins isn't ahead more than a hundred and sixty as the
thing stands now. Cheer up, girls. A defeat won't hurt us much, for
we've all made a good fight. Better get to bed and sleep, for you're
tired out. We'll know all about everything in the morning."

But they would not move. Disappointment unnerved them more than victory
would have done. They resolved to wait until the last returns were in.

"Telephone, sir," said Tom Gates.

Kenneth picked up the receiver.

"Here's Dupree," he said. "Our majority over Hopkins is two hundred and
eleven. Let's see, that's a gain of seventy-four votes, my dears."

"Hooray!" cried Patsy, delightedly. "I don't care a rap now, what
happens. Old Hopkins won't have much to crow over if--"

"Wait a minute," said Kenneth. "Here's Fairview, at last!"

They held their breaths and watched his face. Kenneth flushed red as he
held the receiver to his ear, and then grew white. He turned around to
the expectant group and Beth knew from the sparkle in his eyes what had
happened.

"Fairview's six precincts give us six hundred and forty-one majority,"
announced the boy, in an awed tone. "That's a gain of nearly four
hundred!"

They gazed at him in silent wonder. Then Uncle John rose slowly and took
the boy's hand.

"That means we've won--and won in a walk," said the little man.
"Kenneth, we congratulate you."

Patsy's face was buried in her handkerchief, and Beth's great eyes were
bright with unshed tears. But Louise laughed her soft, musical laugh and
remarked:

"Why, I knew all the time we would win. We had the better candidate, you
see."

"And the best campaign managers," added Uncle John, with a proud smile.

"That may be true," admitted Beth. "But the thing that really won the
fight was Patsy's sore tooth."




CHAPTER XXII

THE AWAKENING


James and Mr. Burke met the great specialist in brain diseases at the
noon train on Wednesday and drove him to Elmhurst.

Dr. Hoyt was a handsome, gray-haired man, with kindly eyes and a
distinguished manner. When he was ushered into the library the young
ladies were attracted by the physician at once, and from the first
glance were inspired by confidence in his powers. Yet Dr. Hoyt spoke
rather doubtfully of the case in hand.

"These cases are not so rare as you might suppose," he said; "yet no two
of them are exactly alike. Usually the recovery is slow and tedious; but
recovery is not always assured. In some instances, however, the memory
is absolutely restored, and from what Mr. Burke has explained to me of
Lucy Rogers's history this is what we may expect now. Or else, we must
trust to time or an accident to awaken her dormant mental faculties. The
case is so interesting that I should like, with your permission, to make
an experiment which can result in no harm if it does not succeed."

"We put the matter entirely in your hands, sir," said Uncle John. "Act
as you think best."

"I thank you," replied Dr. Hoyt, bowing. Then he turned to the girls.
"Which of you young ladies has won the friendship of Lucy Rogers?" he
asked.

Louise answered that she and Eliza Parsons had become good friends.

"Will you assist me?" asked the physician.

"Willingly, sir."

"I wish to send the girl into a deep sleep, to render her unconscious
without her suspecting my intention, or realizing the fact. Can you
suggest a way to do this?"

Louise tried to think.

"What means will you employ, sir?" she asked.

"There are many ways to accomplish this. I prefer to administer a
powerful sleeping potion. Have you any confectionery or bon-bons at
hand?"

"Yes, indeed. I have just received a fresh box of bon-bons from New
York. But I'm not sure I can induce Eliza to eat candy."

"Then let us prepare the potion in various ways. But you must be
careful, Miss Merrick, not to make a mistake and take the dose
yourself."

Louise laughed.

"I'll be careful, sir," she promised.

The two then retired to perfect their plan, and in an hour every
arrangement was complete.

Louise went to her room, donned a wrapper, and bandaged her head. Then
she summoned Martha and asked the housekeeper to send Eliza Parsons to
sit with her in the darkened room, as she was suffering from a headache.

The maid came at once, to all appearances, as happy and careless as
ever. After expressing her sympathy she asked what she could do.

"Just sit down and keep me company, dear," replied Louise. "I'm not very
bad, but I'm restless and can't sleep, and I want you to talk to me and
amuse me."

Eliza laughed.

"That is easy, as far as talking is concerned," she said. "But to amuse
you, Miss Louise, may be more difficult."

But the girls found a topic of conversation in the election, in which
Eliza was much interested, and they chatted together for an hour or so
before Louise made any move to consummate her plot.

"I hope my foolish reports to Mr. Hopkins did no harm to Mr. Forbes,"
Eliza was saying. "I really had little to tell him of your conversation
or movements."

"You did no harm at all, for Mr. Forbes was elected," replied Louise.
Then she said, carelessly:

"Martha has sent me this pitcher of lemonade, and I don't care for it.
Won't you drink a glass, Eliza?"

"No, thank you," she replied, shaking her head. "I never drink
lemonade."

"Then have one of these sandwiches?"

"I'm not hungry, Miss Louise."

Louise sighed. Both the lemonade and the sandwiches had been "dosed" by
Dr. Hoyt. Then she picked up the box of bon-bons that was beside her.

"But you will eat some candy, dear. Every girl likes candy."

"I don't seem to care for it," said Eliza carelessly.

"Just one piece, to please me," coaxed Louise, and selected a piece from
the box with dainty care. "Here, my dear; you'll find this sort very
nice."

Eliza hesitated, but finally reached out her hand and took the bon-bon.
Louise lay back in her chair and closed her eyes, fearing their
eagerness might betray her. When after a time she opened them again
Eliza was slowly rocking back and forth and chewing the confection.

Dr. Hoyt's first suggestion had been best. The potion had been prepared
in several ways to tempt Eliza, but the candy had been the effectual
bait.

Louise felt a glow of triumph, but managed to continue the conversation,
relating in an amusing way the anxiety of the Elmhurst folks when the
first returns seemed to indicate the election of Hopkins.

Eliza laughed once or twice, her head resting upon the back of her
chair. Then the words of Louise began to sound dreamy and indistinct in
her ears. The chair rocked with less regularity; soon it came to a stop,
and Eliza was peacefully sleeping in its ample depths.

Louise now rose softly and rang her bell. Footsteps approached, and a
knock came upon the door. She admitted Dr. Hoyt, Mr. Burke, and two
servants.

The physician approached the sleeping girl and gently lifted the lids of
her eyes. Then he nodded with satisfaction.

"There was no suspicion on her part? She made no struggle--no attempt to
evade unconsciousness?" he asked.

"None at all, sir," replied Louise. "She ate the bon-bon, and was asleep
before she realized it."

"Excellent!" said the doctor. "We will now place her in her own room,
upon her bed, while Mr. Burke and I drive over to her former home to
complete our arrangements."

"Won't she waken?" asked Louise.

"Not until tomorrow morning, and when she does I hope for a complete
restoration of her memory."

Beth went with Dr. Hoyt to the Rogers farm, because she knew Mrs.
Rogers. It was necessary to break the news to the poor, blind woman
gently, but Beth's natural tact stood her in good stead. She related the
story of the search for Lucy, the discovery that one of the maids at
Elmhurst resembled the missing girl, and the detective's conclusion that
Eliza Parsons was none other than Lucy Rogers, who was suffering from a
peculiar mental aberration and had forgotten every detail of her former
life.

Mrs. Rogers followed the tale with intelligent understanding, and her
joy at the discovery of her wandering child was only tempered by the
fear that Lucy would never know her mother again or be content to remain
in her humble home.

Then Dr. Hoyt took up the conversation and related the many instances of
complete recovery that had come under his observation.

"I am adopting heroic methods in this case," said he, "but I have
reasonable hopes of their success. Your child doubtless became mentally
confused while under this roof. How many hours she wandered, we do not
know, but it could not have been long before she lay down by the
roadside and fell asleep. When she awakened her mind was a blank as
regards her identity and former history. Now, in order to effect a
recovery, I have reversed these experiences with her. She is at present
plunged into a deep sleep, under the influence of narcotics that have
rendered her brain absolutely inactive. It is really a state of coma,
and I wish her to waken in this house, amid the scenes with which she
was formerly familiar. By this means I hope to induce her mental
faculties to resume their normal functions."

Mrs. Rogers accepted this proposal with calmness and a confidence in the
physician that was admirable. Old Will trembled with nervous excitement,
and was so "flustered" by the importance of the experiment that Dr. Hoyt
decided to give him a quieting potion.

Lucy's room was prepared in the exact manner in which she had left it,
and presently the visitors drove back to Elmhurst.

In the evening the doctor made the journey a second time, accompanying
the unconscious form of Lucy, which was attended by a maid Louise had
sent with her.

The girl was undressed and put to bed in her own room, and then everyone
except Dr. Hoyt returned to Elmhurst.

The physician sat late in conversation with the blind woman and old
Will, and when they retired for the night he lay down upon a lounge in
the little living-room. The question of fees or of comfort was wholly
ignored by the specialist at the moment. His sole interest was in his
remarkable case.

Mrs. Rogers rose at daylight and with old Will's assistance prepared the
breakfast. The little table was set in the humble living-room, and the
fragrant odor of coffee pervaded the house. Dr. Hoyt drank a cup and
then stepped out upon the little porch, taking a position of observation
by the window.

"All right, Nell," muttered old Will, his knees knocking together, in
spite of himself.

Mrs. Rogers rose quietly and walked to the foot of the stairs.

"Lucy! Lucy!" she called.

"Yes!" came a faint reply.

"Breakfast is ready!"

Then the two old people sat in suppressed excitement for what seemed to
them an age. But the physician, calmly stationed at the window, knew it
was not very long.

Presently a light step sounded upon the stairs and Lucy came into the
room.

"Good morning, mother dear!" she said, a new, sweet tenderness in her
voice. And then she knelt and kissed the woman upon her brow.

The doctor looked at his watch.

"I must be going," he muttered, turning away. "There's time for me to
catch the early train."


THE END





CHAPTER I


UNCLE JOHN'S DUTY

"You're not doing your duty by those girls, John Merrick!"

The gentleman at whom this assertion was flung in a rather angry tone
did not answer his sister-in-law. He sat gazing reflectively at the
pattern in the rug and seemed neither startled nor annoyed. Mrs.
Merrick, a pink-cheeked middle-aged lady attired in an elaborate morning
gown, knitted her brows severely as she regarded the chubby little man
opposite; then, suddenly remembering that the wrinkles might leave their
dreadful mark on her carefully rolled and massaged features, she
banished them with a pass of her ringed hand and sighed dismally.

"It would not have mattered especially had the poor children been left
in their original condition of friendless poverty," she said. "They were
then like a million other girls, content to struggle for a respectable
livelihood and a doubtful position in the lower stratas of social
communion. But you interfered. You came into their lives abruptly,
appearing from those horrid Western wilds with an amazing accumulation
of money and a demand that your three nieces become your special
_protges_. And what is the result?"

The little man looked up with a charming smile of good humored raillery.
His keen gray eyes sparkled as mischievously as a schoolboy's. Softly he
rubbed the palms of his hands together, as if enjoying the situation.

"What is it, Martha, my dear? What is the result?" he asked.

"You've raised them from their lowly condition to a sphere in which they
reign as queens, the envy of all who know them. You've lavished your
millions upon them unsparingly; they are not only presumptive heiresses
but already possessed of independent fortunes. Ah, you think you've been
generous to these girls; don't you, John Merrick?"  "Go on, Martha; go
on."

"You've taken them abroad--you took my own daughter, John Merrick, and
left _me_ at home!--you've lugged your three nieces to the mountains and
carried them to the seashore. You even encouraged them to enlist in an
unseemly campaign to elect that young imbecile, Kenneth Forbes, and--"

"Oh, Martha, Martha! Get to the point, if you can. I'm going,
presently."

"Not until you've heard me out. You've given your nieces every advantage
in your power save one, and the neglect of that one thing renders futile
all else you have accomplished."

Now, indeed, her listener seemed perplexed. He passed a hand over his
shiny bald head as if to stimulate thought and exorcise bewilderment.

"What is it, then? What have I neglected?" was his mild enquiry.

"To give those girls their proper standing in society."

He started; smiled; then looked grave.

"You're talking foolishly," he said. "Why, confound it, Martha, they're
as good girls as ever lived! They're highly respected, and--"  "Sir, I
refer to Fashionable Society." The capitals indicate the impressive
manner in which Mrs. Merrick pronounced those words.

"I guess money makes folks fashionable; don't it, Martha?"

"No, indeed. How ignorant you are, John. Can you not understand that
there is a cultured, aristocratic and exclusive Society in New York that
millions will not enable one to gain _entre_ to?"

"Oh, is there? Then I'm helpless."

"You are not, sir."

"Eh? I thought you said--"

"Listen, John; and for heaven's sake try for once to be receptive. I am
speaking not only for the welfare of my daughter Louise but for Beth
and Patricia. Your nieces are charming girls, all three. With the
advantages you have given them they may well become social celebrities."

"H-m-m. Would they be happier so?"

"Of course. Every true woman longs for social distinction, especially if
it seems difficult to acquire. Nothing is dearer to a girl's heart than
to win acceptance by the right social set. And New York society is the
most exclusive in America."

"I'm afraid it will continue to exclude our girls, Martha."

"Not if you do your duty, John."

"That reminds me. What is your idea of my duty, Martha? You've been
talking in riddles, so far," he protested, shifting uneasily in his
chair.

"Let me explain more concisely, then. Your millions, John Merrick, have
made you really famous, even in this wealthy metropolis. In the city and
at your club you must meet with men who have the _entre_ to the most
desirable social circles: men who might be induced to introduce your
nieces to their families, whose endorsement would effect their proper
presentation."

"Nonsense."

"It isn't nonsense at all."

"Then blamed if I know what you're driving at."

"You're very obtuse."

"I won't agree to that till I know what 'obtuse' means. See here,
Martha; you say this social position, that the girls are so crazy
for--but they've never said anything to _me_ about it--can't be bought.
In the next breath you urge me to buy it. Phoo! You're a thoughtless,
silly woman, Martha, and let your wild ambitions run away with your
common sense."

Mrs. Merrick sighed, but stubbornly maintained her position.

"I don't suggest 'buying' such people; not at all, John. It's what is
called--ah--ah--'influence'; or, or--"

"Or 'pull.' 'Pull' is a better word, Martha. Do you imagine there's any
value in social position that can be acquired by 'pull'?"

"Of course. It has to be acquired some way--if one is not born to it. As
a matter of fact, Louise is entitled, through her connection with _my_
family--"

"Pshaw, I knew _your_ family, Martha," he interrupted. "An arrant lot of
humbugs."

"John Merrick!"

"Don't get riled. It's the truth. I _knew_ 'em. On her father's side
Louise has just as much to brag about--an' no more. We Merricks never
amounted to much, an' didn't hanker to trip the light fantastic in
swell society. Once, though, when I was a boy, I had a cousin who
spelled down the whole crowd at a spellin'-bee. We were quite proud of
him then; but he went wrong after his triumph, poor fellow! and became a
book agent. Now, Martha, I imagine this talk of yours is all hot air,
and worked off on me not because the girls want society, but because you
want it for 'em. It's all _your_ ambition, I'll bet a peanut."

"You misjudge me, as usual, John. I am urging a matter of simple
justice. Your nieces are lovely girls, fitted to shine in any sphere of
life," she continued, knowing his weak point and diplomatically
fostering it. "Our girls have youth, accomplishments, money--everything
to fit them for social triumphs. The winter season is now approaching;
the people are flocking back to town from their country homes;
fashionable gaieties and notable events will soon hold full sway. The
dear girls are surely entitled to enjoy these things, don't you think?
Aren't they _worthy_ the best that life has to offer? And why shouldn't
they enter society, if you do your full duty? Once get them properly
introduced and they will be able to hold their own with perfect ease.
Give me the credit for knowing these things, John, and try to help your
nieces to attain their ambition."

"But _is_ it their ambition?" he asked, doubtfully.

"They have not said so in words; but I can assure you it _is_ their
ambition, because all three are sensible, spirited, young women, who
live in this age and not the one you yourself knew a half century or so
ago."

Mr. Merrick sighed and rubbed his head again. Then he slowly rose.

"Mornin', Martha," he said, with a somewhat abstracted nod at his
sister-in-law. "This is a new idea to me. I'll think it over."




CHAPTER II


A QUESTION OF "PULL"

John Merrick's face was not so cheery as usual as he made his way into
the city. This suggestion of Martha Merrick's regarding his inattention
to duty to his beloved nieces was no easy nut to crack.

He knew his sister-in-law to be a wordly-minded, frivolous woman, with
many trivial ambitions; but in this instance he had misgivings that she
might be right. What did he, John Merrick, know of select society? A
poor man, of humble origin, he had wandered into the infantile, embryo
West years ago and there amassed a fortune. When he retired and returned
to "civilization" he found his greatest reward In the discovery of three
charming nieces, all "as poor as Job's turkey" but struggling along
bravely, each in her individual characteristic way, and well worthy
their doting uncle's affectionate admiration. Mrs. Merrick had recited
some of the advantages they had derived from the advent of this rich
relative; but even she could not guess how devoted the man was to the
welfare of these three fortunate girls, nor how his kindly, simple heart
resented the insinuation that he was neglecting anything that might
contribute to their happiness.

Possession of money had never altered John Merrick's native simplicity.
He had no extravagant tastes, dressed quietly and lived the life of the
people. On this eventful morning the man of millions took a cross-town
car to the elevated station and climbed the stairs to his train. Once
seated and headed cityward he took out his memorandum book to see what
engagements he had for the day. There were three for the afternoon. At
twelve o'clock he had promised to meet Von Taer.

"H-m-m. Von Taer."

Gazing reflectively from the window he remembered a conversation with a
prominent banker some month or so before. "Von Taer," the banker had
said, "is an aristocrat with an independent fortune, who clings to the
brokerage business because he inherited it from his father and
grandfather. I hold that such a man has no moral right to continue in
business. He should retire and give the other fellow a chance."

"Why do you call him an aristocrat?" Mr. Merrick had enquired.

"Because his family is so ancient that it shames the ark itself. I
imagine his ancestors might have furnished Noah the lumber to build his
ship. In New York the '400' all kowtow to Von Taer."

"Seems to me he has the right to be a broker if he wants to," asserted
Mr. Merrick.

"The right; yes. But, between us, Mr. Merrick, this society swell has no
mental capacity to handle such an uncertain business. He's noted for
doing unwarranted things. To me it's a marvel that Von Taer hasn't
shipwrecked the family fortunes long ago. Luck has saved him, not
foresight."

That speech of a few weeks ago now seemed prophetic to John Merrick.
Within a few days the aristocratic broker had encountered financial
difficulties and been forced to appeal to Mr. Merrick, to whom he
obtained an introduction through a mutual friend. Von Taer was
doubtless solvent, for he controlled large means; but unless a saving
hand was extended at this juncture his losses were sure to be severe,
and might even cripple him seriously.

All this Mr. Merrick shrewdly considered in the space of a few moments.
As he left the train he looked at his watch and found it was barely
eleven. He decided not to await the hour of appointment. With his usual
brisk stride he walked to Von Taer's offices and was promptly admitted
to the broker's sanctum.

Hedrik Von Taer was a fine looking man, tall, grave, of dignified
demeanor and courteous manners. He stood until his visitor was seated
and with a gesture of deference invited him to open the conversation.

"I've decided to make you the loan, Von Taer," began Mr. Merrick, in his
practical, matter-of-fact way. "Three hundred thousand, wasn't it? Call
on Major Doyle at my office this afternoon and he'll arrange it for
you."

An expression of relief crossed the broker's face.

"You are very kind, sir," he answered. "I assure you I fully appreciate
the accommodation."

"Glad to help you," responded the millionaire, briskly. Then he paused
with marked abruptness. It occurred to him he had a difficult
proposition to make to this man. To avoid the cold, enquiring eyes now
fixed upon him he pulled out a cigar and deliberately cut the end. Von
Taer furnished him a match. He smoked a while in silence.

"This loan, sir," he finally began, "is freely made. There are no
strings tied to it. I don't want you to feel I'm demanding any sort of
return. But the truth is, you have it in your power to grant me a
favor."

Von Taer bowed.

"Mr. Merrick has generously placed me under an obligation it will afford
me pleasure to repay," said he. But his eyes held an uneasy look,
nevertheless.

"It's this way," explained the other: "I've three nieces--fine girls,
Von Taer--who will some day inherit my money. They are already
independent, financially, and they're educated, well-bred and amiable
young women. Take my word for it."

"I am sure your statements are justified, Mr. Merrick." Yet Hedrik Von
Taer's face, usually unexpressive, denoted blank mystification. What
connection could these girls have with the favor to be demanded?

"Got any girls yourself, Von Taer?"

"A daughter, sir. My only child.

"Grown up?"

"A young lady now, sir."

"Then you'll understand. I'm a plain uneducated man myself. Never been
any nearer swell society than a Fifth Avenue stage. My money has given
me commercial position, but no social one worth mentioning. Your '400's'
a bunch I can't break into, nohow."

A slight smile hovered over the other's lips, but he quickly controlled
it.

"They tell me, though," continued the speaker, "that _your_ family has
long ago climbed into the top notch of society. You're one o' the big
guns in the battery, an' hold the fort against all comers."

Von Taer merely bowed. It was scarcely necessary to either admit or
contradict the statement. Uncle John was a little indignant that his
companion showed no disposition to assist him in his explanation, which
a clear head might now easily comprehend. So, with his usual frankness,
he went directly to the point.

"I'd like my girls to get into the best--the most select--circles," he
announced. "They're good and pretty and well-mannered, so it strikes me
they're entitled to the best there is a-going. I don't want to mix with
your swell crowd myself, because I ain't fit; likewise the outfit ain't
much to my taste, askin' your pardon; but with women it's different.
They need to stand high an' shine bright to make 'em really happy, and
if any special lot is particularly ex-clusive an' high-falutin', that's
the crowd they long to swarm with. It's human nature--female human
nature, anyhow. You catch my idea, Von Taer, don't you?"

"I think so, Mr. Merrick. Yet I fail to see how I can be of service to
you in gratifying the ambition of your charming nieces."  "Then I'll
go, and you may forget what I've said." The visitor arose and took his
hat from the table. "It was only a fool notion, anyway; just a thought,
badly expressed, to help my girls to a toy that money can't buy."

Hedrik Von Taer gazed steadily into the man's face. There was something
in the simple, honest self-abnegation of this wealthy and important
person that won the respect of all he met. The broker's stern eyes
softened a bit as he gazed and he allowed a fugitive smile, due to his
own change of attitude, to wreathe his thin lips again--just for an
instant.

"Sit down, please, Mr. Merrick," he requested, and rather reluctantly
Uncle John resumed his seat. "You may not have an especially clear idea
of New York society, and I want to explain my recent remark so that you
will understand it. What is called 'the 400' may or may not exist; but
certainly it is no distinct league or association. It may perhaps be
regarded as a figure of speech, to indicate how few are really admitted
to the most exclusive circles. Moreover, there can be no dominant
'leader of society' here, for the reason that not all grades of society
would recognize the supremacy of any one set, or clique. These cliques
exist for various reasons. They fraternize generally, but keep well
within their own circles. Kindred tastes attract some; ancient lineage
others. There is an ultra-fashionable set, a sporting set, a literary
set, an aristocratic set, a rather 'fast' set, a theatrical set--and so
on. These may all lay claim with certain justice to membership in good
society. Their circles are to an extent exclusive, because some
distinction must mark the eligibility of members. And outside each
luminous sphere hovers a multitude eager to pass the charmed circle and
so acquire recognition. Often it is hard to separate the initiate from
the uninitiate, even by those most expert. Is it difficult to comprehend
such a condition as I have described, Mr. Merrick?"

"Somewhat, Mr. Von Taer. The wonder to me is why people waste time in
such foolishness."

"It is the legitimate occupation of many; the folly of unwise ambition
impels others. There is a fascination about social life that appeals to
the majority of natures. Let us compare society to a mountain whose
sides are a steep incline, difficult to mount. To stand upon the
summit, to become the cynosure of all eyes, is a desire inherent,
seemingly, in all humanity; for humanity loves distinction. In the
scramble toward the peak many fall by the wayside; others deceive
themselves by imagining they have attained the apex when they are far
from it. It is a game, Mr. Merrick, just as business is a game, politics
a game, and war a game. You know how few really win."

"Here," said Uncle John, musingly, "is a philosophy I did not expect
from you, Von Taer. They tell me you're one who stands on top the peak.
And you were born that way, and didn't have to climb. Seems to me you
rather scorn the crowd that's trying to climb to an eminence you never
had to win. That wouldn't be my way. And I suspect that if the crowd
wasn't trying to climb to you, your own position wouldn't be worth a
cotton hat."

Von Taer had no answer to this criticism. Perhaps he scarcely heard it,
for he appeared lost in a brown study. Finally he said:  "Will you
permit my daughter to call upon your nieces, Mr. Merrick?"

"Of course, sir."

"Then kindly give me their addresses."

Uncle John wrote them on a slip of paper.

"You may now dismiss the subject from your mind, sir, as you lately
advised me to do. Whatever may be accomplished in the direction you have
suggested I will gladly undertake. If I succeed it will be exceedingly
gratifying to us all, I am sure."

Mr. Merrick left the office in a rather humbled and testy mood. He
disliked to ask favors at any time and now felt that he had confided
himself to the mercy of this callous aristocrat and met with a distinct
rebuff.

But he had done it for the sake of his beloved nieces--and they would
never know what humiliation this unsatisfactory interview had cost him.




CHAPTER III


DIANA

Diana Von Taer can not be called a type. She was individual.
Aristocratic to her finger tips, she was unlike all other aristocrats.
An admitted queen of society, her subjects were few and indifferent. She
possessed ancient lineage, was highly accomplished, had been born to the
purple, as the saying is; but none of these things conspired to make her
the curious creature she was.

As we make her acquaintance she is twenty-three years of age--and looks
eighteen. She is tall and slender and carries her handsome form with
exquisite grace. Diana is never abrupt; her voice is ever modulated to
soft, even tones; she rises from a chair or couch with the lithe,
sinuous motion of a serpent uncoiling.

Her face, critically regarded, is not so admirable as her form. The
features are a trifle too elongated, and their delicacy is marred by a
nose a bit broad and unshapely and a mouth with thin lips primly set.
Her dark eyes might be magnificent if wide open: but through the narrow
slits of their lids, half hidden by long curling lashes, the eyes peer
at you with a cold, watchful, intent gaze that carries a certain uncanny
and disconcerting fascination.

Yet the girl is essentially feminine. If you refrain from meeting that
discomfiting gaze--and her familiars have learned to avoid it--Diana
impresses you as being graceful, dainty and possessed of charming
manners. Her taste in dress is perfect. She converses fluently on many
topics. It is her custom to rise at ten o'clock, whatever time she may
have retired the night before; to read until luncheon; to devote the
remainder of her day to the requirements of society.

Eligible young men of admitted social standing call upon Diana at such
intervals as the proprieties require. They chatter "small talk" and are
careful to address her with deference. With an exception to be referred
to later these young men have no more thought of "flirting" with Miss
Von Taer than they would with the statue of the goddess, her namesake.
Her dinner parties and entertainments are very successful. She is
greatly admired, _per se_, but has no intimate friends.

When her mother died, some years before, an aunt had come to live with
Diana, and now posed as her chaperon. Mrs. Cameron was a stolid,
corpulent lady, with a countenance perpetually placid and an habitual
aversion to displaying intellect. Her presence in the establishment,
although necessary, was frankly ignored. Fortunately she never obtruded
herself.

Hedrik Von Taer was passionately devoted to his daughter. He alone,
perhaps, of all the world, thoroughly understood her and appreciated her
talents. She may have frightened him at times, but that only added to
his admiration. In return Diana displayed a calm, but affectionate
regard for her father.

Often after dinner these two would pass an hour together in a corner of
the drawing-room, where the cold gray eyes of the man met the intent,
half-veiled glance of the girl with perfect understanding. They talked
of many things, including business. Hedrik had no secrets from his
daughter.  The desperate condition of his finances, when he had been
caught in a "corner" on wheat and nearly crushed, had not dismayed her
in the least. It was she who had counseled him to appeal to John
Merrick, since the name and fame of the eccentric millionaire were
familiar to her as to him.

He related to Diana his interview with Mr. Merrick on his return home.
He was saved. The three hundred thousand were now in the bank to his
credit and he could weather the coming storm easily--perhaps with
profit. In a tone half amused, half serious, he told her of the little
millionaire's desire to secure _entre_ into good society for his three
nieces.

Diana laughed with her lips; her eyes never laughed. Then she took in
her hand the paper containing the addresses of the three girls and
regarded it thoughtfully.

"It is a curious request, _mon pere_," she said, in her soft, even
tones; "but one we cannot diplomatically disregard. Provided, however--"

"Yes, Diana;" as she paused.

"Provided these prospective _debutantes_ are not wholly impossible."

"I realize that," returned her father. "John Merrick is a great power in
the city. He has been useful to me, and may be again. I have this chance
to win him. But the man is very common clay, despite his wealth, and his
three nieces are likely to be made of the same material. Should they
prove impossible you cannot well descend to introducing them to our
set."

"I am not certain of that, sir," said the girl, with a pretty shrug. "My
position is too secure to be jeopardized by any error of this sort. I
believe I may introduce these girls without risk. I shall not vouch for
them too strongly, and after their debut they must stand or fall on
their own merits."

"It is something a Von Taer has never yet done," remarked the man,
gravely.

"To commercialize his social position? But, father dear, the age is fast
commercializing everything. I think our especial set is as yet
comparatively free from contamination by the 'lately rich'; but even
among us money has glossed many offenses that a generation ago would
have meant social ostracism."

He nodded.

"That is true, Diana."

"Life with me is a bit dull, as well. Everlasting routine, however
admirable, is tiresome. I scent amusement in this adventure, which I
have decided to undertake. With your permission I will see these girls
and quickly decide their fate. Should they prove not too dreadfully
_outr_ you may look to see them my especial _protgs_."

"I leave all to your discretion, Diana," returned Von Taer, with a sigh.
"If, in the end, some of the more particular venture to reproach them."

"It will not matter," interrupted the daughter, lightly, as her dark
eyes narrowed to a hair's breadth. "Any who dares reproach Diana Von
Taer will afford her interesting occupation. And to offset that remote
contingency we shall permanently enslave the powerful John Merrick. I
understand he is hard as nails in financial matters; but to us the man
has disclosed his one weakness--ambition to promote his three nieces.
Since we have discovered this vulnerable point, let us take advantage of
it. I am satisfied the loan of three hundred thousand was but a
lure--and how cleverly the man gauged us!"

Von Taer scowled.

"Get your wraps, Diana. The carriage is waiting, and we are due at Mrs.
Doldringham's crush."




CHAPTER IV


THE THREE NIECES

The Von Taers did not affect motor cars. In some circles the carriage
and pair is still considered the more aristocratic mode of conveyance.
Established customs do not readily give way to fads and freaks.

Consulting her memoranda as she rode along; in her handsome, tastefully
appointed equipage, Diana found that Louise Merrick, one of the three
girls she had set out to discover, was the nearest on her route.
Presently she rang the bell at the Merrick residence, an eminently
respectable dwelling; in a desirable neighborhood.

Diana could not resist a sigh of relief as her observant glance noted
this detail. A dignified butler ushered her into a reception room and
departed with her card.

It was now that the visitor's nose took an upward tendency as she
critically examined her surroundings. The furnishings were abominable, a
mixture of distressingly new articles with those evidently procured
from dealers in "antiquities." Money had been lavished here, but good
taste was absent. To understand this--for Miss Von Taer gauged the
condition truly--it is necessary to know something of Mrs. Martha
Merrick.

This lady, the relict of John Merrick's only brother, was endowed with a
mediocre mind and a towering ambition. When left a widow with an only
daughter she had schemed and contrived in endless ways to maintain an
appearance of competency on a meager income. Finally she divided her
capital, derived from her husband's life insurance, into three equal
parts, which she determined to squander in three years in an attempt to
hoodwink the world with the belief that she was wealthy. Before the
three years were ended her daughter Louise would be twenty, and by that
time she must have secured a rich _parti_ and been safely married. In
return for this "sacrifice" the girl was to see that her mother was made
comfortable thereafter.

This worldly and foolish design was confided to Louise when she was only
seventeen, and her unformed mind easily absorbed her mother's silly
ambition. It was a pity, for Louise Merrick possessed a nature sweet
and lovable, as well as instinctively refined--a nature derived from her
dead father and with little true sympathy with Mrs. Merrick's
unscrupulous schemes. But at that age a girl is easily influenced, so it
is little wonder that under such tuition Louise became calculating, sly
and deceitful, to a most deplorable degree.

Such acquired traits bade fair in the end to defeat Mrs. Merrick's
carefully planned _coup_, for the daughter had a premature love affair
with a youth outside the pale of eligibility. Louise ignored the fact
that he had been disinherited by his father, and in her reckless
infatuation would have sacrificed her mother without thought or remorse.
The dreadful finale had only been averted by the advent of Uncle John
Merrick, who had changed the life plans of the widow and her heedless
daughter and promptly saved the situation.

John Merrick did not like his sister-in-law, but he was charmed by his
lovely niece and took her at once to his affectionate old heart. He saw
the faults of Louise clearly, but also appreciated her sweeter
qualities. Under his skillful guidance she soon redeemed herself and
regained control of her better nature. The girl was not yet perfect, by
any means; she was to an extent artificial and secretive, and her
thoughtless flirtations were far from wise; but her two cousins and her
uncle had come to know and understand her good points. They not only
bore patiently with her volatile nature but strove to influence her to
demonstrate her inherent good qualities.

In one way her mother's calculating training had been most effective.
Louise was not only a dainty, lovely maid to the eye, but her manners
were gracious and winning and she had that admirable self-possession
which quickly endears one even to casual acquaintances. She did not
impress more intimate friends as being wholly sincere, yet there was
nothing in her acts, since that one escapade referred to, that merited
severe disapproval.

Of course the brilliant idea of foisting her precious daughter upon the
"select" society of the metropolis was original with Mrs. Merrick.
Louise was well content with things as they were; but not so the
mother. The rise from poverty to affluence, the removal of all cares and
burdens from her mind, had merely fostered still greater ambitions.
Uncle John's generosity had endowed each of his three nieces with an
ample fortune. "I want 'em to enjoy the good things of life while
they're at an age to enjoy 'em," he said; "for the older one gets the
fewer things are found to be enjoyable. That's my experience, anyhow."
He also told the girls frankly that they were to inherit
jointly--although not equally--his entire fortune. Yet even this glowing
prospect did not satisfy Mrs. Merrick. Since all her plans for Louise,
from the very beginning, had been founded on personal selfishness, she
now proposed to have her daughter gain admission to recognized
fashionable society in order that she might herself bask in the
reflection of the glory so obtained and take her place with the proud
matrons who formed the keystone of such society.  After carefully
considering ways and means to gain her object she had finally conceived
the idea of utilizing Mr. Merrick. She well knew Uncle John would not
consider one niece to the exclusion of the others, and had therefore
used his influence to get all three girls properly "introduced."
Therefore her delight and excitement were intense when the butler
brought up Diana's card and she realized that "the perfectly swell Miss
Von Taer" was seated in her reception room. She rushed to Louise, who,
wholly innocent of any knowledge of the intrigue which had led to this
climax, opened her blue eyes in astonishment and said with a gasp:

"Oh, mother! what shall I do?"

"Do? Why, go down and make yourself agreeable, of course. It's your
chance, my dear, your great chance in life! Go--go! Don't, for heaven's
sake, keep her waiting."

Louise went down. In her most affable and gracious way she approached
the visitor and said:

"It is very nice of you to call upon me. I am _so_ glad to meet Miss Von
Taer."  Diana, passing conversational nothings with the young girl, was
pleased by her appearance and self-possession. This aspirant for social
honors was fresh, fair and attractive, with a flow of small talk at her
tongue's end.

"Really," thought the fastidious visitor, "this one, at least, will do
me no discredit. If she is a fair sample of the others we shall get
along very nicely In this enterprise."

To Louise she said, before going:

"I'm to have an evening, the nineteenth. Will you assist me to receive?
Now that we are acquainted I wish to see more of you, my dear, and I
predict we shall get along famously together."

The girl's head swam. Help Miss Von Taer to receive! Such an honor had
been undreamed of an hour ago. But she held her natural agitation under
good control and only a round red spot Upon each cheek betrayed her
inward excitement as she prettily accepted the invitation. Beneath their
drooping lashes Diana's sagacious eyes read the thoughts of the girl
quite accurately. Miss Von Taer enjoyed disconcerting anyone in any way,
and Louise was so simple and unsophisticated that she promised to afford
considerable amusement in the future.

By the time Diana had finished her brief call this singular creature had
taken the measure of Louise Merrick in every detail, including her
assumption of lightness and her various frivolities. She understood that
in the girl were capabilities for good or for evil, as she might be led
by a stronger will. And, musingly, Diana wondered who would lead her.

As for Louise, she was enraptured by her distinguished visitor's
condescension and patronage, and her heart bounded at the thought of
being admitted to the envied social coterie in which Diana Von Taer
shone a bright, particular star.

The second name in the list of John Merrick's nieces was that of
Elizabeth De Graf. She lived at a good private hotel located in an
exclusive residence district.

It was true that Elizabeth--or "Beth," as she was more familiarly
called--was not a permanent guest at this hotel. When in New York she
was accustomed to live with one or the other of her cousins, who
welcomed her eagerly. But just now her mother had journeyed from the old
Ohio home to visit Beth, and the girl had no intention of inflicting
her parent upon the other girls. Therefore she had taken rooms at the
hotel temporarily, and the plan suited her mother excellently. For one
thing, Mrs. De Graf could go home and tell her Cloverton gossips that
she had stopped at the most "fashionable" hotel in New York; a second
point was that she loved to feast with epicurean avidity upon the
products of a clever _chef_, being one of those women who live to eat,
rather than eat to live.

Mrs. De Graf was John Merrick's only surviving sister, but she differed
as widely from the simple, kindly man in disposition as did her
ingenious daughter from her in mental attainments. The father, Professor
De Graf, was supposed to be a "musical genius." Before Beth came into
her money, through Uncle John, the Professor taught the piano and
singing; now, however, the daughter allowed her parents a liberal
income, and the self-engrossed musician devoted himself to composing
oratorios and concertas which no one but himself would ever play.  To
be quite frank, the girl cared little for her gross and selfish parents,
and they in turn cared little for her beyond the value she afforded them
in the way of dollars and cents. So she had not lived at home, where
constant quarrels and bickerings nearly drove her frantic, since Uncle
John had adopted her. In catering to this present whim of her mother,
who longed to spend a few luxurious weeks in New York, Beth sacrificed
more than might be imagined by one unacquainted with her sad family
history.

Whimsical Major Doyle often called Uncle John's nieces "the Three
Graces"; but Beth was by odds the beauty of them all. Splendid brown
eyes, added to an exquisite complexion, almost faultless features and a
superb carriage, rendered this fair young girl distinguished in any
throng. Fortunately she was as yet quite unspoiled, being saved from
vanity by a morbid consciousness of her inborn failings and a sincere
loathing for the moral weakness that prevented her from correcting those
faults. Judging Beth by the common standard of girls of her age, both
failings and faults were more imaginary than real; yet it was her
characteristic to suspect and despise in herself such weaknesses as
others would condone, or at least regard leniently. For here was a girl
true and staunch, incapable of intrigue or deceit, frank and outspoken,
all these qualities having been proven more than once. Everyone loved
Beth De Graf save herself, and at this stage of her development the
influence of her cousins and of Uncle John had conspired to make the
supersensitive girl more tolerant of herself and less morbid than
formerly.

I think Beth knew of Diana Von Taer, for the latter's portrait
frequently graced the society columns of the New York press and at times
the three nieces, in confidential mood, would canvass Diana and her
social exploits as they did the acts of other famous semi-public
personages. But the girl had never dreamed of meeting such a celebrity,
and Miss Von Taer's card filled her with curious wonder as to the errand
that had brought her.

The De Grafs lived _en suite_ at the hotel, for Beth had determined to
surround her Sybaritic mother with all attainable luxury, since the
child frequently reproached herself with feeling a distinct repulsion
for the poor woman. So to-day Diana was ushered into a pretty parlor
where Beth stood calmly awaiting her.

The two regarded one another in silence a moment, Miss De Graf's frank
eyes covering the other with a comprehensive sweep while Miss Von Taer's
narrowed gaze, profoundly observant, studied the beautiful girl before
her with that impenetrable, half-hidden gleam that precluded any
solution.

"Miss Von Taer, I believe," said Beth, quietly glancing at the card she
held. "Will you be seated?"

Diana sank gracefully into a chair. The sinuous motion attracted Beth's
attention and gave her a slight shiver.

"I am so glad to meet you, my dear," began the visitor, in soft, purring
accents. "I have long promised myself the pleasure of a call, and in
spite of many procrastinations at last have accomplished my ambition."

Beth resented the affectation of this prelude, and slightly frowned.
Diana was watching; she always watched.  "Why should you wish to call
upon me?" was the frank demand. "Do not think me rude, please; but I am
scarcely in a position to become a desirable acquaintance of Miss Von
Taer." The tone was a trifle bitter, and Diana noted it. A subtile
antagonism seemed springing up between them and the more experienced
girl scented in this danger to her plans. She must handle this young
lady more cautiously than she had Louise Merrick.

"Your position is unimpeachable, my dear," was the sweet-toned response.
"You are John Merrick's niece."

Beth was really angry now. She scowled, and it spoiled her beauty. Diana
took warning and began to think quickly.

"I referred to my social position, Miss Von Taer. Our family is honest
enough, thank God; but it has never been accepted in what is termed
select society."

Diana laughed; a quiet, rippling laugh as icy as a brook in November,
but as near gaiety as she could at the moment accomplish. When she
laughed this way her eyes nearly closed and became inscrutable. Beth
had a feeling of repulsion for her caller, but strove to shake it off.
Miss Von Taer was nothing to her; could be nothing to her.

"Your uncle is a very wealthy man," said Diana, with easy composure. "He
has made you an heiress, placing you in a class much sought after in
these mercenary days. But aside from that, my dear, your personal
accomplishments have not escaped notice, and gossip declares you to be a
very fascinating young woman, as well as beautiful and good. I do not
imagine society claims to be of divine origin, but were it so no one is
more qualified to grace it."

The blandishments of this speech had less effect upon Beth than the
evident desire to please. She began to feel she had been ungracious, and
straightway adopted a more cordial tone.

"I am sure you mean well, Miss Von Taer," she hastened to say, "and I
assure you I am not ungrateful. But it occurred to me we could have
nothing in common."  "Oh, my dear! You wrong us both."

"Do you know my uncle?" enquired Beth.

"He is the friend of my father, Mr. Hedrik Von Taer. Our family owes Mr.
John Merrick much consideration. Therefore I decided to seek pleasure in
the acquaintance of his nieces."

The words and tone seemed alike candid. Beth began to relent. She sat
down for the first time, taking a chair opposite Diana.

"You see," she said, artlessly, "I have no personal inclination for
society, which is doubtless so large a part of your own amusement. It
seems to me artificial and insipid."

"Those who view from a distance the husk of a cocoanut, have little idea
of the milk within," declared Diana, softly.

"True," answered Beth. "But I've cracked cocoanuts, and sometimes found
the milk sour and tainted."

"The difference you observe in cocoanuts is to be found in the various
grades of society. These are not all insipid and artificial, I assure
you."

"They may be worse," remarked Beth. "I've heard strange tales of your
orgies."  Diana was really amused. This girl was proving more
interesting than the first niece she had interviewed. Unaccustomed to
seeking acquaintances outside her own exclusive circle, and under such
circumstances, these meetings were to her in the nature of an adventure.
A creature of powerful likes and dislikes, she already hated Beth most
heartily; but for that very reason she insisted on cultivating her
further acquaintance.

"You must not judge society by the mad pranks of a few of its members,"
she responded, in her most agreeable manner. "If we are not to set an
example in decorum to the rest of the world we are surely unfitted to
occupy the high place accorded us. But you must see and decide for
yourself."

"I? No, indeed!"

"Ah, do not decide hastily, my dear. Let me become your sponsor for a
short time, until you really discover what society is like. Then you may
act upon more mature judgment."

"I do not understand you, Miss Von Taer."

"Then I will be more explicit. I am to receive a few friends at my home
on the evening of the nineteenth; will you be my guest?"  Beth was
puzzled how to answer. The thought crossed her mind that perhaps Uncle
John would like her to be courteous to his friend's daughter, and that
argument decided her. She accepted the invitation.

"I want you to receive with me," continued Diana, rising. "In that way I
shall be able to introduce you to my friends."

Beth wondered at this condescension, but consented to receive. She was
annoyed to think how completely she had surrendered to the will of Miss
Von Taer, for whom she had conceived the same aversion she had for a
snake. She estimated Diana, society belle though she was, to be sly,
calculating and deceitful. Worse than all, she was decidedly clever, and
therefore dangerous. Nothing good could come of an acquaintance with
her, Beth was sure; yet she had pledged herself to meet her and her
friends the nineteenth, lit a formal society function. How much Beth De
Graf misjudged Diana Von Taer the future will determine.  The interview
had tired Diana. As she reentered her carriage she was undecided whether
to go home or hunt up the third niece. But Willing Square was not five
minutes' drive from here, so she ordered the coachman to proceed there.

"I am positively out of my element in this affair," she told herself,
"for it is more difficult to cultivate these inexperienced girls than I
had thought. They are not exactly impossible, as I at first feared, but
they are so wholly unconventional as to be somewhat embarrassing as
_protges_. Analyzing the two I have met--the majority--one strikes me
as being transparently affected and the other a stubborn, attractive
fool. They are equally untrained in diplomacy and unable to cover their
real feelings. Here am I, practically dragging them into the limelight,
when it would be far better for themselves--perhaps for me--that they
remained in oblivion. Ah, well: I called it an adventure: let me hope
some tangible plot will develop to compensate me for my trouble. Life
seems deadly dull; I need excitement. Is it to be furnished by John
Merrick's nieces, I wonder?"  Willing Square is a new district, crowded
with fashionable apartment houses. That is, they are called fashionable
by their builders and owners and accepted as such by their would-be
fashionable occupants. Diana knew at least two good families resident in
Willing Square, and though she smiled grimly at the rows of
"oppressively new and vulgar" buildings, she still was not ashamed to
have her equipage seen waiting there.

Number 3708 Willing Square is a very substantial and cozy appearing
apartment building owned in fee by Miss Patricia Doyle. Diana was
unaware of this fact, but rang the Doyle bell and ascended to the second
floor.

A maid received her with the announcement that Miss Doyle had "just
stepped out," but was somewhere in the building. Would the visitor care
to wait a few minutes?

Yes; Diana decided she would wait. She took a seat in the snug front
parlor and from her position noted the series of rooms that opened one
into another throughout the suite, all richly but tastefully furnished
in homely, unassuming manner.  "This is better," she mused. "There is
no attempt at foolish display in this establishment, at any rate. I hope
to find Miss Doyle a sensible, refined person. The name is Irish."

A door slammed somewhere down the line of rooms and a high-pitched voice
cried in excited tones:

"I've found a baby! Hi, there, Nunkie, dear--I've found a baby!"

Thereupon came the sound of a chair being pushed back as a man's voice
answered in equal glee:

"Why, Patsy, Patsy! it's the little rogue from upstairs. Here, Bobby;
come to your own old Uncle!"

"He won't. He belongs to me; don't you, Bobby darlin'?"

A babyish voice babbled merrily, but the sounds were all "goos" and
"ahs" without any resemblance to words. Bobby may have imagined he was
talking, but he was not very intelligible.

"See here, Patsy Doyle; you gimme that baby." cried the man, pleadingly.
 "I found him myself, and he's mine. I've dragged him here all the way
from his home upstairs, an' don't you dare lay a finger on him. Uncle
John!"

"Fair play, Patsy! Bobby's my chum, and--"

"Well, I'll let you have half of him, Nunkie. Down on your hands and
knees, sir, and be a horse. That's it--Now, Bobby, straddle Uncle John
and drive him by his necktie--here it is. S-t-e-a-d-y, Uncle; and
neigh--neigh like a horse!"

"How does a horse neigh, Patsy?" asked a muffled voice, choking and
chuckling at the same time.

"'Nee, hee-hee--hee; hee!'"

Uncle John tried to neigh, and made a sorry mess of it, although Bobby
shrieked with delight.

Then came a sudden hush. Diana caught the maid's voice, perhaps
announcing the presence of a visitor, for Patsy cried in subdued
accents:

"Goodness me, Mary! why didn't you say so? Listen, Uncle John--"

"Leggo that ear, Bobby--leggo!"

"--You watch the baby, Uncle John, and don't let anything happen to
him. I've got a caller."

Diana smiled, a bit scornfully, and then composed her features as a
young girl bustled into the room and came toward her with frank
cordiality indicated in the wide smile and out-stretched hand.

"Pardon my keeping you waiting," said Patsy, dropping into a chair
opposite her visitor, "Uncle John and I were romping with the baby from
upstarts--Bobby's such a dear! I didn't quite catch the name Mary gave
me and forgot to look at your card."

"I am Miss Von Taer."

"Not Diana Von Taer, the swell society girl?" cried Patsy eagerly.

Diana couldn't remember when she had been so completely nonplused
before. After an involuntary gasp she answered quietly:

"I am Diana Von Taer."

"Well, I'm glad to meet you, just the same," said Patsy, cheerfully. "We
outsiders are liable to look on society folk as we would on a cage of
monkeys--because we're so very ignorant, you know, and the bars are
really between us."  This frank disdain verged on rudeness, although
the girl had no intention of being rude. Diana was annoyed in spite of
her desire to be tolerant.

"Perhaps the bars are imaginary," she rejoined, carelessly, "and it may
be you've been looking at the side-show and not at the entertainment in
the main tent. Will you admit that possibility, Miss Doyle?"

Patsy laughed gleefully.

"I think you have me there, Miss Von Taer. And what do _I_ know about
society? Just nothing at all. It's out of my line entirely."

"Perhaps it is," was the slow response. "Society appeals to only those
whose tastes seem to require it."

"And aren't we drawing distinctions?" enquired Miss Doyle. "Society at
large is the main evidence of civilization, and all decent folk are
members of it."

"Isn't that communism?" asked Diana.

"Perhaps so. It's society at large. But certain classes have leagued
together and excluded themselves from their fellows, admitting only
those of their own ilk. The people didn't put them on their
pedestals--they put themselves there. Yet the people bow down and
worship these social gods and seem glad to have them. The newspapers
print their pictures and the color of their gowns and how they do their
hair and what they eat and what they do, and the poor washwomen and
shop-girls and their like read these accounts more religiously than they
do their bibles. My maid Mary's a good girl, but she grabs the society
sheet of the Sunday paper and reads it from top to bottom. I never look
at it myself."

Diana's cheeks were burning. She naturally resented such ridicule,
having been born to regard social distinction with awe and reverence.
Inwardly resolving to make Miss Patricia Doyle regret the speech she hid
all annoyance under her admirable self-control and answered with smooth
complacency:

"Your estimate of society, my dear Miss Doyle, is superficial."

"Don't I know it, then?" exclaimed Patsy. "Culture and breeding,
similarity of taste and intellectual pursuits will always attract
certain people and band them together in those cliques which are called
'social sets,' They are not secret societies; they have no rules of
exclusion; congenial minds are ever welcome to their ranks. This is a
natural coalition, in no way artificial. Can you not appreciate that,
Miss Doyle?"

"Yes, indeed," admitted Patsy, promptly. "You're quite right, and I'm
just one of those stupid creatures who criticise the sun because there's
a cloud before it. Probably there are all grades of society, because
there are all grades of people."

"I thought you would agree with me when you understood," murmured Diana,
and her expression was so smug and satisfied that Patsy was seized with
an irresistible spirit of mischief.

"And haven't I seen your own pictures in the Sunday papers?" she asked.

"Perhaps; if you robbed your maid of her pleasure."

"And very pretty pictures they were, too. They showed culture and
breeding all right, and the latest style in gowns. Of course those
intellectual high-brows in your set didn't need an introduction to you;
you were advertised as an example of ultra-fashionable perfection, to
spur the ambition of those lower down in the social scale. Perhaps it's
a good thing."

"Are you trying to annoy me?" demanded Diana, her eyes glaring under
their curling lashes.

"Dear me--dear me!" cried Patsy, distressed, "see how saucy and impudent
I've been--and I didn't mean a bit of it! Won't you forgive me, please,
Miss Von Taer? There! we'll begin all over again, and I'll be on my good
behavior. I'm so very ignorant, you know!"

Diana smiled at this; it would be folly to show resentment to such a
childish creature.

"Unfortunately," she said, "I have been unable to escape the vulgar
publicity thrust upon me by the newspapers. The reporters are preying
vultures, rapacious for sensation, and have small respect for anyone. I
am sure we discourage them as much as we can. I used to weep with
mortification when I found myself 'written up'; now, however, I have
learned to bear such trials with fortitude--if not with resignation."
"Forgive me!" said Patsy, contritely. "Somehow I've had a false idea of
these things. If I knew you better, Miss Von Taer, you'd soon convert me
to be an admirer of society."

"I'd like to do that, Miss Doyle, for you interest me. Will you return
my call?"

"Indeed I will," promised the girl, readily. "I'm flattered that you
called on me at all, Miss Von Taer, for you might easily have amused
yourself better. You must be very busy, with all the demands society
makes on one. When shall I come? Make it some off time, when we won't be
disturbed."

Diana smiled at her eagerness. How nescient the poor little thing was!

"Your cousins, Miss Merrick and Miss De Graf, have consented to receive
with me on the evening of the nineteenth. Will you not join us?"

"Louise and Beth!" cried Patsy, astounded.

"Isn't it nice of them? And may I count upon you, also?"

Patsy smiled dubiously into the other's face.

"Let me out of it!" she said. "Can't you see I'm no butterfly?"

Diana saw many things, having taken a shrewd account of the girl long
before this. Miss Patricia Doyle was short and plump, with a round,
merry face covered with freckles, hair indisputably red and a
_retrouss_ nose. Also she possessed a pair of wonderful blue eyes--eyes
that danced and scintillated with joyous good humor--eyes so captivating
that few ever looked beyond them or noted the plain face they
glorified. But the critic admitted that the face was charmingly
expressive, the sweet and sensitive mouth always in sympathy with the
twinkling, candid eyes. Life and energy radiated from her small person,
which Miss Von Taer grudgingly conceded to possess unusual fascination.
Here was a creature quite imperfect in detail, yet destined to allure
and enchant whomsoever she might meet. All this was quite the reverse of
Diana's own frigid personality. Patsy would make an excellent foil for
her.

"As you please, my dear," she said graciously; "but do you not think it
would amuse you to make your debut in society--unimpeachable
society--and be properly introduced to the occupants of the 'pedestals,'
as your cousins will be?"

Patsy reflected. If Beth and Louise had determined to undertake this
venture why should she hold back? Moreover, she experienced a girlish
and wholly natural curiosity to witness a fashionable gathering and
"size up" the lions for herself. So she said:

"I'll come, if you really want me; and I'll try my best to behave
nicely. But I can't imagine why you have chosen to take us three girls
under your wing; unless--" with sudden intuition, "it's for Uncle John's
sake."

"That was it, at first," replied Diana, rising to go; "but now that I've
seen you I'm delighted to have you on your own account. Come early,
dear; we must be ready to receive our guests by nine."

"Nine o'clock!" reflected Patsy, when her visitor had gone; "why, I'm
often in bed by that time."




CHAPTER V


PREPARING FOR THE PLUNGE

John Merrick lived with the Doyles at their Willing Square apartments.
There were but two of the Doyles--Patricia and her father, Major Doyle,
a tall, handsome, soldierly man with white moustache and hair. The Major
was noted as a "character," a keen wit and a most agreeable type of the
"old Irish gentleman." He fairly worshipped his daughter, and no one
blamed him for it. His business, as special agent and manager for his
brother-in-law's millions, kept the Major closely occupied and afforded
John Merrick opportunity to spend his days as be pleased. The rich man
was supposed to be "retired," yet the care of his investments and income
was no light task, as the Major found.

We are accustomed to regard extreme wealth as the result of hard-headed
shrewdness, not wholly divorced from unscrupulous methods, yet no one
could accuse John Merrick or his representative with being other than
kindly, simple-hearted and honest. Uncle John says that he never
intended to "get rich"; it was all the result of carelessness. He had
been so immersed in business that he failed to notice how fast his
fortune was growing. When he awoke to a realization of his immense
accumulation he promptly retired, appointing Major Doyle to look after
his investments and seeking personal leisure after many years of hard
work. He instructed his agent to keep his income from growing into more
capital by rendering wise assistance to all worthy charities and
individuals, and this, as you may suppose, the Major found a herculean
task. Often he denounced Uncle John for refusing to advise him, claiming
that the millionaire had selfishly thrust the burden of his wealth on
the Major's broad shoulders. While there was an element of truth in this
the burden it was not so heavy as to make the old soldier unhappy, and
the two men loved and respected one another with manly cordiality.

Patricia was recognized as Uncle John's favorite niece and it was
understood she was to inherit the bulk of his property, although some
millions might be divided between Beth and Louise "if they married
wisely." Neither Uncle John nor the Major ever seemed to consider
Patsy's marrying; she was such a child that wedlock for her seemed a
remote possibility.

The Sunday afternoon following Diana Von Taer's visit to the three
nieces found the girls all congregated in Patsy's own room, where an
earnest discussion was being conducted. That left Uncle John to take his
after-dinner nap in the big Morris chair in the living room, where Major
Doyle sat smoking-sulkily while he gazed from the window and begrudged
the moments Patsy was being kept from him.

Finally the door opened and the three girls trooped out.

"Huh! Is the conspiracy all cut-an'-dried?" growled the Major.

Uncle John woke up with a final snort, removed the newspaper from his
face and sat up. He smiled benignantly upon his nieces.

"It's all your fault, sor!" declared Major Doyle, selecting the little
millionaire as the safest recipient of his displeasure. "Your
foolishness has involved us all in this dreadful complication. Why on
earth couldn't you leave well-enough alone?"

Uncle John received the broadside with tolerant equanimity.

"What's wrong; my dears?" he enquired, directing his mild glance toward
the bevy of young girls.

"I am unaware that anything is wrong, Uncle," replied Louise gravely.
"But since we are about to make our debut in society it is natural we
should have many things to discuss that would prove quite uninteresting
to men. Really, Uncle John, this is a great event--perhaps the most
important event of our lives."

"Shucks an' shoestrings!" grunted the Major. "What's in this
paper-shelled, painted, hollow thing ye call 'society' to interest three
healthy, wide-awake girls? Tell me that!"

"You don't understand, dear," said Patsy, soothing him with a kiss.

"I think he does," remarked Beth, with meditative brows. "Modern society
is a man-made--or woman-made--condition, to a large extent artificial,
selfish and unwholesome."

"Oh, Beth!" protested Louise. "You're talking like a rank socialist. I
can understand common people sneering at society, which is so far out of
their reach; but a girl about to be accepted in the best circles has no
right to rail at her own caste."

"There can be no caste in America," declared Beth, stubbornly.

"But there _is_ caste in America, and will be so long as the
exclusiveness of society is recognized by the people at large,"
continued Louise. "If it is a 'man-made condition' isn't it the most
respected, most refined, most desirable condition that one may attain
to?"

"There are plenty of honest and happy people in the world who ignore
society altogether," answered Beth. "It strikes me that your social
stars are mighty few in the broad firmament of humanity."

"But they're stars, for all that, dear," said Uncle John, smiling at her
with a hint of approval in his glance, yet picking up the argument; "and
they look mighty big and bright to the crowd below. It's quite natural.
You can't keep individuals from gaining distinction, even in America.
There are few generals in an army, for instance; and they're 'man-made';
but that's no reason the generals ain't entitled to our admiration."

"Let's admire 'em, then--from a distance," retorted the Major, realizing
the military simile was employed to win his sympathy.

"Certain things, my dear Major, are naturally dear to a girl's heart,"
continued Uncle John, musingly; "and we who are not girls have no right
to condemn their natural longings. Girls love dancing, pink teas and
fudge-parties, and where can they find 'em in all their perfection but
in high society? Girls love admiration and flirtations--you do, my
dears; you can't deny it--and the male society swells have the most time
to devote to such things. Girls love pretty dresses--"

"Oh, Uncle! you've hit the nail on the head now," exclaimed Patsy,
laughing. "We must all have new gowns for this reception, and as we're
to assist Miss Von Taer the dresses must harmonize, so to speak,
and--and--"  "And be quite suited to the occasion," broke in Louise;
"and--"

"And wear our lives out with innumerable fittings," concluded Beth,
gloomily.

"But why new dresses?" demanded the Major. "You've plenty of old ones
that are clean and pretty, I'm sure; and our Patsy had one from the
dressmaker only last week that's fit for a queen."

"Oh, Daddy! you don't understand," laughed Patsy.

"This time, Major, I fear you don't," agreed Beth. "Your convictions
regarding society may be admirable, but you're weak on the gown
question."

"If the women would only listen to me," began the Major, dictatorially;
but Uncle John cut him short.

"They won't, sir; they'll listen to no man when it comes to
dressmaking."

"Don't they dress to captivate the men, then?" asked the Major, with
fine sarcasm.

"Not at all," answered Louise, loftily. "Men seldom know what a woman
has on, if she looks nice; but women take in every detail of dress and
criticise it severely if anything happens to be out of date, ill
fitting or in bad taste."

"Then they're in bad taste themselves!" retorted the Major, hotly.

"Tut-tut, sir; who are you to criticise woman's ways?" asked Uncle John,
much amused. The Major was silenced, but he glared as if unconvinced.

"Dressmaking is a nuisance," remarked Beth, placidly; "but it's the
penalty we pay for being women."

"You're nothing but slips o' girls, not out of your teens," grumbled the
Major. And no one paid any attention to him.

"We want to do you credit, Uncle John," said Patsy, brightly. "Perhaps
our names will be in the papers."

"They're there already," announced Mr. Merrick, picking up the Sunday
paper that lay beside him.

A chorus of exclamations was followed by a dive for the paper, and even
the Major smiled grimly as he observed the three girlish heads close
together and three pair of eager eyes scanning swiftly the society
columns.

"Here it is!" cried Patsy, dancing up and down like a school-girl; and
Louise read in a dignified voice--which trembled slightly with
excitement and pleasure--the following item:

"Miss Von Taer will receive next Thursday evening at the family mansion
in honor of Miss Merrick, Miss Doyle and Miss De Graf. These three
charming _debutantes_ are nieces of John Merrick, the famous tin-plate
magnate."

"Phoo!" growled the Major, during the impressive hush that followed;
"that's it, exactly. Your names are printed because you're John
Merrick's nieces. If it hadn't been for tin-plate, my dears, society
never would 'a' known ye at all, at all!"




CHAPTER VI


THE FLY IN THE BROTH

Diana was an experienced entertainer and under her skillful supervision
the reception proved eminently successful. Nor had she cause to be
ashamed of the three _protges_ she presented to society, since capable
_modistes_ had supplemented their girlish charms and freshness with
costumes pertinent to the occasion. Perhaps Patsy's chubby form looked a
little "dumpish" in her party gown, for some of Diana's female guests
regarded her with quiet amusement and bored tolerance, while the same
critical posse was amazed and envious at Beth's superb beauty and
stately bearing. After all, it was Louise who captured the woman
contingency and scored the greatest success; for her appearance was not
only dainty and attractive but she was so perfectly self-possessed and
responsive and bore herself so admirably under the somewhat trying;
circumstances of a debut that she won the cordial goodwill of all whom
she encountered. The hostess was elaborately gowned in white pompadour
satin, trimmed with white chiffon and embroidered in pink roses and
pearls. The Von Taer home was handsomely decorated for the occasion,
since Diana never did anything by halves and for her own credit insisted
on attention to those details of display that society recognizes and
loves. Hundreds of long-stemmed American Beauties and Kentia palms were
combined in beautifying the spacious hall, while orchids in marvelous
variety nodded their blossoms in the great drawing-room, where the
young-ladies received. These rare and precious flowers were arranged in
bronze baskets with sprays of maidenhair. In the music room adjoining,
great clusters of Madam Chantenay roses embellished the charming scene.
Branches of cherry-blossoms, supplied by hot-houses, were banked in the
lofty dining-room, where a Japanese pergola made of bamboo and lighted
with red lanterns was erected at the upper end. The attendants here were
Japanese girls in native costume, and the long table was laid with a
lace cloth over pink satin, with butterfly bows of pink tulle. The table
itself was decorated with cut-glass baskets of Cecil Brunner roses
mingled with lilies of the valley and refreshments were distributed to
the standing guests as they entered.

The affair was in the nature of a typical "crush," for Diana's list of
eligibles included most of the prominent society folk then in town, and
she was too important a personage to have her invitations disregarded.
Beth and Patsy were fairly bewildered by the numerous introductions,
until names became meaningless in their ears; but Louise, perfectly
composed and in no wise distracted by her surroundings or the music of
the orchestra and the perpetual buzz of conversation in the crowded
rooms, impressed each individual upon her memory clearly, and was not
likely to blunder in regard to names or individuality in the future.
This is a rare talent, indeed, and scores, largely in one's favor; for
no one likes to think himself so unimportant as to be forgotten, under
any circumstances.

It was during the thick of the reception that one of Miss Von Taer's
intimates, a graceful blond girl, suddenly seized her arm and whispered:
"Oh, Diana! Guess who's here--guess, my dear!"  Diana knew. Her eyes,
always narrowed until the lashes shielded their sharp watchfulness,
seldom missed observing anything of importance. She pressed her friend's
hand and turned again to the line of guests, while Louise, who had
overheard the excited whisper, wondered casually what it might mean.

Soon after she knew. A tall, handsome young fellow was bowing before
Diana, who--wonder of wonders!--for an instant unclosed her great eyes
and shot an electric glance into his smiling face. The glance was brief
as unexpected, yet it must have told the young man something, for he
flushed and bowed again as if to hide his embarrassment. It also told
Louise something, and her heart, which had given a quick bound at sight
of the man's face, began to cry out against Diana Von Taer's artifices.

"Mr. Arthur Weldon," said the hostess, in her soft voice; and now, as
the young man turned an eager gaze on Louise and half extended his hand,
the girl's face grew pale and she imitated Diana to the extent of
dropping her eyes and bowing with frigid indifference.  Standing close
he whispered "Louise!" in a pleading tone that made Diana frown
wickedly. But the girl was unresponsive and another instant forced him
to turn to Beth.

"Why, Arthur! are you here, then?" said the girl, in a surprised but
cordial tone.

"That is not astonishing, Miss Beth," he replied. "The puzzling fact is
that _you_ are here--and under such auspices," he added, in a lower
tone.

Patsy now claimed him, with a frank greeting, and Arthur Weldon could do
little more than press her hand when the line forced him to move on and
give place to others.

But this especial young fellow occupied the minds of all four girls long
after the crowd had swallowed him up. Diana was uneasy and obviously
disturbed by the discovery that he was known to the three cousins, as
well as by the memory of his tone as he addressed Louise Merrick.
Louise, who had read Diana's quick glance with the accuracy of an
intuitionist, felt a sudden suspicion and dislike for Diana now
dominating her. Behind all this was a mystery, which shall be explained
here because the reader deserves to be more enlightened than the
characters themselves.

Arthur Weldon's nature was a queer combination of weakness and strength.
He was physically brave but a moral coward. The motherless son of a man
wholly immersed in business, he had been much neglected in his youth and
his unstable character was largely the result of this neglect. On
leaving college he refused a business career planned for him by his
father, who cast him off with scornful indifference, and save for a slim
temporary allowance promised to disinherit him. It was during this
period that Arthur met Louise and fell desperately in love with her. The
girl appeared to return the young fellow's devotion, but shrewd, worldly
Mrs. Merrick, discovering that the boy was practically disinherited and
had no prospects whatever, forbade him the house. Louise, until now but
mildly interested in the young-man, resented her mother's interference
and refused to give him up. She found ways to meet Arthur Weldon outside
her home, so that the situation had become complicated and dangerous
when Uncle John seized his three nieces and whisked them off to Europe.
Young Weldon, under an assumed name, followed and attached himself to
the party; but John Merrick's suspicions were presently aroused and on
discovering the identity of the youth he forbade him or Louise to "make
love" or even speak of such a thing during the remainder of the trip.

The young fellow, by manly acts on some occasions and grave weaknesses
on others, won Uncle John's kindly interest. The old gentleman knew
human nature, and saw much to admire as well as condemn in Louise's
friend. Beth and Patsy found him a pleasant comrade, and after all
love-making was tabooed they were quite a harmonious party. Finally the
sudden death of Weldon's father left him the possessor of a fortune. He
returned to America to look after his newly-acquired business and became
so immersed in it that Louise felt herself neglected when she came home
expecting him to dance attendance upon her as before. She treated him
coldly and he ceased calling, his volatile and sensitive nature
resenting such treatment.  It is curious what little things influence
the trend of human lives. Many estrangements are caused by trifles so
intangible that we can scarcely locate them at all.

At first the girl was very unhappy at the alienation, but soon schooled
herself to forget her former admirer. Arthur Weldon, for his part,
consoled himself by plunging into social distractions and devoting
himself to Diana Von Taer, whose strange personality for a time
fascinated him.

The business could not hold young Weldon's vacillant temperament for
long; neither could Diana. As a matter of fact his heart, more staunch
than he himself suspected, had never wavered much from Louise. Yet pride
forbade his attempting to renew their former relations. It was now some
months since he had seen the girl, and his eager exclamation was wrested
from him by surprise and a sudden awakening to the fact that his love
for her had merely slumbered.

Diana, worldly, cold and calculating as was her nature, had been
profoundly touched by Arthur's devotion to her. Usually young men were
soon repulsed by her unfortunate personality, which was not easily
understood. Therefore her intense nature responded freely to this
admirer's attentions, and if Diana could really love she loved Arthur
Weldon. He had never proposed to her or even intimated it was his
intention to do so, but she conceived a powerful desire to win him and
had never abandoned this motive when he grew cold and appeared to desert
her. Just now he was recently back from Italy, where he had passed
several months, and Diana's reception was his first reappearance in
society. The girl had planned to bring him to her side this evening and
intended to exert her strongest fascinations to lure him back to his
former allegiance; so her annoyance may be guessed when she found her
three _protges_ seemingly more familiar with the young man than was
she herself.

At last the line ended and the introductions were complete. The
_debutantes_ were at once the center of interested groups composed of
those who felt it a duty or pleasure to show them attention. Diana
wandered to the music room and waylaid Arthur Weldon, who was just about
to make his escape from the house, having decided it was impossible to
find an opportunity to converse with Louise that evening.

"I'm so glad you came, Arthur," she said, a quick glance assuring her
they were not overheard. "You landed from the steamer but yesterday, I
hear."

"And came straightway to pay my respects to my old friend," he answered
lightly. "Isn't it unusual for you to present _debutantes_, Diana?"

"You know these girls, don't you, Arthur?"

"Yes; I met them in Europe."

"And flirted with Miss Merrick? Be honest, Arthur, I know your secret."

"Do you? Then you know we were merely good friends," said he, annoyed at
her accusation.

"Of course. You called her 'Louise,' didn't you?"

"To be sure. And Patsy called me 'Arthur. You may have heard her."

"Patsy?"

"That's Miss Patricia Doyle--our dear little Patsy."

"Oh. I'm sure you didn't fall in love with _her_, at any rate."

"I'm not so sure. Everybody loves Patsy. But I had no time for
love-making. I was doing Europe."

"Wasn't that a year or so ago?" she asked, realizing he was trying to
evade further reference to Louise.

"Yes."

"And since then?"

"I've been away the last six or seven months, as you know, on my second
trip abroad."

"But before that--when you first returned?"

"If I remember rightly I was then much in the society of Miss Von Taer.
Is the catechism ended at last?"

"Yes," she replied, laughing. "Don't think me inquisitive, Arthur; I was
surprised to find you knew these girls, with whom I am myself but
lightly acquainted."

"Yet you introduce them to your very select set?"

"To please my father, who wishes to please Mr. Merrick."

"I understand," said he, nodding. "But they're nice girls, Diana.
You're not running chances, I assure you."

"That relieves me," she replied rather scornfully. "If Arthur Weldon
will vouch for them--"

"But I don't. I'll vouch for no one--not even myself," he declared
hastily. She was calmly reading his face, and did not seem to approve
the text.

"Are you as fickle as ever, then, _mon cher_?" she asked, softly.

"I'm not fickle, Diana. My fault is that I'm never serious."

"Never?"

"I cannot remember ever being serious; at least, where a girl was
concerned."

Diana bit her lips to restrain a frown, but her eyes, which he was
avoiding, flashed wickedly.

"That is surely a fault, my Arthur," was her tender reply. "Were you
never serious during our quiet evenings together; our dances, theatre
parties and romps?"

"That was merely fun. And you, Diana?"

"Oh, I enjoyed the fun, too. It meant so much to me. I began to live,
then, and found life very sweet. But when you suddenly left me and went
abroad--ah, _that_ was indeed serious."

Her tone was full of passionate yearning. He laughed, trying to appear
at ease. Some sort of an understanding must be had with Diana sooner or
later, and she might as well realize at this present interview that the
old relations could not be restored. His nature was not brutal and he
disliked to hurt her; moreover, the boy had an uneasy feeling that he
had been a far more ardent admirer of this peculiar girl than any fellow
should be who had had no serious intentions; yet it would be folly to
allow Diana to think she could win him back to his former allegiance. No
compromising word had ever left his lips; he had never spoken of love to
her. Yet the girl's attitude seemed to infer a certain possession of him
which was far from agreeable.

Having gone so far, he should have said more; but here again his lack of
moral courage proved his stumbling-block, and he weakly evaded a frank
expression of his true feelings.  "Life," he began somewhat haltingly,
to break the embarrassing pause, "is only serious when we make it so;
and as soon as we make it serious it makes us unhappy. So I've adopted
one invariable rule: to laugh and be gay."

"Then I too will be gay, and together we'll enjoy life," responded
Diana, with an effort to speak lightly. "I shall let your moods be my
moods, Arthur, as a good friend should. Are we not affinities?"

Again he knew not what to say. Her persistence in clinging to her
intangible hold upon him was extremely irritating, and he realized the
girl was far too clever for him to cope with and was liable to cause him
future trouble. Instead of seizing the opportunity to frankly undeceive
her he foolishly evaded the subject.

"You've been tempting fate to-night," he remarked with assumed
carelessness. "Don't you remember that to stand four girls in a row is a
bad omen?"

"Only for the one who first winks. Isn't that the way the saying goes? I
seldom wink, myself," she continued, smilingly. "But I have no faith in
ill omens. Their power is entirely due to mental fear."

"I think not," said Arthur, glad the conversation had taken this turn.
"Once I knew a fellow with thirteen letters in his name. He had no
mental fear. But he proposed to a girl--and was accepted."

She gave him one of those sudden, swift glances that were so
disconcerting.

"If you had a middle initial, there would be thirteen letters in your
own name, Arthur Weldon."

"But I haven't, Diana; I haven't," he protested, eagerly. "And if ever I
propose to a girl I'm sure she'll refuse me. But I've no intention of
doing such a crazy thing, so I'm perfectly safe."

"You cannot be sure until you try, Arthur," she replied pointedly, and
with a start he became conscious that he was again treading upon
dangerous ground.

"Come; let us rejoin your guests," said he, offering her his arm. "They
would all hate me if they knew I was keeping the fair Diana from them so
long."  "Arthur, I must have a good long; talk with you--one of our
old, delightful confabs," she said, earnestly. "Will you call Sunday
afternoon? Then we shall be quite undisturbed."

He hesitated.

"Sunday afternoon?" he answered.

"Yes."

"All right; I'll come, Diana."

She gave him a grateful look and taking his arm allowed him to lead her
back to the drawing-room. The crush was over, many having already
departed. Some of the young people were dancing in the open spaces to
the music of a string orchestra hidden behind a bank of ferns in the
hall.

Louise and Beth were the centers of attentive circles; Patsy conversed
with merry freedom with a group of ancient dowagers, who delighted in
her freshness and healthy vigor and were flattered by her consideration.
Mrs. Merrick--for she had been invited--sat in a corner gorgeously robed
and stiff as a poker, her eyes devouring the scene. Noting the triumph
of Louise she failed to realize she was herself neglected.  A single
glance sufficed to acquaint Diana with all this, and after a gracious
word to her guests here and there she asked Arthur to dance with her. He
could not well refuse, but felt irritated and annoyed when he observed
Louise's eyes fastened upon him in amused disdain. After a few turns he
discovered some departing ones waiting to bid their hostess _adieu_, and
escaped from his unpleasant predicament by halting his partner before
them. Then he slipped away and quietly left the house before Diana had
time to miss him.




CHAPTER VII


THE HERO ENTERS AND TROUBLE BEGINS

The Von Taer reception fully launched the three nieces in society.
Endorsed by Diana and backed by John Merrick's millions and their own
winsome charms, they were sure to become favorites in that admirable set
to which they had fortunately gained admittance.

Cards poured in upon them during; the succeeding days and they found
themselves busy returning calls and attending dinners, fetes, bridge
parties and similar diversions. The great Mrs. Sandringham took a
decided fancy to Louise, and when the committee was appointed to arrange
for the social Kermess to be held in December, this dictatorial leader
had the girl's name included in the list. Naturally the favor led to all
three cousins taking active part in the most famous social event of the
season, and as an especial mark of favoritism they were appointed to
conduct the "flower booth," one of the important features of the
Kermess.

Mrs. Merrick was in the seventh heaven of ecstatic delight; Uncle John
declared his three girls were sure to become shining lights, if not
actual constellations, wherever they might be placed; Major Doyle
growled and protested; but was secretly pleased to have "our Patsy the
captain of the dress parade," where he fondly imagined she outclassed
all others. All former denunciations of society at large were now
ignored, even by unimpressive Beth, and the girls soon became deeply
interested in their novel experiences.

Arthur Weldon sulked at home, unhappy and undecided, for a day or two
after the reception. Sunday noon he dispatched a messenger to Diana with
a note saying he would be unable to keep his appointment with her that
afternoon. Then he went straight to the Merrick home and sent his card
to Louise. The girl flushed, smiled, frowned, and decided to go down.

No one had ever interested her so much as Arthur Weldon. There had been
a spice of romance about their former relations that made her still
regard him as exceptional among mankind. She had been asking herself,
since the night of the reception, if she still loved him, but could not
come to a positive conclusion. The boy was no longer "ineligible," as he
had been at first; even Uncle John could now have no serious objection
to him. He was handsome, agreeable, occupied a good social position and
was fairly well off in the way of worldly goods--the last point removing
Mrs. Merrick's former rejection of Arthur as a desirable son-in-law.

But girls are wayward and peculiar in such an _affaire du coeur_, and
none of these things might have weighed with Louise had she not
discovered that Diana Von Taer was in love with Arthur and intended to
win him. That aroused the girl's fighting instincts, rendered the young
man doubly important, and easily caused Louise to forget her resentment
at his temporary desertion of her. Perhaps, she reflected, it had
partially been her own fault. Now that Arthur showed a disposition to
renew their friendship, and she might promise herself the satisfaction
of defeating Diana's ambitions, it would be diplomatic, at least, to
receive the youth with cordial frankness.

Therefore she greeted him smilingly and with outstretched hand, saying:

"This is quite a surprise, Mr. Weldon. I'd a notion you had forgotten
me."  "No, indeed, Louise! How could you imagine such a thing?" he
answered, reproachfully.

"There was some evidence of the fact," she asserted archly. "At one time
you gave me no peace; then you became retiring. At last you disappeared
wholly. What could I think, sir, under such circumstances?"

He stood looking down at her thoughtfully. How pretty she had grown; and
how mature and womanly.

"Louise," said he, gently, "don't let us indulge in mutual reproaches.
Some one must have been at fault and I'll willingly take all the blame
if you will forgive me. Once we were--were good friends. We--we intended
to be still more to one another, Louise, but something occurred, I don't
know what, to--to separate us."

"Why, you went away," said the girl, laughing; "and that of course
separated us."

"You treated me like a beggar; don't forget that part of it, dear. Of
course I went away."

"And consoled yourself with a certain Miss Diana Von Taer. It has lately
been rumored you are engaged to her."  "Me? What nonsense?" But he
hushed guiltily, and Louise noted everything and determined he should
not escape punishment.

"Diana, at least, is in earnest," she remarked, with assumed
indifference. "You may not care to deny that you have been very
attentive to her."

"Not especially so," he declared, stoutly.

"People gossip, you know. And Diana is charming."

"She's an iceberg!"

"Oh, you have discovered that? Was she wholly unresponsive, then?"

"No," he said, with a touch of anger. "I have never cared for Diana,
except in a friendly way. She amused me for a while when--when I was
wretched. But I never made love to her; not for a moment. Afterward,
why--then----"

"Well; what then?" as he hesitated, growing red again.

"I found she had taken my careless attentions in earnest, and the play
was getting dangerous. So I went abroad."

Louise considered this explanation seriously. She believed he was
speaking the truth, so far as he knew. But at the same time she realized
from her own experience that Arthur might as easily deceive himself as
Diana in his estimate as to the warmth of the devotion he displayed. His
nature was impetuous and ardent. That Diana should have taken his
attentions seriously and become infatuated with the handsome young
fellow was not a matter to cause surprise.

Gradually Louise felt her resentment disappearing. In Arthur's presence
the charm of his personality influenced her to be lenient with his
shortcomings. And his evident desire for a reconciliation found an echo
in her own heart.

Mutual explanations are excellent to clear a murky atmosphere, and an
hour's earnest conversation did much to restore these two congenial
spirits to their former affectionate relations. Of course Louise did not
succumb too fully to his pleadings, for her feminine instinct warned her
to keep the boy on "the anxious seat" long enough to enable him to
appreciate her value and the honor of winning her good graces. Moreover,
she made some severe conditions and put him on his good behavior. If he
proved worthy, and was steadfast and true, why then the future might
reward him freely.

Diana had been making careful plans for her interview with Arthur that
Sunday afternoon. With no futile attempt to deceive herself as to
existent conditions she coldly weighed the chances in her mental scale
and concluded she had sufficient power to win this unstable youth to her
side and induce him to forget that such a person as Louise Merrick ever
existed.

Diana was little experienced in such affairs, it is true. Arthur Weldon
had been her first and only declared admirer, and no one living had
studied his peculiar nature more critically than this observant girl.
Also she knew well her own physical failings. She realized that her
personality was to many repulsive, rather than attractive, and this in
spite of her exquisite form, her perfect breeding and many undeniable
accomplishments. Men, as a rule, seldom remained at her side save
through politeness, and even seemed to fear her; but never until now had
she cared for any man sufficiently to wish to retain or interest him.
There were unsuspected fascinations lying dormant in her nature, and
Miss Von Taer calmly reflected that the exercise of these qualities,
backed by her native wit and capacity for intrigue, could easily
accomplish the object she desired.

Thus she had planned her campaign and carefully dressed herself in
anticipation of Arthur's call when his note came canceling the
engagement. After rereading his lame excuse she sat down in a quiet
corner and began to think. The first gun had been fired, the battle was
on, and like a wise general she carefully marshaled her forces for
combat.

An hour or two later she turned to her telephone book and called up the
Merrick establishment. A voice, that of a maid, evidently, answered her.

"I wish to speak with Miss Merrick," said Diana.

Louise, annoyed at being disturbed, left Arthur's side to respond to the
call.

"Who is it, please?" she asked.

"Is Mr. Weldon still there, or has he gone?" enquired Diana, disguising
her voice and speaking imperatively..  "Why, he's still here," answered
bewildered Louise; "but who is talking, please?"

No answer.

"Do you wish to speak with Mr. Weldon?" continued the girl, mystified at
such an odd procedure.

Diana hung up her receiver, severing the connection. The click of the
instrument assured Louise there was no use in waiting longer, so she
returned to Arthur. She could not even guess who had called her. Arthur
could, though, when he had heard her story, and Diana's impudent
meddling made him distinctly uneasy. He took care not to enlighten
Louise, and the incident was soon forgotten by her.

"It proved just as I expected," mused Diana, huddled in her reclining'
chair. "The fool has thrown me over to go to her. But this is not
important. With the situation so clearly defined I shall know exactly
what I must do to protect my own interests."

Mr. Von Taer was away from home that Sunday afternoon, and would not
return until a late hour. Diana went to the telephone again and after
several unsuccessful attempts located her cousin, Mr. Charles Connoldy
Mershone, at a club.

"It's Diana," she said, when at last communication was established. "I
want you to come over and see me; at once."

"You'll have to excuse me, Di," was the answer. "I was unceremoniously
kicked out the last time, you know."

"Father's away. It's all right, Charlie. Come along."

"Can't see it, my fair cousin. You've all treated me like a bull-pup,
and I'm not anxious to mix up with that sort of a relationship. Anything
more? I'm going to play pool to win my dinner."

"Funds running low, Charlie?"

"Worse than that; they're invisible."

"Then pay attention. Call a taxi at once, and get here as soon as you
can. I'll foot the bill--and any others that happen to be bothering
you."

A low, surprised whistle came over the wire.

"What's up, Di?" he asked, with new interest.

"Come and find out."

"Can I be useful?"

"Assuredly; to yourself."

"All right; I'm on the way."

He hung up, and Diana gave a sigh of content as she slowly returned to
her den and the easy chair, where Mr. Mershone found her "coiled" some
half hour later.

"This is a queer go," said the young man, taking a seat and glancing
around with knitted brows. "It isn't so long since dear Uncle Hedrik
tumbled me out of here neck and crop; and now Cousin Diana invites me to
return."

At first glance young Mershone seemed an attractive young fellow, tall,
finely formed and well groomed. But his eyes were too close together and
his handsome features bore unmistakable marks of dissipation.

"You disgraced us a year or so ago, Charlie," said Diana, in her soft,
quiet accents, "and under such circumstances we could not tolerate you.
You can scarcely blame us for cutting your acquaintance. But now--"

"Well, now?" he enquired coolly, trying to read her impassive face.

"I need the services of just such an unscrupulous and clever individual
as you have proven yourself to be. I'm willing to pay liberally for
those services, and you doubtless need the money. Are we allies, then?"

Mershone laughed, with little genuine mirth.

"Of course, my dear cousin," he responded; "provided you propose any
legal villainy. I'm not partial to the police; but I really need the
money, as you suggest."

"And you will be faithful?" she asked, regarding him doubtfully.

"To the cause, you may be sure. But understand me: I balk at murder and
burglary. Somehow, the police seem to know me. I'll not do anything that
might lead to a jail sentence, because there are easier ways to get
money. However, I don't imagine your proposed plan is very desperate,
Diana; it's more liable to be dirty work. Never mind; you may command
me, my dear cousin--if the pay is ample."

"The pay will be ample if you succeed," she began.

"I don't like that. I may not succeed."

"Listen to me, Charlie. Do you know Arthur Weldon?"

"Slightly; not very well."

"I intend to marry him. He has paid me marked attentions in the past;
but now--he--"

"Wants to slip the leash. Quite natural, my dear."

"He has become infatuated with another girl; a light-headed,
inexperienced little thing who is likely to marry the first man who asks
her. She is very rich--in her own right, too--and her husband will be a
fortunate man."

Mershone stared at her. Then he whistled, took a few turns up and down
the room, and reseated himself.

"Evidently!" he ejaculated, lighting a cigarette without permission and
then leaning back thoughtfully in his chair.

"Charlie," continued Diana, "you may as well marry Louise Merrick and
settle down to a life of respectability. You've a dashing, masterful way
which no girl of her sort can long resist. I propose that you make
desperate love to Louise Merrick and so cut Arthur Weldon out of the
deal entirely. My part of the comedy will be to attract him to my side
again. Now you have the entire proposition in a nutshell."

He smoked for a time in reflective silence.

"What's the girl like?" he enquired, presently. "Is she attractive?"

"Sufficiently so to fascinate Arthur Weldon. Moreover, she has just been
introduced in our set, and knows nothing of your shady past history.
Even if rumors came to her ears, young creatures of her sort often find
a subtle charm in a man accused of being 'naughty.'"

"Humph!"

"If you win her, you get a wife easily managed and a splendid fortune to
squander as you please."

"Sounds interesting, Di, doesn't it? But--"

"In regard to preliminary expenses," she interrupted, calmly, "I have
said that your reward will be ample when you have won the game. But
meantime I am willing to invest the necessary funds in the enterprise. I
will allow you a thousand a month."  "Bah! that's nothing at all!" said
he, contemptuously, as he flicked the ashes from his cigarette.

"What do you demand, then?"

"Five hundred a week, in advance. It's an expensive job, Di."

"Very well; I will give you five hundred a week; but only as long as you
work earnestly to carry out the plot. I shall watch you, Charlie. And
you must not lose sight of the ultimate reward."

"I won't, my sweet cousin. It's a bargain," he said, readily enough.
"When do I begin, and what's the program?"

"Draw your chair nearer," said Diana, restraining her triumphant joy.
"I'll explain everything to you in detail. It will be my part to plan,
and yours to execute."

"Good!" he exclaimed, with a cheerful grin. "I feel like an executioner
already!"




CHAPTER VIII


OPENING THE CAMPAIGN

Louise's little romance, which now began to thrive vigorously, was
regarded with calmness by her cousins and her mother, who knew of the
former episode between her and Arthur and attached little importance to
the renewed flirtation in which they indulged. That they were deceived
in their estimate was due to the girl's reputation for frivolity where
young men were concerned. She had been dubbed a "flirt" ever since she
first began to wear long dresses, and her nature was not considered deep
enough for her heart to be ever seriously affected. Therefore the young
girl was gravely misjudged.

Louise was not one to bare her heart, even to her most intimate friends,
and no one now suspected that at last her deepest, truest womanly
affections were seriously involved. The love for Arthur that had lain
dormant in her heart was aroused at a time when she was more mature and
capable of recognizing truly her feelings, so that it was not long
before she surrendered her reserve and admitted to him that life would
mean little for her unless they might pass the years together. For his
part, young Weldon sincerely loved Louise, and had never wavered from
his firm devotion during all the past months of misunderstanding.

The general impression that they were "merely flirting" afforded the
lovers ample opportunity to have their walks and drives together
undisturbed, and during these soulful communions they arrived at such a
perfect understanding that both were confident nothing could ever
disturb their trust and confidence.

It was at a theatre party that the three _debutantes_ first met Charlie
Mershone, but they saw little of him that first evening and scarcely
noticed his presence. Louise, indeed, noted that his eyes were fixed
upon her more than once with thinly veiled admiration, and without a
thought of disloyalty to Arthur, but acting upon the impulse of her
coquettish nature, she responded with a demure smile of encouragement.
Charlie Mershone was an adept at playing parts. He at first regarded
Louise much as a hunter does the game he is stalking. Patsy Doyle was
more jolly and Beth De Graf more beautiful than Miss Merrick; but the
young man would in any event have preferred the latter's dainty
personality. When he found her responsive to his admiring glances he was
astounded to note his heart beating rapidly--a thing quite foreign to
his usual temperament. Yes, this girl would do very nicely, both as a
wife and as a banker. Assuredly the game was well worth playing, as
Diana had asserted. He must make it his business to discover what
difficulties must be overcome in winning her. Of course Arthur Weldon
was the main stumbling-block; but Weldon was a ninny; he must be thrust
aside; Diana had promised to attend to that.

Never in his life had Charles Connoldy Mershone been in earnest before.
After his first interview with Louise Merrick he became in deadly
earnest. His second meeting with her was at Marie Delmar's bridge whist
party, where they had opportunity for an extended conversation. Arthur
was present this evening, but by some chance Mershone drew Louise for
his partner at cards, and being a skillful player he carried her in
progression from table to table, leaving poor Arthur far behind and
indulging in merry repartee and mild flirtation until they felt they
were quite well acquainted.

Louise found the young man a charming conversationalist. He had a
dashing, confidential way of addressing the girl which impressed her as
flattering and agreeable, while his spirits were so exuberant and
sparkling with humor that she was thoroughly amused every moment while
in his society. Indeed, Mr. Mershone was really talented, and had he
possessed any manly attributes, or even the ordinary honorable instincts
of mankind, there is little doubt he would have been a popular favorite.
But he had made his mark, and it was a rather grimy one. From earliest
youth he had been guilty of discreditable acts that had won for him the
contempt of all right-minded people. That he was still accepted with lax
tolerance by some of the more thoughtless matrons of the fashionable set
was due to his family name. They could not forget that in spite of his
numerous lapses from respectability he was still a Mershone. Not one of
the careless mothers who admitted him to her house would have allowed
her daughter to wed him, and the degree of tolerance extended to him was
fully appreciated by Mershone himself. He knew he was practically barred
from the most desirable circles and seldom imposed himself upon his
former acquaintances; but now, with a distinct object in view, he
callously disregarded the doubtful looks he encountered and showed
himself in every drawing-room where he could secure an invitation or
impudently intrude himself. He made frank avowals that he had "reformed"
and abandoned his evil ways forever. Some there were who accepted this
statement seriously, and Diana furthered his cause by treating him
graciously whenever they met, whereas she had formerly refused to
recognize her cousin.

Louise knew nothing at all of Charlie Mershone's history and permitted
him to call when he eagerly requested the favor; but on the way home
from the Delmars Arthur, who had glowered at the usurper all the
evening, took pains to hint to Louise that Mershone was an undesirable
acquaintance and had a bad record. Of course she laughed at him and
teased him, thinking he was jealous and rejoicing that in Mershone she
had a tool to "keep Arthur toeing the mark." As a matter of truth she
had really missed her lover's companionship that evening, but forbore to
apprise him of the fact.

And now the great Kermess began to occupy the minds of the three
cousins, who were to share the important "Flower Booth" between them.
The Kermess was to be the holiday sensation of the season and bade fair
to eclipse the horse show in popularity. It was primarily a charitable
entertainment, as the net receipts were to be divided among several
deserving hospitals; nevertheless it was classed as a high society
function and only the elect were to take active part in the affair.

The ball room at the Waldorf had been secured and many splendid booths
were to be erected for the sale of novelties, notions and refreshments.
There were to be lotteries and auctions, national dances given by groups
of society belles, and other novel entertainments calculated to empty
the pockets of the unwary.

Beth was somewhat indignant to find that she and her cousins, having
been assigned to the flower booth, were expected to erect a pavilion and
decorate it at their own expense, as well as to provide the stock of
flowers to be sold. "There is no fund for preliminary expenses, you
know," remarked Mrs. Sandringham, "and of course all the receipts are to
go to charity; so there is nothing to do but stand these little bills
ourselves. We all do it willingly. The papers make a good deal of the
Kermess, and the advertisement we get is worth all it costs us."

Beth did not see the force of this argument. She thought it was dreadful
for society--really good society--to wish to advertise itself; but
gradually she was learning that this was merely a part of the game. To
be talked about, to have her goings and comings heralded in the society
columns and her gowns described on every possible occasion, seemed the
desire of every society woman, and she who could show the biggest
scrap-book of clippings was considered of highest importance..  Uncle
John laughed joyously when told that the expenses of the flower booth
would fall on the shoulders of his girls and there was no later
recompense.

"Why not?" he cried. "Mustn't we pay the fiddler if we dance?"

"It's a hold-up game," declared Beth, angrily. "I'll have nothing to do
with it."

"Yes, you will, my dear," replied her uncle; "and to avoid separating
you chicks from your pin-money I'm going to stand every cent of the
expense myself. Why, it's for charity, isn't it? Charity covers a
multitude of sins, and I'm just a miserable sinner that needs a
bath-robe to snuggle in. How can the poor be better served than by
robbing the rich? Go ahead, girls, and rig up the swellest booth that
money will build. I'll furnish as many flowers as you can sell, and
Charity ought to get a neat little nest-egg out of the deal."

"That's nice of you," said Patsy, kissing him; "but it's an imposition,
all the same."

"It's a blessing, my dear. It will help a bit to ease off that dreadful
income that threatens to crush me," he rejoined, smiling at them. And
the nieces made no further protest, well knowing the kindly old
gentleman would derive untold pleasure in carrying out his generous
plans.

The flower booth, designed by a famous architect, proved a splendid and
most imposing structure. It was capped by a monster bouquet of
artificial orchids in _papier-mach,_ which reached twenty feet into the
air. The three cousins had their gowns especially designed for the
occasion. Beth represented a lily, Louise a Gold-of-Ophir rose, and
Patricia a pansy.

The big ball room had been turned over to the society people several
days in advance, that the elaborate preparations might be completed in
time, and during this period groups of busy, energetic young folks
gathered by day and in the evenings, decorating, flirting, rehearsing
the fancy dances, and amusing themselves generally.

Arthur Weldon was there to assist Uncle John's nieces; but his pleasure
was somewhat marred by the persistent presence of Charlie Mershone, who,
having called once or twice upon Louise, felt at liberty to attach
himself to her party. The ferocious looks of his rival were ignored by
this designing young man and he had no hesitation in interrupting a
_tte--tte_ to monopolize the girl for himself.

Louise was amused, thinking it fun to worry Arthur by flirting mildly
with Mr. Mershone, for whom she cared not a jot. Both Patsy and Beth
took occasion to remonstrate with her for this folly, for having known
Weldon for a long time and journeyed with him through a part of Europe,
they naturally espoused his cause, liking him as much as they
intuitively disliked Mershone.

One evening Arthur, his patience well-nigh exhausted, talked seriously
with Louise.

"This fellow Mershone," said he, "is a bad egg, a despicable son of a
decadent family. His mother was Hedrik Von Taer's sister, but the poor
thing has been dead many years. Not long ago Charlie was tabooed by even
the rather fast set he belonged to, and the Von Taers, especially,
refused to recognize their relative. Now he seems to go everywhere
again. I don't know what has caused the change, I'm sure."  "Why, he
has reformed," declared Louise; "Diana told me so. She said he had been
a bit wild, as all young men are; but now his behavior is
irreproachable."

"I don't believe a word of it," insisted Arthur. "Mershone is a natural
cad; he's been guilty of all sorts of dirty tricks, and is capable of
many more. If you'll watch out, Louise, you'll see that all the girls
are shy of being found in his society, and all the chaperons cluck to
their fledglings the moment the hawk appears. You're a novice in society
just yet, my dear, and it won't do you any good to encourage Charlie
Mershone, whom everyone else avoids."

"He's very nice," returned Louise, lightly.

"Yes; he must be nicer than I am," admitted the young man, glumly, and
thereupon he became silent and morose and Louise found her evening
spoiled.

The warning did not fall on barren ground, however. In the seclusion of
her own room the girl thought it all over and decided she had teased her
true lover enough. Arthur had not scolded or reproached her, despite his
annoyance, and she had a feeling that his judgment of Charlie Mershone
was quite right. Although the latter was evidently madly in love with
her the girl had the discretion to see how selfish and unrestrained was
his nature, and once or twice he had already frightened her by his
impetuosity. She decided to retreat cautiously but positively from
further association with him, and at once began to show the young man
coolness.

Mershone must have been chagrined, but he did not allow Louise to see
there was any change in their relations as far as he was concerned. He
merely redoubled his attentions, sending her flowers and bonbons daily,
accompanied by ardently worded but respectful notes. Really, Louise was
in a quandary, and she frankly admitted to Arthur that she had brought
this embarrassment upon herself. Yet Arthur could do or say little to
comfort her. He longed secretly to "punch Mershone's head," but could
find no occasion for such decided action.

Diana, during this time, treated both Arthur and Louise with marked
cordiality. Believing her time would come to take part in the comedy she
refrained from interfering prematurely with the progress of events. She
managed to meet her accomplice at frequent intervals and was pleased
that there was no necessity to urge Charlie to do his utmost in
separating the lovers.

"I'm bound to win, Di," he said grimly, "for I love the girl even better
than I do her fortune. And of one thing you may rest assured; Weldon
shall never marry her."

"What will you do?" asked Diana, curiously.

"Anything! Everything that is necessary to accomplish my purpose."

"Be careful," said she warningly. "Keep a cool head, Charlie, and don't
do anything foolish. Still--"

"Well?"

"If it is necessary to take a few chances, do it. Arthur Weldon must not
marry Louise Merrick!"




CHAPTER IX


THE VON TAER PEARLS

Uncle John really had more fun out of the famous Kermess than anyone
else. The preparations gave him something to do, and he enjoyed
doing--openly, as well as in secret ways. Having declared that he would
stock the flower booth at his own expense, he confided to no one his
plans. The girls may have thought he would merely leave orders with a
florist; but that was not the Merrick way of doing things. Instead, he
visited the most famous greenhouses within a radius of many miles,
contracting for all the floral blooms that art and skill could produce.
The Kermess was to be a three days' affair, and each day the floral
treasures of the cast were delivered in reckless profusion at the flower
booth, which thus became the center of attraction and the marvel of the
public. The girls were delighted to be able to dispense such blooms, and
their success as saleswomen was assured at once.  Of course the fair
vendors were ignorant of the value of their wares, for Uncle John
refused to tell them how extravagant he had been; so they were obliged
to guess at the sums to be demanded and in consequence sold priceless
orchids and rare hothouse flora at such ridiculous rates that Mr.
Merrick chuckled with amusement until he nearly choked.

The public being "cordially invited" Uncle John was present on that
first important evening, and--wonder of wonders--was arrayed in an
immaculate full-dress suit that fitted his chubby form like the skin of
a banana. Mayor Doyle, likewise disguised, locked arms with his
brother-in-law and stalked gravely among the throng; but neither ever
got to a point in the big room where the flower booth was not in plain
sight. The Major's pride in "our Patsy" was something superb; Uncle John
was proud of all three of his nieces. As the sale of wares was for the
benefit of charity these old fellows purchased liberally--mostly flowers
and had enough parcels sent home to fill a delivery wagon.

One disagreeable incident, only, marred this otherwise successful
evening--successful especially for the three cousins, whose beauty and
grace won the hearts of all.

Diana Von Taer was stationed in the "Hindoo Booth," and the oriental
costume she wore exactly fitted her sensuous style of beauty. To enhance
its effect she had worn around her neck the famous string of Von Taer
pearls, a collection said to be unmatched in beauty and unequaled in
value in all New York.

The "Hindoo Booth" was near enough to the "Flower Booth" for Diana to
watch the cousins, and the triumph of her late _protges_ was very
bitter for her to endure. Especially annoying was it to find Arthur
Weldon devoting himself assiduously to Louise, who looked charming in
her rose gown and favored Arthur in a marked way, although Charlie
Mershone, refusing to be ignored, also leaned over the counter of the
booth and chatted continually, striving to draw Miss Merrick's attention
to himself.

Forced to observe all this, Diana soon lost her accustomed coolness. The
sight of the happy faces of Arthur and Louise aroused all the rancor
and subtile wit that she possessed, and she resolved upon an act that
she would not before have believed herself capable of. Leaning down, she
released the catch of the famous pearls and unobserved concealed them in
a handkerchief. Then, leaving her booth, she sauntered slowly over to
the floral display, which was surrounded for the moment by a crowd of
eager customers. Many of the vases and pottery jars which had contained
flowers now stood empty, and just before the station of Louise Merrick
the stock was sadly depleted. This was, of course, offset by the store
of money in the little drawer beside the fair sales-lady, and Louise,
having greeted Diana with a smile and nod, turned to renew her
conversation with the young men besieging her.

Diana leaned gracefully over the counter, resting the hand containing
the handkerchief over the mouth of an empty Doulton vase--empty save for
the water which had nourished the flowers. At the same time she caught
Louise's eye and with a gesture brought the girl to her side.  "Those
young men are wealthy," she said, carelessly, her head close to that of
Louise. "Make them pay well for their purchases, my dear."

"I can't rob them, Diana," was the laughing rejoinder.

"But it is your duty to rob, at a Kermess, and in the interests of
charity," persisted Diana, maintaining her voice at a whisper.

Louise was annoyed.

"Thank you," she said, and went back to the group awaiting her.

The floral booth was triangular, Beth officiated at one of the three
sides, Patsy at another, and Louise at the third. Diana now passed
softly around the booth, interchanging a word with the other two girls,
after which she returned to her own station.

Presently, while chatting with a group of acquaintances, she suddenly
clasped her throat and assuming an expression of horror exclaimed:

"My pearls!"

"What, the Von Taer pearls?" cried one.

"The Von Taer pearls," said Diana, as if dazed by her misfortune.

"And you've lost them, dear?"

"They're lost!" she echoed.

Well, there was excitement then, you may be sure. One man hurried to
notify the door-keeper and the private detective employed oh all such
occasions, while others hastily searched the booth--of course in vain.
Diana seemed distracted and the news spread quickly through the
assemblage.

"Have you left this booth at all?" asked a quiet voice, that of the
official whose business it was to investigate.

"I--I merely walked over to the floral booth opposite, and exchanged a
word with Miss Merrick, and the others there," she explained.

The search was resumed, and Charlie Mershone sauntered over.

"What's this, Di? Lost the big pearls, I hear," he said.

She took him aside and whispered something to him. He nodded and
returned at once to the flower booth, around which a crowd of searchers
now gathered, much to the annoyance of Louise and her cousins.

"It's all foolishness, you know," said Uncle John, to the Major,
confidentially. "If the girl really dropped her pearls some one has
picked them up, long ago."

Young Mershone seemed searching the floral booth as earnestly as the
others, and awkwardly knocked the Doulton vase from the shelf with his
elbow. It smashed to fragments and in the pool of water on the floor
appeared the missing pearls.

There was an awkward silence for a moment, while all eyes turned
curiously upon Louise, who served this side of the triangle. The girl
appeared turned to stone as she gazed down at the gems. Mershone laughed
disagreeably and picked up the recovered treasure, which Diana ran
forward and seized.

"H-m-m!" said the detective, with a shrug; "this is a strange
occurrence--a very strange occurrence, indeed. Miss Von Taer, do you
wish--"

"No!" exclaimed Diana, haughtily. "I accuse no one. It is enough that an
accident has restored to me the heirloom."

Stiffly she marched back to her own booth, and the crowd quietly
dispersed, leaving only Arthur, Uncle John and the Major standing to
support Louise and her astonished cousins.

"Why, confound it!" cried the little millionaire, with a red face, "does
the jade mean to insinuate--"

"Not at all, sor," interrupted the Major, sternly; "her early education
has been neglected, that's all."

"Come dear," pleaded Arthur to Louise; "let us go home."

"By no means!" announced Beth, positively; "let us stay where we belong.
Why, we're not half sold out yet!"




CHAPTER X


MISLED

Arthur Weldon met Mershone at a club next afternoon. "You low
scoundrel!" he exclaimed. "It was _your_ trick to accuse Miss Merrick of
a theft last night."

"Was she accused?" enquired the other, blandly. "I hadn't heard,
really."

"You did it yourself!"

"Dear me!" said Mershone, deliberately lighting a cigarette.

"You or your precious cousin--you're both alike," declared Arthur,
bitterly. "But you have given us wisdom, Mershone. We'll see you don't
trick us again."

The young man stared at him, between puffs of smoke.

"It occurs to me, Weldon, that you're becoming insolent. It won't do, my
boy. Unless you guard your tongue--"

"Bah! Resent it, if you dare; you coward."

"Coward?"

"Yes. A man who attacks an innocent girl is a coward. And you've been a
coward all your life, Mershone, for one reason or another. No one
believes in your pretended reform. But I want to warn you to keep away
from Miss Merrick, hereafter, or I'll take a hand in your punishment
myself."

For a moment the two eyed one another savagely. They were equally
matched in physique; but Arthur was right, there was no fight in
Mershone; that is, of the knock-down order. He would fight in his own
way, doubtless, and this made him more dangerous than his antagonist
supposed.

"What right have you, sir, to speak for Miss Merrick?" he demanded.

"The best right in the world," replied Arthur. "She is my promised
wife."

"Indeed! Since when?"

"That is none of your affair, Mershone. As a matter of fact, however,
that little excitement you created last night resulted in a perfect
understanding between us."  "_I_ created!"

"You, of course. Miss Merrick does not care to meet you again. You will
do well to avoid her in the future."

"I don't believe you, Weldon. You're bluffing."

"Am I? Then dare to annoy Miss Merrick again and I'll soon convince you
of my sincerity."

With this parting shot he walked away, leaving Mershone really at a loss
to know whether he was in earnest or not. To solve the question he
called a taxicab and in a few minutes gave his card to the Merrick
butler with a request to see Miss Louise.

The man returned with a message that Miss Merrick was engaged.

"Please tell her it is important," insisted Mershone.

Again the butler departed, and soon returned.

"Any message for Miss Merrick must be conveyed in writing, sir," he
said, "She declines to see you."

Mershone went away white with anger. We may credit him with loving
Louise as intensely as a man of his caliber can love anyone. His sudden
dismissal astounded him and made him frantic with disappointment.
Louise's treatment of the past few days might have warned him, but he
had no intuition of the immediate catastrophe that had overtaken him. It
wasn't his self-pride that was injured; that had become so battered
there was little of it left; but he had set his whole heart on winning
this girl and felt that he could not give her up.

Anger toward Weldon was prominent amongst his emotion. He declared
between his set teeth that if Louise was lost to him she should never
marry Weldon. Not on Diana's account, but for his own vengeful
satisfaction was this resolve made.

He rode straight to his cousin and told her the news. The statement that
Arthur was engaged to marry Louise Merrick drove her to a wild anger no
less powerful because she restrained any appearance of it. Surveying her
cousin steadily through her veiled lashes she asked:

"Is there no way we can prevent this thing?"

Mershone stalked up and down before her like a caged beast. His eyes
were red and wicked; his lips were pressed tightly together.  "Diana,"
said he, "I've never wanted anything in this world as I want that girl.
I can't let that mollycoddle marry her!"

She flushed, and then frowned. It was not pleasant to hear the man of
her choice spoken of with such contempt, but after all their
disappointment and desires were alike mutual and she could not break
with Charlie at this juncture.

Suddenly he paused and asked:

"Do you still own that country home near East Orange?"

"Yes; but we never occupy it now. Father does not care for the place."

"Is it deserted?"

"Practically so. Madame Cerise is there in charge."

"Old Cerise? I was going to ask you what had become of that clever
female."

"She was too clever, Charlie. She knew too much of our affairs, and was
always prying into things that did not concern her. So father took an
antipathy to the poor creature, and because she has served our family
for so long sent her to care for the house at East Orange."

"Pensioned her, eh? Well, this is good news, Di; perhaps the best news
in the world. I believe it will help clear up the situation. Old Cerise
and I always understood each other."

"Will you explain?" asked Diana, coldly.

"I think not, my fair cousin. I prefer to keep my own counsel. You made
a bad mess of that little deal last night, and are responsible for the
climax that faces us. Besides, a woman is never a good conspirator. I
know what you want; and I know what I want. So I'll work this plan
alone, if you please. And I'll win, Di; I'll win as sure as fate--if
you'll help me."

"You ask me to help you and remain in the dark?"

"Yes; it's better so. Write me a note to Cerise and tell her to place
the house and herself unreservedly at my disposal."

She stared at him fixedly, and he returned the look with an evil smile.
So they sat in silence a moment. Then slowly she arose and moved to her
escritoire, drawing a sheet of paper toward her and beginning to write.
 "Is there a telephone at the place?" enquired Mershone abruptly.

"Yes."

"Then telephone Cerise after I'm gone. That will make it doubly sure.
And give me the number, too, so I can jot it down. I may need it."

Diana quietly tore up the note.

"The telephone is better," she said. "Being in the dark, sir, I prefer
not to commit myself in writing."

"You're quite right, Di," he exclaimed, admiringly. "But for heaven's
sake don't forget to telephone Madame Cerise."

"I won't Charlie. And, see here, keep your precious plans to yourself,
now and always. I intend to know nothing of what you do."

"I'm merely the cats-paw, eh? Well, never mind. Is old Cerise to be
depended upon, do you think?"

"Why not?" replied the girl. "Cerise belongs to the Von Taers--body and
soul!"




CHAPTER XI


THE BROWN LIMOUSINE

The second evening of the society Kermess passed without unusual event
and proved very successful in attracting throngs of fashionable people
to participate in its pleasures.

Louise and her cousins were at their stations early, and the second
installment of Uncle John's flowers was even more splendid and profuse
than the first. It was not at all difficult to make sales, and the
little money drawer began to bulge with its generous receipts.

Many a gracious smile or nod or word was bestowed upon Miss Merrick by
the society folk; for these people had had time to consider the
accusation against her implied by Diana Von Taer's manner when the
pearls were discovered in the empty flower vase. Being rather impartial
judges--for Diana was not a popular favorite with her set--they decided
it was absurd to suppose a niece of wealthy old John Merrick would
descend to stealing any one's jewelry. Miss Merrick might have anything
her heart desired with-out pausing to count the cost, and moreover she
was credited with sufficient common sense to realize that the Von Taer
heirlooms might easily be recognized anywhere. So a little gossip
concerning the queer incident had turned the tide of opinion in Louise's
favor, and as she was a recent _debutante_ with a charming personality
all vied to assure her she was held blameless.

A vast coterie of the select hovered about the flower booth all the
evening, and the cousins joyously realized they had scored one of the
distinct successes of the Kermess. Arthur could not get very close to
Louise this evening; but he enjoyed her popularity and from his modest
retirement was able to exchange glances with her at intervals, and these
glances assured him he was seldom absent from her thoughts.

Aside from this, he had the pleasure of glowering ferociously upon
Charlie Mershone, who, failing to obtain recognition from Miss Merrick,
devoted himself to his cousin Diana, or at least lounged nonchalantly in
the neighborhood of the Hindoo Booth. Mershone was very quiet. There
was a speculative look upon his features that denoted an undercurrent
of thought.

Diana's face was as expressionless as ever. She well knew her action of
the previous evening had severed the cordial relations formerly existing
between her and Mr. Merrick's nieces, and determined to avoid the
possibility of a snub by keeping aloof from them. She greeted whoever
approached her station in her usual gracious and cultured manner, and
refrained from even glancing toward Louise.

Hedrik Von Taer appeared for an hour this evening. He quietly expressed
his satisfaction at the complete arrangements of the Kermess, chatted a
moment with his daughter, and then innocently marched over to the flower
booth and made a liberal purchase from each of the three girls.
Evidently the old gentleman had no inkling of the incident of the
previous evening, or that Diana was not still on good terms with the
young ladies she had personally introduced to society. His action amused
many who noted it, and Louise blushing but thoroughly self-possessed,
exchanged her greetings with Diana's father and thanked him heartily
for his purchase. Mr. Von Taer stared stonily at Charlie Mershone, but
did not speak to him.

Going out he met John Merrick, and the two men engaged in conversation
most cordially.

"You did the trick all right, Von Taer," said the little millionaire,
"and I'm much obliged, as you may suppose. You're not ashamed of my
three nieces, I take it?"

"Your nieces, Mr. Merrick, are very charming young women," was the
dignified reply. "They will grace any station in life to which they may
be called."

When the evening's entertainment came to an end Arthur Weldon took
Louise home in his new brown limousine, leaving Patsy and her father,
Uncle John and Beth to comfortably fill the Doyle motor car. Now that
the engagement of the young people had been announced and accepted by
their friends, it seemed very natural for them to prefer their own
society.

"What do you think of it, Uncle John, anyhow?" asked Patsy, as they
rode home.  "It's all right, dear," he announced, with a sigh. "I hate
to see my girls take the matrimonial dive, but I guess they've got to
come to it, sooner or later."

"Later, for me," laughed Patsy.

"As for young Weldon," continued Mr. Merrick, reflectively, "he has some
mighty good points, as I found out long ago. Also he has some points
that need filing down. But I guess he'll average up with most young men,
and Louise seems to like him. So let's try to encourage 'em to be happy;
eh, my dears?"

"Louise," said Beth, slowly, "is no more perfect than Arthur. They both
have faults which time may eradicate, and as at present they are not
disposed to be hypercritical they ought to get along nicely together."

"If 't was me," said the Major, oracularly, "I'd never marry Weldon."

"He won't propose to you, Daddy dear," returned Patsy, mischievously;
"he prefers Louise."

"I decided long ago," said Uncle John, "that I'd never be allowed to
pick out the husbands for my three girls. Husbands are a matter of
taste, I guess, and a girl ought to know what sort she wants. If she
don't, and makes a mistake, that's _her_ look-out. So you can all choose
for yourselves, when the time comes, and I'll stand by you, my dears,
through thick and thin. If the husband won't play fair, you can always
bet your Uncle John will."  "Oh, we know, that," said Patsy, simply;
and Beth added: "Of course, Uncle, dear."

Thursday evening, the third and last of the series, was after all the
banner night of the great Kermess. All the world of society was present
and such wares as remained unsold in the booths were quickly auctioned
off by several fashionable gentlemen with a talent for such brigandage.
Then, the national dances and songs having been given and received
enthusiastically, a grand ball wound up the occasion in the merriest
possible way.

Charlie Mershone was much in evidence this evening, as he had been
before; but he took no active part in the proceedings and refrained from
dancing, his pet amusement. Diana observed that he made frequent trips
downstairs, perhaps to the hotel offices. No one paid any attention to
his movements, except his cousin, and Miss Von Taer, watching him
intently, decided that underneath his calm exterior lurked a great deal
of suppressed excitement.

At last the crowd began to disperse. Uncle John and the Major took Beth
and Patsy away early, as soon as their booth was closed; but Louise
stayed for a final waltz or two with Arthur. She soon found, however,
that the evening's work and excitement had tired her, and asked to be
taken home.

"I'll go and get the limousine around," said Arthur. "That new chauffeur
is a stupid fellow. By the time you've managed in this jam to get your
wraps I shall be ready. Come down in the elevator and I'll meet you at
the Thirty-second street entrance."

As he reached the street a man--an ordinary servant, to judge from his
appearance--ran into him full tilt, and when they recoiled from the
impact the fellow with a muttered curse raised his fist and struck young
Weldon a powerful blow. Reeling backward, a natural anger seized Arthur,
who was inclined to be hot-headed, and he also struck out with his
fists, never pausing to consider that the more dignified act would be to
call the police.

The little spurt of fistcuffs was brief, but it gave Mershone, who stood
in the shadow of the door-way near by, time to whisper to a police
officer, who promptly seized the disputants and held them both in a
firm grip.

"What's all this?" he demanded, sternly.

"That drunken loafer assaulted me without cause" gasped Arthur, panting.

"It's a lie!" retorted the man, calmly; "he struck me first."

"Well, I arrest you both," said the officer.

"Arrest!" cried Arthur, indignantly; "why, confound it, man, I'm--"

"No talk!" was the stern command. "Come along and keep quiet."

As if the whole affair had been premeditated and prearranged a patrol
wagon at that instant backed to the curb and in spite of Arthur Weldon's
loud protests he was thrust inside with his assailant and at once driven
away at a rapid gait.

At the same moment a brown limousine drew up quietly before the
entrance.

Louise, appearing in the doorway in her opera cloak, stood hesitating on
the steps, peering into the street for Arthur. A man in livery
approached her.

"This way, please, Miss Merrick," he said. "Mr. Weldon begs you to be
seated in the limousine. He will join you in a moment."

With this he led the way to the car and held the door open, while the
girl, having no suspicion, entered and sank back wearily upon the seat.
Then the door abruptly slammed, and the man in livery leaped to the seat
beside the chauffeur and with a jerk the car darted away.

So sudden and astounding was this _denouement_ that Louise did not even
scream. Indeed, for the moment her wits were dazed.

And now Charlie Mershone stepped from his hiding place and with a
satirical smile entered the vestibule and looked at his watch. He found
he had time to show himself again at the Kermess, for a few moments,
before driving to the ferry to catch the train for East Orange.

Some one touched him on the arm.

"Very pretty, sir, and quite cleverly done," remarked a quiet voice.

Mershone started and glared at the speaker, a slender, unassuming man in
dark clothes.

"What do you mean, fellow?"

"I've been watching the comedy, sir, and I saw you were the star actor,
although you took care to keep hidden in the wings. That bruiser who
raised the row took his arrest very easily; I suppose you've arranged to
pay his fine, and he isn't worried. But the gentleman surely was in hard
luck pounded one minute and pinched the next. You arranged it very
cleverly, indeed."

Charlie was relieved that no mention was made of the abduction of
Louise. Had that incident escaped notice? He gave the man another sharp
look and turned away; but the gentle touch again restrained him.

"Not yet, please, Mr. Mershone."

"Who are you?" asked the other, scowling.

"The house detective. It's my business to watch things. So I noticed you
talking to the police officer; I also noticed the patrol wagon standing
on the opposite side of the street for nearly an hour--my report on that
will amuse them at headquarters, won't it? And I noticed you nod to the
bruiser, just as your victim came out."

"Let go of my arm, sir!"

"Do you prefer handcuffs? I arrest you. We'll run over to the station
and explain things."

"Do you know who I am?"

"Perfectly, Mr. Mershone. I believe I ran you in for less than this,
some two years ago. You gave the name of Ryder, then. Better take
another, to-night."

"If you're the house detective, why do you mix up in this affair?"
enquired Mershone, his anxiety showing in his tone.

"Your victim was a guest of the house."

"Not at all. He was merely attending the Kermess."

"That makes him our guest, sir. Are you ready?"

Mershone glanced around and then lowered his voice.

"It's all a little joke, my dear fellow," said he, "and you are liable
to spoil everything with your bungling. Here," drawing; a roll of bills
from his pocket, "don't let us waste any more time. I'm busy."

The man chuckled and waved aside the bribe.

"You certainly are, sir; you're _very_ busy, just now! But I think the
sergeant over at the station will give you some leisure. And listen, Mr.
Mershone: I've got it in for that policeman you fixed; he's a cheeky
individual and a new man. I'm inclined to think this night's work will
cost him his position. And the patrol, which I never can get when I want
it, seems under your direct management. These things have got to be
explained, and I need your help. Ready, sir?"

Mershone looked grave, but he was not wholly checkmated. Thank heaven
the bungling detective had missed the departure of Louise altogether.
Charlie's arrest at this critical juncture was most unfortunate, but
need not prove disastrous to his cleverly-laid plot. He decided it would
be best to go quietly with the "plain-clothes man."

Weldon had become nearly frantic in his demands to be released when
Mershone was ushered into the station. He started at seeing his enemy
and began to fear a thousand terrible, indefinite things, knowing how
unscrupulous Mershone was. But the Waldorf detective, who seemed
friendly with the police sergeant, made a clear, brief statement of the
facts he had observed. Mershone denied the accusation; the bruiser
denied it; the policeman and the driver of the patrol wagon likewise
stolidly denied it. Indeed, they had quite another story to tell.

But the sergeant acted on his own judgment. He locked up Mershone,
refusing bail. He suspended the policeman and the driver, pending
investigation. Then he released Arthur Weldon on his own recognisance,
the young man promising to call and testify when required.

The house detective and Arthur started back to the Waldorf together.

"Did you notice a young lady come to the entrance, soon after I was
driven away?" he asked, anxiously.

"A lady in a rose-colored opera cloak, sir?"

"Yes! yes!"

"Why, she got into a brown limousine and rode away."  Arthur gave a
sigh of relief.

"Thank goodness that chauffeur had a grain of sense," said he. "I
wouldn't have given him credit for it. Anyway, I'm glad Miss Merrick is
safe."

"Huh!" grunted the detective, stopping short. "I begin to see this thing
in its true light. How stupid we've been!"

"In what way?" enquired Arthur, uneasily.

"Why did Mershone get you arrested, just at that moment?"

"Because he hated me, I suppose."

"Tell me, could he have any object in spiriting away that young lady--in
abducting her?" asked the detective.

"Could he?" cried Arthur, terrified and trembling. "He had every object
known to villainy. Come to the hotel! Let's hurry, man--let's fly!"




CHAPTER XII


FOGERTY

At the Waldorf Arthur's own limousine was standing by the curb. The
street was nearly deserted. The last of the Kermess people had gone
home.

Weldon ran to his chauffeur.

"Did you take Miss Merrick home?" he eagerly enquired.

"Miss Merrick? Why, I haven't seen her, sir, I thought you'd all
forgotten me."

The young man's heart sank. Despair seized him. The detective was
carefully examining the car.

"They're pretty nearly mates, Mr. Weldon. as far as the brown color and
general appearances go," he said. "But I'm almost positive the car that
carried the young lady away was of another make."

"What make was it?"

The man shook his head.

"Can't say, sir. I was mighty stupid, and that's a fact. But my mind was
so full of that assault and battery case, and the trickery of that
fellow Mershone, that I wasn't looking for anything else."

"Can you get away?" asked Arthur. "Can you help me on this case?"

"No, sir; I must remain on duty at the hotel. But perhaps the young lady
is now safe at home, and we've been borrowing trouble. In case she's
been stolen, however, you'd better see Fogerty."

"Who's Fogerty?"

"Here's his card, sir. He's a private detective, and may be busy just
now, for all I know. But if you can get Fogerty you've got the best man
in all New York."

Arthur sprang into the seat beside his driver and hurried post-haste to
the Merrick residence. In a few minutes Mrs. Merrick was in violent
hysterics at the disappearance of her daughter. Arthur stopped long
enough to telephone for a doctor and then drove to the Doyles. He routed
up Uncle John and the Major, who appeared in pajamas and bath-robes, and
told them the startling news.

A council of war was straightway held. Uncle John trembled with
nervousness; Arthur was mentally stupefied; the Major alone was calm.

"In the first place," said he, "what object could the man have in
carrying off Louise?"  Arthur hesitated.

"To prevent our marriage, I suppose," he answered. "Mershone has an idea
he loves Louise. He made wild love to her until she cut his
acquaintance."

"But it won't help him any to separate her from her friends, or her
promised husband," declared the Major. "Don't worry. We're sure to find
her, sooner or later."

"How? How shall we find her?" cried Uncle John. "Will he murder her, or
what?"

"Why, as for that, John, he's safe locked up in jail for the present,
and unable to murder anyone," retorted the Major. "It's probable he
meant to follow Louise, and induce her by fair means or foul to marry
him. But he's harmless enough for the time being."

"It's not for long, though," said Arthur, fearfully. "They're liable to
let him out in the morning, for he has powerful friends, scoundrel
though he is. And when he is free--"

"Then he must be shadowed, of course," returned the Major, nodding
wisely. "If it's true the fellow loves Louise, then he's no intention
of hurting her. So make your minds easy. Wherever the poor lass has been
taken to, she's probably safe enough."

"But think of her terror--her suffering!" cried Uncle John, wringing his
chubby hands. "Poor child! It may be his idea to compromise her, and
break her heart!"

"We'll stop all that, John, never fear," promised the Major. "The first
thing to do is to find a good detective."

"Fogerty!" exclaimed Arthur, searching for the card.

"Who's Fogerty?"

"I don't know."

"Get the best man possible!" commanded Mr. Merrick. "Spare no expense;
hire a regiment of detectives, if necessary; I'll--"

"Of course you will," interrupted the Major, smiling. "But we won't need
a regiment. I'm pretty sure the game is in our hands, from the very
start."

"Fogerty is highly recommended," explained Arthur, and related what the
house detective of the Waldorf had said.

"Better go at once and hunt him up," suggested Uncle John. "What time is
it?"

"After two o'clock. But I'll go at once." "Do; and let us hear from you
whenever you've anything to tell us," said the Major.

"Where's Patsy?" asked Arthur.

"Sound asleep. Mind ye, not a word of this to Patsy till she _has_ to be
told. Remember that, John."

"Well, I'll go," said the young man, and hurried away.

Q. Fogerty lived on Eleventh street, according to his card. Arthur drove
down town, making good time. The chauffeur asked surlily if this was to
be "an all-night job," and Arthur savagely replied that it might take a
week. "Can't you see, Jones, that I'm in great trouble?" he added. "But
you shall be well paid for your extra time."

"All right, sir. That's no more than just," said the man. "It's none of
my affair, you know, if a young lady gets stolen."

Arthur was wise enough to restrain his temper and the temptation to kick
Jones out of the limousine. Five minutes later they paused before a
block of ancient brick dwellings and found Fogerty's number. A card over
the bell bore his name, and Arthur lit a match and read it. Then he rang
impatiently.

Only silence.

Arthur rang a second time; waited, and rang again. A panic of fear took
possession of him. At this hour of night it would be well-nigh
impossible to hunt up another detective if Fogerty failed him. He
determined to persist as long as there was hope. Again he rang.

"Look above, sir," called Jones from his station in the car.

Arthur stepped back on the stone landing and looked up. A round spark,
as from a cigarette, was visible at the open window. While he gazed the
spark glowered brighter and illumined a pale, haggard boy's face,
surmounted by tousled locks of brick colored hair.

"Hi, there!" said Arthur. "Does Mr. Fogerty live here?"

"He pays the rent," answered a boyish voice, with a tinge of irony.
"What's wanted?"  "Mr. Fogerty is wanted. Is he at home?"

"He is," responded the boy.

"I must see him at once--on important business. Wake him up, my lad;
will you?"

"Wait a minute," said the youth, and left the window. Presently he
opened the front door, slipped gently out and closed the door behind
him.

"Let's sit in your car," he said, in soft, quiet tones. "We can talk
more freely there."

"But I must see Fogerty at once!" protested Arthur.

"I'm Fogerty."

"Q. Fogerty?"

"Quintus Fogerty--the first and last and only individual of that name."

Arthur hesitated; he was terribly disappointed.

"Are you a detective?" he enquired.

"By profession."

"But you can't be very old."

The boy laughed.

"I'm no antiquity, sir," said he, "but I've shed the knickerbockers
long ago. Who sent you to me?"

"Why do you ask?"

"I'm tired. I've been busy twenty-three weeks. Just finished my case
yesterday and need a rest--a good long rest. But if you want a man I'll
refer you to a friend."

"Gorman, of the Waldorf, sent me to you--and said you'd help me."

"Oh; that's different. Case urgent, sir?"

"Very. The young lady I'm engaged to marry was abducted less than three
hours ago."

Fogerty lighted another cigarette and the match showed Arthur that the
young face was deeply lined, while two cold gray eyes stared blankly
into his own.

"Let's sit in your limousine, sir," he repeated.

When they had taken their places behind the closed doors the boy asked
Arthur to tell him "all about it, and don't forget any details, please."
So Weldon hastily told the events of the evening and gave a history of
Mershone and his relations with Miss Merrick. The story was not half
told when Fogerty said:

"Tell your man to drive to the police station."

On the way Arthur resumed his rapid recital and strove to post the
young detective as well as he was able. Fogerty made no remarks, nor did
he ask a single question until Weldon had told him everything he could
think of. Then he made a few pointed enquiries and presently they had
arrived at the station.

The desk sergeant bowed with great respect to the youthful detective. By
the dim light Arthur was now able to examine Fogerty for the first time.

He was small, slim and lean. His face attested to but eighteen or
nineteen years, in spite of its deep lines and serious expression.
Although his hair was tangled and unkempt Fogerty's clothing and linen
were neat and of good quality. He wore a Scotch cap and a horseshoe pin
in his cravat.

One might have imagined him to be an errand boy, a clerk, a chauffeur, a
salesman or a house man. You might have placed him in almost any
middle-class walk in life. Perhaps, thought Arthur, he might even be a
good detective! yet his personality scarcely indicated it.

"Mershone in, Billy?" the detective asked the desk sergeant.

"Room 24. Want him?"

"Not now. When is he likely to go?"

"When Parker relieves me. There's been a reg'lar mob here to get
Mershone off. I couldn't prevent his using the telephone; but I'm a
stubborn duck; eh, Quintus? And now the gentleman has gone to bed,
vowing vengeance."

"You're all right, Billy. We both know Mershone. Gentleman scoundrel."

"Exactly. Swell society blackleg."

"What name's he docked under?"

"Smith."

"Will Parker let him off with a fine?"

"Yes, or without it. Parker comes on at six."

"Good. I'll take a nap on that bench. Got to keep the fellow in sight,
Billy."

"Go into my room. There's a cot there."

"Thanks, old man; I will. I'm dead tired."

Then Fogerty took Arthur aside.  "Go home and try to sleep," he
advised. "Don't worry. The young lady's safe enough till Mershone goes
to her hiding place. When he does, I'll be there, too, and I'll try to
have you with me."

"Do you think you can arrange it alone, Mr. Fogerty?" asked Arthur,
doubtfully. The boy seemed so very young.

"Better than if I had a hundred to assist me. Why, this is an easy job,
Mr. Weldon. It 'll give me a fine chance to rest up."

"And you won't lose Mershone?"

"Never. He's mine."

"This is very important to me, sir," continued Arthur, nervously.

"Yes; and to others. Most of all it's important to Fogerty. Don't worry,
sir."

The young man was forced to go away with this assurance. He returned
home, but not to sleep. He wondered vaguely if he had been wise to lean
upon so frail a reed as Fogerty seemed to be; and above all he wondered
where poor Louise was, and if terror and alarm were breaking her heart.




CHAPTER XIII


DIANA REVOLTS

Charlie Mershone had no difficulty in securing his release when Parker
came on duty at six o'clock. He called up a cab and went at once to his
rooms at the Bruxtelle; and Fogerty followed him.

While he discarded his dress-coat, took a bath and donned his walking
suit Mershone was in a brown study. Hours ago Louise had been safely
landed at the East Orange house and placed in the care of old Madame
Cerise, who would guard her like an ogre. There was no immediate need of
his hastening after her, and his arrest and the discovery of half his
plot had seriously disturbed him. This young man was no novice in
intrigue, nor even in crime. Arguing from his own stand-point he
realized that the friends of Louise were by this time using every
endeavor to locate her. They would not succeed in this, he was positive.
His plot had been so audacious and all clews so cleverly destroyed or
covered up that the most skillful detective, knowing he had abducted the
girl; would be completely baffled in an attempt to find her.

The thought of detectives, in this connection, led him to decide that he
was likely to be shadowed. That was the most natural thing for his
opponents to do. They could not prove Mershone's complicity in the
disappearance of Louise Merrick, but they might easily suspect him,
after that little affair of Weldon's arrest. Therefore if he went to the
girl now he was likely to lead others to her. Better be cautious and
wait until he had thrown the sleuths off his track.

Having considered this matter thoroughly, Mershone decided to remain
quiet. By eight o'clock he was breakfasting in the grill room, and
Fogerty occupied a table just behind him.

During the meal it occurred to Charlie to telephone to Madame Cerise for
assurance that Louise had arrived safely and without a scene to attract
the attention of strangers. Having finished breakfast he walked into the
telephone booth and was about to call his number when a thought struck
him. He glanced out of the glass door. In the hotel lobby were many
loungers. He saw a dozen pairs of eyes fixed upon him idly or curiously;
one pair might belong to the suspected detective. If he used the
telephone there would be a way of discovering the number he had asked
for. That would not do--not at all! He concluded not to telephone, at
present, and left the booth.  His next act was to purchase a morning
paper, and seating himself carelessly in a chair he controlled the
impulse to search for a "scare head" on the abduction of Miss Merrick.
If he came across the item, very well; he would satisfy no critical eye
that might be scanning him by hunting for it with a show of eagerness.
The game was in his hands, he believed, and he intended to keep it
there.

Fogerty was annoyed by the man's evident caution. It would not be easy
to surprise Mershone in any self-incriminating action. But, after all,
reflected the boy, resting comfortably in the soft-padded cushions of a
big leather chair, all this really made the case the more interesting.
He was rather glad Mershone was in no hurry to precipitate a climax. A
long stern chase was never a bad chase.

By and bye another idea occurred to Charlie. He would call upon his
cousin Diana, and get her to telephone Madame Cerise for information
about Louise. It would do no harm to enlighten Diana as to what he had
done. She must suspect it already; and was she not a co-conspirator?
But he could not wisely make this call until the afternoon. So meantime
he took a stroll into Broadway and walked leisurely up and down that
thoroughfare, pausing occasionally to make a trifling purchase and
turning abruptly again and again in the attempt to discover who might be
following him. No one liable to be a detective of any sort could he
discern; yet he was too shrewd to be lulled into a false belief that his
each and every act was unobserved.

Mershone returned to his hotel, went to his room, and slept until after
one o'clock, as he had secured but little rest the night before in his
primitive quarters at the police station. It was nearly two when he
reappeared in the hotel restaurant for luncheon, and he took his seat
and ate with excellent appetite.

During this meal Mr. Fogerty also took occasion to refresh himself,
eating modestly at a retired table in a corner. Mershone's sharp eyes
noted him. He remembered seeing this youth at breakfast, and
thoughtfully reflected that the boy's appearance was not such as might
be expected from the guest of a fashionable and high-priced hotel.
Silently he marked this individual as the possible detective. He had two
or three others in his mind, by this time; the boy was merely added to
the list of possibilities.

Mershone was a capital actor. After luncheon he sauntered about the
hotel, stared from the window for a time, looked at his watch once or
twice with an undecided air, and finally stepped to the porter and asked
him to call a cab. He started for Central Park; then changed his mind
and ordered the man to drive him to the Von Taer residence, where on
arrival Diana at once ordered him shown into her private parlor.

The young man found his cousin stalking up and down in an extremely
nervous manner. She wrung her delicate fingers with a swift, spasmodic
motion. Her eyes, nearly closed, shot red rays through their slits.

"What's wrong, Di?" demanded Mershone, considerably surprised by this
intense display of emotion on the part of his usually self-suppressed
and collected cousin.

"Wrong!" she echoed; "everything is wrong. You've ruined yourself,
Charlie; and you're going to draw me into this dreadful crime, also, in
spite of all I can do!"

"Bah! don't be a fool," he observed, calmly taking a chair.

"Am _I_ the fool?" she exclaimed, turning upon him fiercely. "Did _I_
calmly perpetrate a deed that was sure to result in disgrace and
defeat?"

"What on earth has happened to upset you?" he asked, wonderingly. "It
strikes me everything is progressing beautifully."

"Does it, indeed?" was her sarcastic rejoinder. "Then your information
is better than mine. They called me up at three o'clock this morning to
enquire after Louise Merrick--as if _I_ should know her whereabouts. Why
did they come to _me_ for such information? Why?" she stamped her foot
for emphasis.

"I suppose," said Charlie Mershone, "they called up everyone who knows
the girl. It would be natural in case of her disappearance."

"Come here!" cried Diana, seizing his arm and dragging him to a window.
"Be careful; try to look out without showing yourself. Do you see that
man on the corner?"

"Well?"

"He has been patrolling this house since day-break. He's a detective!"

Charlie whistled.

"What makes you think so, Di? Why on earth should they suspect you?"

"Why? Because my disreputable cousin planned the abduction, without
consulting me, and--"

"Oh, come, Di; that's a little too--"

"Because the girl has been carried to the Von Taer house--_my_ house--in
East Orange; because my own servant is at this moment her jailor, and--"

"How should they know all this?" interrupted Mershone, impatiently. "And
how do you happen to know it yourself, Diana?"

"Madame Cerise called me up at five o'clock, just after Louise's uncle
had been here for the second time, with a crew of officers. Cerise is in
an ugly mood. She said a young girl had been brought to her a prisoner,
and Mr. Mershone's orders were to keep her safely until he came. She is
greatly provoked at our using her in this way, but promised to follow
instructions if I accepted all responsibility."

"What did you tell her?"

"That I knew nothing of the affair, but had put the house and her
services at your disposal. I said I would accept no responsibility
whatever for anything you might do."

Mershone looked grave, and scowled.

"The old hag won't betray us, will she?" he asked, uneasily.

"She cannot betray me, for I have done nothing. Charlie," she said,
suddenly facing him, "I won't be mixed in this horrid affair. You must
carry out your infamous plan in your own way. I know nothing, sir, of
what you have done; I know nothing of what you intend to do. Do you
understand me?"

He smiled rather grimly.

"I hardly expected, my fair cousin, that you would be frightened into
retreat at this stage of the game, when the cards are all in our hands.
Do you suppose I decided to carry away Louise without fully considering
what I was doing, and the immediate consequences of my act? And wherein
have I failed? All has gone beautifully up to this minute. Diana, your
fears are absolutely foolish, and against your personal interests. All
that I am doing for myself benefits you doubly. Just consider, if you
will, what has been accomplished for our mutual benefit: The girl has
disappeared under suspicious circumstances; before she again rejoins her
family and friends she will either be my wife or Arthur Weldon will
prefer not to marry her. That leaves him open to appreciate the charms
of Diana Von Taer, does it not? Already, my dear cousin, your wishes are
accomplished. My own task, I admit, is a harder one, because it is more
delicate."

The cold-blooded brutality of this argument caused even Diana to
shudder. She looked at the young man half fearfully as she asked:

"What is your task?"

"Why, first to quiet Louise's fears; then to turn her by specious
arguments--lies, if you will--against Weldon; next to induce her to
give me her hand in honest wedlock. I shall tell her of my love, which
is sincere; I shall argue--threaten, if necessary; use every reasonable
means to gain her consent."

"You'll never succeed!" cried Diana, with conviction.

"Then I'll try other tactics," said he blandly.

"If you do, you monster, I'll expose you," warned the girl.

"Having dissolved partnership, you won't be taken into my confidence, my
fair cousin. You have promised to know nothing of my acts, and I'll see
you don't." Then he sprang from his chair and came to her with a hard,
determined look upon his face. "Look here, Di; I've gone too far in this
game to back out now, I'm going to carry it through if it costs me my
life and liberty--and yours into the bargain! I love Louise Merrick! I
love her so well that without her the world and its mockeries can go to
the devil! There's nothing worth living for but Louise--Louise. She's
going to be my wife, Diana--by fair means or foul I swear to make her my
wife."

He had worked himself up to a pitch of excitement surpassing that of
Diana. Now he passed his hand over his forehead, collected himself with
a slight shudder, and resumed his seat.

Diana was astonished. His fierce mood served to subdue her own.
Regarding him curiously for a time she finally asked:

"You speak as if you were to be allowed to have your own way--as if all
society was not arrayed against you. Have you counted the cost of your
action? Have you considered the consequences of this crime?"

"I have committed no crime," he said stubbornly. "All's fair in love and
war."

"The courts will refuse to consider that argument, I imagine," she
retorted. "Moreover, the friends of this kidnaped girl are powerful and
active. They will show you no mercy if you are discovered."

"If I fail," answered Mershone, slowly, "I do not care a continental
what they do to me, for my life will be a blank without Louise. But I
really see no reason to despair, despite your womanish croakings. All
seems to be going nicely and just as I had anticipated."

"I am glad that you are satisfied," Diana returned, with scornful
emphasis. "But understand me, sir; this is none of my affair in any
way--except that I shall surely expose you if a hair of the girl's head
is injured. You must not come here again. I shall refuse to see you. You
ought not to have come to-day."

"Is there anything suspicious in my calling upon my cousin--as usual?"

"Under such circumstances, yes. You have not been received at this house
of late years, and my father still despises you. There is another danger
you have brought upon me. My father seemed suspicious this morning, and
asked me quite pointedly what I knew of this strange affair."

"But of course you lied to him. All right, Diana; perhaps there is
nothing to be gained from your alliance, and I'll let you out of the
deal from this moment. The battle's mine, after all, and I'll fight it
alone. But--I need more money. You ought to be willing to pay, for so far
the developments are all in your favor."

She brought a handful of notes from her desk.

"This ends our partnership, Charlie," she said.

"Very well. A woman makes a poor conspirator, but is invaluable as a
banker."

"There will be no more money. This ends everything between us."

"I thought you were game, Di. But you're as weak as the ordinary
feminine creation."

She did not answer, but stood motionless, a defiant expression upon her
face. He laughed a little, bowed mockingly, and went away.




CHAPTER XIV


A COOL ENCOUNTER

On leaving the house Mershone buttoned his overcoat tightly up to his
chin, for the weather was cold and raw, and then shot a quick glance
around him. Diana's suspect was still lounging on the corner. Charlie
had little doubt he was watching the house and the movements of its
in-mates--a bad sign, he reflected, with a frown. Otherwise the street
seemed deserted.

He had dismissed the cab on his arrival, so now he stepped out and
walked briskly around the corner, swinging his cane jauntily and looking
very unlike a fugitive. In the next block he passed a youth who stood
earnestly examining the conventional display in a druggist's window.

Mershone, observing this individual, gave a start, but did not alter his
pace. It was the same pale, red-haired boy he had noticed twice before
at the hotel. In his alert, calculating mind there was no coincidence in
this meeting. Before he had taken six more steps Mershone realized the
exact situation.

At the next crossing he stopped and waited patiently for a car. Up the
street he still saw the youth profoundly interested in drugs--a class of
merchandise that seldom calls for such close inspection. The car arrived
and carried Mershone away. It also left the red-haired youth at his post
before the window. Yet on arriving at the Bruxtelle some twenty minutes
later Charlie found this same queer personage occupying a hotel chair in
the lobby and apparently reading a newspaper with serious attention.

He hesitated a moment, then quietly walked over to a vacant chair beside
the red-haired one and sat down. The youth turned the paper, glanced
casually at his neighbor, and continued reading.

"A detective, I believe," said Mershone, in a low, matter of fact tone.

"Who? me?" asked Fogerty, lowering the paper.

"Yes. Your age deceived me for a time. I imagined you were a newsboy or
a sporting kid from the country; but now I observe you are older than
you appear. All sorts of people seem to drift into the detective
business. I suppose your present occupation is shadowing me."

Fogerty smiled. The smile was genuine.

"I might even be a lawyer, sir," he replied, "and in that case I should
undertake to cross-examine you, and ask your reasons for so queer a
charge."

"Or you might be a transient guest at this hotel," the other returned,
in the same bantering tone, "for I saw you at breakfast and luncheon.
Pretty fair _chef_ here, isn't he? But you didn't stick to that part,
you know. You followed me up-town, where I made a call on a relative,
and you studied the colored globes in a druggist's window when I went
away. I wonder why people employ inexperienced boys in such important
matters. In your case, my lad, it was easy enough to detect the
detective. You even took the foolish chance of heading me off, and
returned to this hotel before I did. Now, then, is my charge unfounded?"

"Why should you be under the surveillance of a detective?" asked
Fogerty, slowly.

"Really, my boy, I cannot say. There was an unpleasant little affair
last night at the Waldorf, in which I was not personally concerned, but
suffered, nevertheless. An officious deputy caused my arrest and I
spent an unpleasant night in jail. There being nothing in the way of
evidence against me I was released this morning, and now I find a
detective shadowing me. What can it all mean, I wonder? These stupid
blunders are very annoying to the plain citizen, who, however innocent,
feels himself the victim of a conspiracy."

"I understand you, sir," said Fogerty, drily.

For some moments Mershone now remained silent. Then he asked; "What are
your instructions concerning me?"

To his surprise the boy made a simple, frank admission.

"I'm to see you don't get into more mischief, sir."

"And how long is this nonsense to continue?" demanded Mershone, showing
a touch of anger for the first time.

"Depends on yourself, Mr. Mershone; I'm no judge, myself. I'm so
young--and inexperienced."

"Who is your employer?"

"Oh, I'm just sent out by an agency."

"Is it a big paying proposition?" asked Charlie, eyeing the diffident
youth beside him critically, as if to judge his true caliber.

"Not very big. You see, if I'd been a better detective you'd never have
spotted me so quickly."

"I suppose money counts with you, though, as it does with everyone else
in the world?"

"Of course, sir. Every business is undertaken to make money."

Mershone drew his chair a little nearer.

"I need a clever detective myself," he announced, confidentially. "I'm
anxious to discover what enemy is persecuting me in this way. Would
it--er--be impossible for me to employ _you_ to--er--look after my
interests?"

Fogerty was very serious.

"You see, sir," he responded, "if I quit this job they may not give me
another. In order to be a successful detective one must keep in the good
graces of the agencies."

"That's easy enough," asserted Mershone. "You may pretend to keep this
job, but go home and take life easy. I'll send you a daily statement of
what I've been doing, and you can fix up a report to your superior from
that. In addition to this you can put in a few hours each day trying to
find out who is annoying me in this rascally manner, and for this
service I'll pay you five times the agency price. How does that
proposition strike you, Mr.--"

"Riordan. Me name's Riordan," said Fogerty, with a smile. "No, Mr.
Mershone," shaking his head gravely, "I can't see my way to favor you.
It's an easy job now, and I'm afraid to take chances with a harder one."

Something in the tone nettled Mershone.

"But the pay," he suggested.

"Oh, the pay. If I'm a detective fifty years, I'll make an easy two
thousand a year. That's a round hundred thousand. Can you pay me that
much to risk my future career as a detective?"

Mershone bit his lip. This fellow was not so simple, after all, boyish
as he seemed. And, worse than all, he had a suspicion the youngster was
baiting him, and secretly laughing at his offers of bribery.

"They will take you off the job, now that I have discovered your
identity," he asserted, with malicious satisfaction.

"Oh, no," answered Fogerty; "they won't do that. This little interview
merely simplifies matters. You see, sir, I'm an expert at disguises.
That's my one great talent, as many will testify. But you will notice
that in undertaking this job I resorted to no disguise at all. You see
me as nature made me--and 't was a poor job, I'm thinking."

"Why were you so careless?"

"It wasn't carelessness; it was premeditated. There's not the slightest
objection to your knowing me. My only business is to keep you in sight,
and I can do that exactly as well as Riordan as I could by disguising
myself."

Mershone had it on his tongue's end to ask what they expected to
discover by shadowing him, but decided it was as well not to open an
avenue for the discussion of Miss Merrick's disappearance. So, finding
he could not bribe the youthful detective or use him in any way to his
advantage, he closed the interview by rising.

"I'm going to my room to write some letters," said he, with a yawn.
"Would you like to read them before they are mailed?"

Again Fogerty laughed in his cheerful, boyish way.

"You'd make a fine detective yourself, Mr. Mershone," he declared, "and
I advise you to consider the occupation. I've a notion it's safer, and
better pay, than your present line."

Charlie scowled at the insinuation, but walked away without reply.
Fogerty eyed his retreating figure a moment, gave a slight shrug and
resumed his newspaper.

Day followed day without further event, and gradually Mershone came to
feel himself trapped. Wherever he might go he found Fogerty on duty,
unobtrusive, silent and watchful. It was very evident that he was
waiting for the young man to lead him to the secret hiding place of
Louise Merrick.

In one way this constant surveillance was a distinct comfort to Charlie
Mershone, for it assured him that the retreat of Louise was still
undiscovered. But he must find some way to get rid of his "shadow," in
order that he might proceed to carry out his plans concerning the girl.
During his enforced leisure he invented a dozen apparently clever
schemes, only to abandon them again as unpractical.

One afternoon, while on a stroll, he chanced to meet the bruiser who had
attacked Arthur Weldon at the Waldorf, and been liberally paid by
Mershone for his excellent work. He stopped the man, and glancing
hastily around found that Fogerty was a block in the rear.

"Listen," he said; "I want your assistance, and if you're quick and sure
there is a pot of money, waiting for you."

"I need it, Mr. Mershone," replied the man, grinning.

"There's a detective following me; he's down the street there--a mere
boy--just in front of that tobacco store. See him?"

"Sure I see him. It's Fogerty."

"His name is Riordan."

"No; it's Fogerty. He's no boy, sir, but the slickest 'tec' in the city,
an' that's goin' some, I can tell you."

"Well, you must get him, whoever he is. Drag him away and hold him for
three hours--two--one. Give me a chance to slip him; that's all. Can
you do it? I'll pay you a hundred for the job."

"It's worth two hundred, Mr. Mershone. It isn't safe to fool with
Fogerty."

"I'll make it two hundred."

"Then rest easy," said the man. "I know the guy, and how to handle him.
You just watch him like he's watching you, Mr. Mershone, and if anything
happens you skip as lively as a flea. I can use that two hundred in my
business."

Then the fellow passed on, and Fogerty was still so far distant up the
street that neither of them could see the amused smile upon his thin
face.




CHAPTER XV


A BEWILDERING EXPERIENCE

When Louise Merrick entered the brown limousine, which she naturally
supposed to belong to Arthur Weldon, she had not the faintest suspicion
of any evil in her mind. Indeed, the girl was very happy this especial
evening, although tired with her duties at the Kermess. A climax in her
young life had arrived, and she greeted it joyously, believing she loved
Arthur well enough to become his wife.

Now that the engagement had been announced to their immediate circle of
friends she felt as proud and elated as any young girl has a right to be
under the circumstances.

Added to this pleasant event was the social triumph she and her cousins
had enjoyed at the Kermess, where Louise especially had met with rare
favor. The fashionable world had united in being most kind and
considerate to the dainty, attractive young _debutante_, and only Diana
had seemed to slight her. This was not surprising in view of the fact
that Diana evidently wanted Arthur for herself, and there was some
satisfaction in winning a lover who was elsewhere in prime demand. In
addition to all this the little dance that concluded the evening's
entertainment had been quite delightful, and all things conspired to put
Louise in a very contented frame of mind.  Still fluttering with the
innocent excitements of the hour the girl went to join Arthur without a
fear of impending misfortune. She did not think of Charlie Mershone at
all. He had been annoying and impertinent, and she had rebuked him and
sent him away, cutting him out of her life altogether. Perhaps she ought
to have remembered that she had mildly flirted with Diana's cousin and
given him opportunity for the impassioned speeches she resented; but
Louise had a girlish idea that there was no harm in flirting,
considering it a feminine license. She saw young Mershone at the Kermess
that evening paying indifferent attentions to other women and ignoring
her, and was sincerely glad to have done with him for good and all.

She obeyed readily the man who asked her to be seated in the limousine.
Arthur would be with her in a minute, he said. When the door closed and
the car started she had an impulse to cry out but next moment controlled
it and imagined they were to pick up Mr. Weldon on some corner.

On and on they rolled, and still no evidence of the owner of the
limousine. What could it mean, Louise began to wonder. Had something
happened to Arthur, so that he had been forced to send her home alone?
As the disquieting thought came she tried to speak with the chauffeur,
but could not find the tube. The car was whirling along rapidly; the
night seemed very dark, only a few lights twinkled here and there
outside.

Suddenly the speed slackened. There was a momentary pause, and then the
machine slowly rolled upon a wooden platform. A bell clanged, there was
a whistle and the sound of revolving water-wheels. Louise decided they
must be upon a ferry-boat, and became alarmed for the first time.

The man in livery now opened the door, as if to reassure her.

"Where are we? Where is Mr. Weldon?" enquired the girl, almost
hysterically.

"He is on the boat, miss, and will be with you shortly now," replied the
man, very respectfully. "Mr. Weldon is very sorry to have annoyed you,
Miss Merrick, but says he will soon explain everything, so that you will
understand why he left you."

With this he quietly closed the door again, although Louise was eager to
ask a dozen more questions. Prominent was the query why they should be
on a ferry-boat instead of going directly home. She knew the hour must
be late.

But while these questions were revolving in her mind she still suspected
no plot against her liberty. She must perforce wait for Arthur to
explain his queer conduct; so she sat quietly enough in her place
awaiting his coming, while the ferry puffed steadily across the river to
the Jersey shore.

The stopping of the boat aroused Louise from her reflections. Arthur not
here yet? Voices were calling outside; vehicles were noisily leaving
their positions on the boat to clatter across the platforms. But there
was no sign of Arthur.

Again Louise tried to find the speaking tube. Then she made an endeavor
to open the door, although just then the car started with a jerk that
flung her back against the cushions.

The knowledge that she had been grossly deceived by her conductor at
last had the effect of arousing the girl to a sense of her danger.
Something must be wrong. Something _was_ decidedly wrong, and fear crept
into her heart. She pounded on the glass windows with all her strength,
and shouted as loudly as she could, but all to no avail.

Swiftly the limousine whirled over the dusky road and either her voice
could not be heard through the glass cage in which she was confined or
there was no one near who was willing to hear or to rescue her.

She now realized how wrong she had been to sit idly during the trip
across the ferry, where a score of passengers would gladly have assisted
her. How cunning her captors had been to lull her fears during that
critical period! Now, alas, it was too late to cry out, and she had no
idea where she was being taken or the reason of her going.

Presently it occurred to her that this was not Arthur's limousine at
all. There was no speaking tube for one thing. She leaned forward and
felt for the leathern pocket in which she kept a veil and her street
gloves. No pocket of any sort was to be found.

An unreasoning terror now possessed her. She knew not what to fear, yet
feared everything. She made another attempt to cry aloud for help and
then fell back unconscious on the cushions.

How long she lay in the faint she did not know. When she recovered the
limousine was still rattling forward at a brisk gait but bumping over
ruts in a manner that indicated a country road.

Through the curtains she could see little but the black night, although
there was a glow ahead cast by the searchlights of the car. Louise was
weak and unnerved. She had no energy to find a way to combat her fate,
if such a way were possible. A dim thought of smashing a window and
hurling herself through it gave her only a shudder of repulsion. She
lacked strength for such a desperate attempt.

On, on, on. Would the dreary journey never end? How long must she sit
and suffer before she could know her fate, or at least find some
explanation of the dreadful mystery of this wild midnight ride?

At last, when she had settled down to dull despair, the car came to a
paved road and began to move more slowly. It even stopped once or twice,
as if the driver was not sure of his way. But they kept moving,
nevertheless, and before long entered a driveway. There was another stop
now, and a long wait.

Louise lay dismally back upon the cushions, sobbing hysterically into
her dripping handkerchief. The door of her prison at last opened and a
light shone in upon her.

"Here we are, miss," said the man in uniform, still in quiet, respectful
tones. "Shall I assist you to alight?"

She started up eagerly, her courage returning with a bound. Stepping
unassisted to the ground she looked around her in bewilderment.

The car stood before the entrance to a modest country house. There was a
light in the hall and another upon the broad porch. Around the house a
mass of trees and shrubbery loomed dark and forbidding.

"Where am I?" demanded Louise, drawing back haughtily as the man
extended a hand toward her.

"At your destination, miss," was the answer. "Will you please enter?"

"No! Not until I have an explanation of this--this--singular,
high-handed proceeding," she replied, firmly.

Then she glanced at the house. The hall door had opened and a woman
stood peering anxiously at the scene outside.

With sudden resolve Louise sprang up the steps and approached her. Any
woman, she felt, in this emergency, was a welcome refuge.

"Who are you?" she asked eagerly, "and why have I been brought here?"

"_Mademoiselle_ will come inside, please," said the woman, with a
foreign accent. "It is cold in the night air, _N'est-ce-pas_?"

She turned to lead the way inside. While Louise hesitated to follow the
limousine started with a roar from its cylinders and disappeared down
the driveway, the two men going with it. The absence of the lamps
rendered the darkness around the solitary house rather uncanny. An
intense stillness prevailed except for the diminishing rattle of the
receding motor car. In the hall was a light and a woman.

Louise went in.




CHAPTER XVI


MADAME CERISE, CUSTODIAN

The woman closed the hall door and locked it. Then she led the way to a
long, dim drawing-room in which a grate fire was smouldering. A stand
lamp of antique pattern but dimly illuminated the place, which seemed
well furnished in an old fashioned way.

"Will not you remove your wraps, Mees--Mees--I do not know ma'm'selle's
name."

"What is your own name?" asked Louise, coming closer to gaze earnestly
into the other's face.

"I am called Madame Cerise, if it please you."

Her voice, while softened to an extent by the French accent, was
nevertheless harsh and emotionless. She spoke as an automaton, slowly,
and pausing to choose her words. The woman was of medium size, slim and
straight in spite of many years. Her skin resembled brown parchment; her
eyes were small, black and beady; her nose somewhat fleshy and her lips
red and full as those of a young girl. The age of Madame Cerise might be
anywhere between fifty and seventy; assuredly she had long been a
stranger to youth, although her dark hair was but slightly streaked with
gray. She wore a somber-hued gown and a maid's jaunty apron and cap.

Louise inspected her closely, longing to find a friend and protector in
this curious and strange woman. Her eyes were moist and pleading--an
appeal hard to resist. But Madame Cerise returned her scrutiny with a
wholly impassive expression.

"You are a French maid?" asked Louise, softly.

"A housekeeper, ma'm'selle. For a time, a caretaker."

"Ah, I understand. Are your employers asleep?"

"I cannot say, ma'm'seile. They are not here."

"You are alone in this house?"

"Alone with you, ma'm'seile."

Louise had a sudden access of alarm.

"And why am I here?" she cried, wringing her hands pitifully.

"Ah, who can tell that?" returned the woman, composedly. "Not Cerise,
indeed. Cerise is told nothing--except what is required of her. I but
obey my orders."

Louise turned quickly, at this.

"What are your orders, then?" she asked.

"To attend ma'm'selle with my best skill, to give her every comfort and
care, to--"

"Yes--yes!"

"To keep her safely until she is called for. That is all."

The girl drew a long breath.

"Who will call for me, then?"

"I am not inform, ma'm'selle."

"And I am a prisoner in this house?"

"Ma'm'selle may call it so, if it please her. But reflect; there is no
place else to go. It is bleak weather, the winter soon comes. And here I
can make you the comforts you need."

Louise pondered this speech, which did not deceive her. While still
perplexed as to her abduction, with no comprehension why she should have
been seized in such a summary manner and spirited to this lonely,
out-of-the-way place, she realized she was in no immediate danger. Her
weariness returned tenfold, and she staggered and caught the back of a
chair for support.

The old woman observed this.

"Ma'm'selle is tired," said she. "See; it is past four by the clock, and
you must be much fatigue by the ride and the nervous strain."

"I--I'm completely exhausted," murmured Louise, drooping her head
wearily. The next moment she ran and placed her hands on Madame Cerise's
shoulders, peering into the round, beady eyes with tender pleading as
she continued: "I don't know why I have been stolen away from my home
and friends; I don't know why this dreadful thing has happened to me; I
only know that I am worn out and need rest. Will you take care of me,
Madame Cerise? Will you watch over me while I sleep and guard me from
all harm? I--I haven't any mother to lean on now, you know; I haven't
any friend at all--but _you!_"

The grim features never relaxed a muscle; but a softer look came into
the dark eyes and the woman's voice took on a faint tinge of compassion
as she answered:

"Nothing can harm ma'm'selle. Have no fear, _ma chere_. I will take care
of you; I will watch. _Allons_! it is my duty; it is also my pleasure."

"Are there no--no men in the house--none at all?" enquired the girl,
peering into the surrounding gloom nervously.  "There is no person at
all in the house, but you and I."

"And you will admit no one?"

The woman hesitated.

"Not to your apartment," she said firmly. "I promise it."

Louise gave a long, fluttering sigh. Somehow, she felt that she could
rely upon this promise.

"Then, if you please, Madame Cerise, I'd like to go to bed," she said.

The woman took the lamp and led the way upstairs, entering a large, airy
chamber in which a fire burned brightly in the grate. The furniture here
was dainty and feminine. In an alcove stood a snowy bed, the covers
invitingly turned down.

Madame Cerise set the lamp upon a table and without a word turned to
assist Louise. The beautiful Kermess costume, elaborately embroidered
with roses, which the girl still wore, evidently won the Frenchwoman's
approval. She unhooked and removed it carefully and hung it in a closet.
Very dextrous were her motions as she took down the girl's pretty hair
and braided it for the night. A dainty _robe de nuit_ was provided.

"It is my own," she said simply. "Ma'm'selle is not prepared."  "But
there must be young ladies in your family," remarked Louise,
thoughtfully, for in spite of the stupor she felt from want of sleep the
novelty of her position kept her alert in a way. It is true she was too
tired and bewildered to think clearly, but slight details were
impressing themselves upon her dimly. "This room, for instance--"

"Of course, _ma chere_, a young lady has lived here. She has left some
odd pieces of wardrobe behind her, at times, in going away. When you
waken we will try to find a house-dress to replace your evening-gown.
Will ma'm'selle indulge in the bath before retiring?"

"Not to-night, Madame Cerise. I'm too tired for anything but--sleep!"

Indeed, she had no sooner crawled into the enticing bed than she sank
into unconscious forgetfulness. This was to an extent fortunate. Louise
possessed one of those dispositions cheery and equable under ordinary
circumstances, but easily crushed into apathy by any sudden adversity.
She would not suffer so much as a more excitable and nervous girl might
do under similar circumstances.

Her sleep, following the severe strain of the night's adventure, did
little to refresh her. She awoke in broad daylight to hear a cold wind
whistling shrilly outside and raindrops beating against the panes.

Madame Cerise had not slept much during the night. For an hour after
Louise retired she sat in her room in deep thought. Then she went to the
telephone and notwithstanding the late hour called up Diana, who had a
branch telephone on a table at her bedside.

Miss Von Taer was not asleep. She had had an exciting night herself. She
answered the old caretaker readily and it did not surprise her to learn
that the missing girl had been taken to the East Orange house by the
orders of Charlie Mershone. She enquired how Louise had accepted the
situation forced upon her, and was shocked and rendered uncomfortable by
the too plainly worded protest of the old Frenchwoman. Madame Cerise did
not hesitate to denounce the abduction as a heartless crime, and in her
communication with Diana swore she would protect the innocent girl from
harm at the hands of Mershone or anyone else.

"I have ever to your family been loyal and true, Ma'm'selle Diana," said
she, "but I will not become the instrument of an abominable crime at
your command or that of your wicked cousin. I will keep the girl here in
safety, if it is your wish; but she will be safe, indeed, as long as
Cerise guards her."

"That's right, Madame," stammered Diana, hardly knowing at the moment
what to say. "Be discreet and silent until you hear from me again; guard
the girl carefully and see that she is not too unhappy; but for heaven's
sake keep Charlie's secret until he sees fit to restore Miss Merrick to
her friends. No crime is contemplated; I would not allow such a thing,
as you know. Yet it is none of my affair whatever. My cousin has
compromised me by taking the girl to my house, and no knowledge of the
abduction must get abroad if we can help it. Do you understand me?"

"No," was the reply. "The safest way for us all is to send Miss Merrick
away."

"That will be done as soon as possible."

With this the old Frenchwoman was forced to be content, and she did not
suspect that her report had made Miss Von Taer nearly frantic with
fear--not for Louise but for her own precious reputation. Accustomed to
obey the family she had served for so many years, Madame Cerise
hesitated to follow her natural impulse to set the poor young lady free
and assist her to return to her friends. So she compromised with her
conscience--a thing she was not credited with possessing--by resolving
to make the imprisonment of the "_pauvre fille_" as happy as possible.

Scarcely had Louise opened her eyes the following morning when the old
woman entered her chamber, unlocking the door from the outside to secure
admission.

She first rebuilt the fire, and when it was crackling cheerfully she
prepared a bath and brought an armful of clothing which she laid out for
inspection over the back of a sofa. She produced lingerie, too, and
Louise lay cuddled up in the bedclothes and watched her keeper
thoughtfully until the atmosphere of the room was sufficiently warmed.

"I'll get up, now," she said, quietly.

Madame Cerise was assuredly a skilled lady's maid. She bathed the girl,
wrapped her in an ample kimono and then seated her before the dresser
and arranged her _coiffure_ with dextrous skill.

During this time Louise talked. She had decided her only chance of
escape lay in conciliating this stern-faced woman, and she began by
relating her entire history, including her love affair with Arthur
Weldon, Diana Von Taer's attempt to rob her of her lover, and the part
that Charlie Mershone had taken in the affair.

Madame Cerise listened, but said nothing.

"And now," continued the girl, "tell me who you think could be so wicked
and cruel as to carry me away from my home and friends? I cannot decide
myself. You have more experience and more shrewdness, can't you tell me,
Madame Cerise?"

The woman muttered inaudibly.

"Mr. Mershone might be an enemy, because I laughed at his love-making,"
continued Louise, musingly. "Would a man who loved a girl try to injure
her? But perhaps his love has turned to hate. Anyhow, I can think of no
one else who would do such a thing, or of any reason why Charlie
Mershone should do it."

Madame Cerise merely grunted. She was brushing the soft hair with gentle
care.

"What could a man gain by stealing a girl? If it was Mr. Mershone, does
he imagine I could ever forget Arthur? Or cease to love him? Or that
Arthur would forget me while I am away? Perhaps it's Diana, and she
wants to get rid of me so she can coax Arthur back to her side. But
that's nonsense; isn't it, Madame Cerise? No girl--not even Diana Von
Taer--would dare to act in such a high-handed manner toward her rival.
Did you ever hear of Miss Von Taer? She's quite a society belle. Have
you ever seen her, Madame Cerise?"

The woman vouchsafed no reply to this direct enquiry, but busied herself
dressing the girl's hair. Louise casually turned over the silver-mounted
hand mirror she was holding and gave a sudden start. A monogram was
engraved upon the metal: "D.v.T." She gazed at the mark fixedly and then
picked up a brush that the Frenchwoman laid down. Yes, the same monogram
appeared upon the brush.

The sharp eyes of Cerise had noted these movements. She was a little
dismayed but not startled when Louise said, slowly: "'D.v.T.' stands for
Diana Von Taer. And it isn't likely to stand for anything else. I think
the mystery is explained, now, and my worst fears are realized. Tell me,
Madame, is this Diana Von Taer's house?"

Her eyes shone with anger and round red patches suddenly appeared upon
her pallid cheeks. Madame Cerise drew a long breath.

"It used to be," was her quiet answer. "It was left her by her
grandmother; but Mr. Von Taer did not like the place and they have not
been here lately--not for years. Miss Von Taer informed me, some time
ago, that she had transferred the property to another."

"To her cousin--Mr. Mershone?" asked Louise quickly.

"That may be the name; I cannot remember," was the evasive reply.

"But you must know him, as he is Diana's cousin," retorted Louise. "Why
will you try to deceive me? Am I not helpless enough already, and do you
wish to make me still more miserable?"

"I have seen Mr. Mershone when he was a boy, many times. He was not the
favorite with Ma'm'selle Diana, nor with Monsieur Von Taer. For myself,
I hated him."

There was decided emphasis to the last sentence. Louise believed her and
felt a little relieved.

From the _mlange_ of apparel a modest outfit was obtained to clothe the
girl with decency and comfort, if not in the prevailing style. The fit
left much to be desired, yet Louise did not complain, as weightier
matters were now occupying her mind.

The toilet completed, Madame Cerise disappeared to get a tray
containing a good breakfast. She seemed exceedingly attentive.

"If you will give me the proper directions I will start for home at
once," announced Louise, with firm resolve, while eating her egg and
toast.

"I am unable to give you directions, and I cannot let you go,
ma'm'selle," was the equally firm reply. "The day is much too
disagreeable to venture out in, unless one has proper conveyance. Here,
alas, no conveyance may be had."

Louise tried other tactics.

"I have no money, but several valuable jewels," she said, meaningly. "I
am quite sure they will obtain for me a conveyance."

"You are wrong, ma'm'selle; there is no conveyance to be had!" persisted
the old woman, more sternly.

"Then I shall walk."

"It is impossible."

"Where is this place situated? How far is it from New York? How near am
I to a street-car, or to a train?"

"I cannot tell you."

"But this is absurd!" cried Louise. "You cannot deceive me for long. I
know this is Diana Von Taer's house, and I shall hold Diana Von Taer
responsible for this enforced imprisonment."

"That," said Madame Cerise, coldly, "is a matter of indifference to me.
But ma'm'selle must understand one thing, she must not leave this
house."

"Oh, indeed!"

"At least, until the weather moderates," added the woman, more mildly.

She picked up the tray, went to the door and passed out. Louise heard
the key click in the lock.




CHAPTER XVII


THE MYSTERY DEEPENS

Uncle John was both astounded and indignant that so bold and unlawful an
act as the abduction of his own niece could have been perpetrated in the
heart of New York and directly under the eyes of the police. Urged by
the Major, Mr. Merrick was at first inclined to allow Arthur Weldon to
prosecute the affair and undertake the recovery of the girl, being
assured this would easily be accomplished and conceding the fact that no
one had a stronger interest in solving the mystery of Louise's
disappearance than young Weldon. But when midday arrived and no trace of
the young girl had yet been obtained the little millionaire assumed an
important and decisive air and hurried down town to "take a hand in the
game" himself.

After a long interview with the Chief of Detectives, Mr. Merrick said
impressively:

"Now, understand, sir; not a hint of this to the newspaper folks. I
won't have any scandal attached to the poor child if I can help it. Set
your whole force to work--at once!--but impress them with the need of
secrecy. My offer is fair and square. I'll give a reward of ten thousand
dollars if Miss Merrick is discovered within twenty-four hours; nine
thousand if she's found during the next twenty-four hours; and so on,
deducting a thousand for each day of delay. That's for the officer who
finds her. For yourself, sir, I intend to express my gratitude as
liberally as the service will allow me to. Is this all clear and
above-board?"

"It is perfectly clear, Mr. Merrick."

"The child must be found--and found blamed quick, too! Great Caesar! Can
a simple affair like this baffle your splendid metropolitan force?"

"Not for long, Mr. Merrick, believe me."

But this assurance proved optimistic. Day by day crept by without a clew
to the missing girl being discovered; without development of any sort.
The Inspector informed Mr. Merrick that "it began to look like a
mystery."

Arthur, even after several sleepless nights, still retained his courage.

"I'm on the right track, sir," he told Uncle John. "The delay is
annoying, but not at all dangerous. So long as Fogerty holds fast to
Mershone Louise is safe, wherever she may be."

"Mershone may have nothing to do with the case."

"I'm positive he has."

"And Louise can't be safe while she's a prisoner, and in the hands of
strangers. I want the girl home! Then I'll know she's safe."

"I want her home, too, sir. But all your men are unable to find her, it
seems. They can't even discover in what direction she was taken, or how.
The brown limousine seems to be no due at all."

"Of course not. There are a thousand brown limousines in New York."

"Do you imagine she's still somewhere in the city, sir?" enquired
Arthur.

"That's my theory," replied Uncle John. "She must be somewhere in the
city. You see it would be almost impossible to get her out of town
without discovery. But I'll admit this detective force is the finest
aggregation of incompetents I've ever known--and I don't believe your
precious Fogerty is any better, either."

Of course Beth and Patsy had to be told of their cousin's disappearance
as soon as the first endeavor to trace her proved a failure. Patsy went
at once to Mrs. Merrick and devoted herself to comforting the poor woman
as well as she could.

Beth frowned at the news and then sat down to carefully think out the
problem. In an hour she had logically concluded that Diana Von Taer was
the proper person to appeal to. If anyone knew where Louise was, it was
Diana. That same afternoon she drove to the Von Taer residence and
demanded an interview.

Diana was at that moment in a highly nervous state. She had at times
during her career been calculating and unscrupulous, but never before
had she deserved the accusation of being malicious and wicked. She had
come to reproach herself bitterly for having weakly connived at the
desperate act of Charlie Mershone, and her good sense assured her the
result would be disastrous to all concerned in it. Contempt for herself
and contempt for her cousin mingled with well-defined fears for her
cherished reputation, and so it was that Miss Von Taer had almost
decided to telephone Madame Cerise and order her to escort Louise
Merrick to her own home when Beth's card came up with a curt demand for
a personal interview.

The natures of these two girls had never harmonized in the slightest
degree. Beth's presence nerved Diana to a spirit of antagonism that
quickly destroyed her repentant mood. As she confronted her visitor her
demeanor was cold and suspicious. There was a challenge and an
accusation in Beth's eyes that conveyed a distinct warning, which Miss
Von Taer quickly noted and angrily resented--perhaps because she knew it
was deserved.

It would have been easy to tell Beth De Graf where her cousin Louise
was, and at the same time to assure her that Diana was blameless in the
affair; but she could not endure to give her antagonist this
satisfaction.

Beth began the interview by saying: "What have you done with Louise
Merrick?" That was, of course, equal to a declaration of war.

Diana was sneering and scornful. Thoroughly on guard, she permitted no
compromising word or admission to escape her. Really, she knew nothing
of Louise Merrick, having unfortunately neglected to examine her
antecedents and personal characteristics before undertaking her
acquaintance. One is so likely to blunder through excess of good nature.
She had supposed a niece of Mr. John Merrick would be of the right sort;
but the age is peculiar, and one cannot be too cautious in choosing
associates. If Miss Merrick had run away from her home and friends, Miss
Von Taer was in no way responsible for the escapade. And now, if Miss De
Graf had nothing further to say, more important matters demanded Diana's
time.

Beth was furious with anger at this baiting. Without abandoning a jot
her suspicions she realized she was powerless to prove her case at this
time. With a few bitter and cutting remarks--made, she afterward said,
in "self-defense"--she retreated as gracefully as possible and drove
home.

An hour later she suggested to Uncle John that he have a detective
placed where Diana's movements could be watched; but that had already
been attended to by both Mr. Merrick and Mr. Fogerty. Uncle John could
hardly credit Diana's complicity in this affair. The young lady's social
position was so high, her family so eminently respectable, her motive
in harming Louise so inconceivable, that he hesitated to believe her
guilty, even indirectly. As for her cousin, he did not know what to
think, as Arthur accused him unreservedly. It did not seem possible that
any man of birth, breeding and social position could be so contemptible
as to perpetrate an act of this character. Yet some one had done it, and
who had a greater incentive than Charlie Mershone?

Poor Mrs. Merrick was inconsolable as the days dragged by. She clung to
Patsy with pitiful entreaties not to be left alone; so Miss Doyle
brought her to her own apartments, where the bereft woman was shown
every consideration. Vain and selfish though Mrs. Merrick might be, she
was passionately devoted to her only child, and her fears for the life
and safety of Louise were naturally greatly exaggerated.

The group of anxious relatives and friends canvassed the subject
morning, noon and night, and the longer the mystery remained unsolved
the more uneasy they all became.

"This, ma'am," said Uncle John, sternly, as he sat one evening facing
Mrs. Merrick, "is the final result of your foolish ambition to get our
girls into society."

"I can't see it that way, John," wailed the poor woman. "I've never
heard of such a thing happening in society before, have you?"

"I don't keep posted," he growled. "But everything was moving smoothly
with us before this confounded social stunt began, as you must admit."

"I can't understand why the papers are not full of it," sighed Mrs.
Merrick, musingly. "Louise is so prominent now in the best circles."

"Of course," said the Major, drily; "she's so prominent, ma'am, that no
one can discover her at all! And it's lucky for us the newspapers know
nothing of the calamity. They'd twist the thing into so many shapes that
not one of us would ever again dare to look a friend in the eye."

"I'm sure my darling has been murdered!" declared Mrs. Merrick, weeping
miserably. She made the statement on an average of once to every five
minutes. "Or, if she hasn't been killed yet, she's sure to be soon.
Can't _something_ be done?"  That last appeal was hard to answer. They
had done everything that could be thought of. And here it was Tuesday.
Louise had been missing for five days.




CHAPTER XVIII


A RIFT IN THE CLOUDS

The Tuesday morning just referred to dawned cold and wintry. A chill
wind blew and for a time carried isolated snowflakes whirling here and
there. Gradually, as the morning advanced, the flakes became more
numerous, until by nine o'clock an old fashioned snowstorm had set in
that threatened to last for some time. The frozen ground was soon
covered with a thin white mantle and the landscape in city and country
seemed especially forbidding.

In spite of these adverse conditions Charlie Mershone decided to go out
for a walk. He felt much like a prisoner, and his only recreation was in
getting out of the hotel for a daily stroll. Moreover, he had an object
in going abroad to-day.

So he buttoned his overcoat up to his chin and fearlessly braved the
storm. He had come to wholly disregard the presence of the detective who
shadowed him, and if the youthful Fogerty by chance addressed him he was
rewarded with a direct snub. This did not seem to disconcert the boy in
the least, and to-day, as usual, when Mershone walked out Fogerty
followed at a respectful distance. He never appeared to be watching his
man closely, yet never for an instant did Mershone feel that he had
shaken the fellow off.

On this especial morning the detective was nearly a block in the rear,
with the snow driving furiously into his face, when an automobile
suddenly rolled up to the curb beside him and two men leaped out and
pinioned Fogerty in their arms. There was no struggle, because there was
no resistance. The captors quickly tossed the detective into the car, an
open one, which again started and turned into a side street.

Fogerty, seated securely between the two burly fellows, managed to
straighten up and rearrange his clothing.

"Will you kindly explain this unlawful act, gentlemen?" he enquired.

The man on the left laughed aloud. He was the same individual who had
attacked Arthur Weldon, the one who had encountered Mershone in the
street the day before.

"Cold day, ain't it, Fogerty?" he remarked. "But that makes it all the
better for a little auto ride. We like you, kid, we're fond of
you--awful fond--ain't we, Pete?"

"We surely are," admitted the other.

"So we thought we'd invite you out for a whirl--see? We'll give you a
nice ride, so you can enjoy the scenery. It's fine out Harlem way, an'
the cold'll make you feel good. Eh, Pete?"

"That's the idea," responded Pete, cheerfully.

"Very kind of you," said the detective, leaning back comfortably against
the cushions and pulling up his coat collar to shield him from the wind.
"But are you aware that I'm on duty, and that this will allow my man to
slip away from me?"

"Can't help that; but we're awful sorry," was the reply. "We just wanted
company, an' you're a good fellow, Fogerty, considerin' your age an'
size."

"Thank you," said Fogerty, "You know me, and I know you. You are Bill
Leesome, alias Will Dutton--usually called Big Bill. You did time a
couple of years ago for knocking out a policeman."

"I'm safe enough now, though," responded Big Bill. "You're not working
on the reg'lar force, Fogerty, you're only a private burr."

"I am protected, just the same," asserted Fogerty. "When you knabbed me
I was shadowing Mershone, who has made away with a prominent society
young lady."

"Oh, he has, has he?" chuckled Big Bill, and his companion laughed so
gleefully that he attracted Fogerty's attention to himself.

"Ah, I suppose you are one of the two men who lugged the girl off," he
remarked; "and I must congratulate you on having made a good job of it.
Isn't it curious, by the way, that the fellow who stole and hid this
girl should be the innocent means of revealing her biding place?"

The two men stared at him blankly. The car, during this conversation,
had moved steadily on, turning this and that corner in a way that might
have confused anyone not perfectly acquainted with this section of the
city.

"What d'ye mean by that talk, Fogerty?" demanded Big Bill.

"Of course it was Mershone who stole the girl," explained the detective,
calmly; "we know that. But Mershone is a clever chap. He knew he was
watched, and so he has never made a movement to go to his prisoner. But
he grew restless in time, and when he met you, yesterday, fixed up a
deal with you to carry me away, so he could escape."

Big Bill looked uncomfortable.

"You know a lot, Fogerty," he said, doggedly.

"Yes; I've found that human nature is much the same the world over,"
replied the detective. "Of course I suspected you would undertake to
give Mershone his chance by grabbing me, and that is exactly what you
have done. But, my lads, what do you suppose I have done in the
meantime?"

They both looked their curiosity but said nothing.

"I've simply used your clever plot to my own advantage, in order to
bring things to a climax," continued Fogerty. "While we are joy-riding
here, a half dozen of my men are watching every move that Mershone
makes. I believe he will lead them straight to the girl; don't you?"

Big Bill growled some words that were not very choice and then yelled to
the chauffeur to stop. The other man was pale and evidently frightened.

"See here, Fogerty; you make tracks!" was the sharp command, as the
automobile came to a halt. "You've worked a pretty trick on us, 'cordin'
to your own showin', and we must find Mr. Mershone before it's too
late--if we can."

"Good morning," said Fogerty, alighting. "Thank you for a pleasant
ride--and other things."

They dashed away and left him standing on the curb; and after watching
them disappear the detective walked over to a drug store and entered the
telephone booth.

"That you, Hyde?--This is Fogerty."

"Yes, sir. Mr. Mershone has just crossed the ferry to Jersey. Adams is
with him. I'll hear from him again in a minute: hold the wire."

Fogerty waited. Soon he learned that Mershone had purchased a ticket for
East Orange. The train would leave in fifteen minutes.

Fogerty decided quickly. After looking at his watch he rushed out and
arrested a passing taxicab.

"Ready for a quick run--perhaps a long one?" he asked.

"Ready for anything," declared the man.

The detective jumped in and gave hurried directions.

"Never mind the speed limit," he said. "No one will interfere with us.
I'm Fogerty."




CHAPTER XIX


POLITIC REPENTANCE

Perhaps no one--not even Mrs. Merrick--was so unhappy in consequence of
the lamentable crime that had been committed as Diana Von Taer.
Immediately after her interview with Beth her mood changed, and she
would have given worlds to be free from complicity in the abduction.
Bitterly, indeed, she reproached herself for her enmity toward the
unsuspecting girl, an innocent victim of Diana's own vain desires and
Charles Mershone's heartless wiles. Repenting her folly and reasoning
out the thing when it was too late, Diana saw clearly that she had
gained no possible advantage, but had thoughtlessly conspired to ruin
the reputation of an honest, ingenuous girl.

Not long ago she had said that her life was dull, a stupid round of
social functions that bored her dreadfully. She had hoped by adopting
John Merrick's nieces as her _protges_ and introducing them to society
to find a novel and pleasurable excitement that would serve to take her
out of her unfortunate _ennui_--a condition to which she had practically
been born.

But Diana had never bargained for such excitement as this; she had never
thought to win self abhorrence by acts of petty malice and callous
cruelties.  Yet so intrenched was she in the conservatism of her class
that she could not at once bring herself to the point of exposing her
own guilt that she might make amends for what had been done. She told
herself she would rather die than permit Louise to suffer through her
connivance with her reckless, unprincipled cousin. She realized
perfectly that she ought to fly, without a moment's delay, to the poor
girl's assistance. Yet fear of exposure, of ridicule, of loss of caste,
held her a helpless prisoner in her own home, where she paced the floor
and moaned and wrung her hands until she was on the verge of nervous
prostration. If at any time she seemed to acquire sufficient courage to
go to Louise, a glance at the detective watching the house unnerved her
and prevented her from carrying out her good intentions.

You must not believe that Diana was really bad; her lifelong training
along set lines and practical seclusion from the everyday world were
largely responsible for her evil impulses. Mischief is sure to crop up,
in one form or another, among the idle and ambitionless. More daring
wickedness is said to be accomplished by the wealthy and aimless
creatures of our false society than by the poorer and uneducated
classes, wherein criminals are supposed to thrive. These sins are often
unpublished, although not always undiscovered, but they are no more
venial because they are suppressed by wealth and power.

Diana Von Taer was a girl who, rightly led, might have been capable of
developing a noble womanhood; yet the conditions of her limited
environment had induced her to countenance a most dastardly and
despicable act. It speaks well for the innate goodness of this girl that
she at last actually rebelled and resolved to undo, insofar as she was
able, the wrong that had been accomplished.

For four days she suffered tortures of remorse. On the morning of the
fifth day she firmly decided to act. Regardless of who might be
watching, or of any unpleasant consequences to herself, she quietly left
the house, unattended, and started directly for the East Orange mansion.




CHAPTER XX


A TELEPHONE CALL

Still another laggard awoke to action on this eventful Tuesday morning.

Madame Cerise had been growing more and more morose and dissatisfied day
by day. Her grievance was very tangible. A young girl had been brought
forcibly to the house and placed in her care to be treated as a
prisoner. From that time the perpetrators of the deed had left the woman
to her own resources, never communicating with her in any way.

During a long life of servitude Madame Cerise had acquiesced in many
things that her own conscience did not approve of, for she considered
herself a mere instrument to be used at will by the people who employed
and paid her. But her enforced solitude as caretaker of the lonely house
at East Orange had given her ample time to think, and her views had
lately undergone a decided change.

To become the jailer of a young, pretty and innocent girl was the most
severe trial her faithfulness to her employers had ever compelled her to
undergo, and the woman deeply resented the doubtful position in which
she had been placed.

However, the chances were that Madame Cerise might have obeyed her
orders to the letter had not so long a period of waiting ensued. During
these days she was constantly thrown in the society of Louise, which had
a tendency to make her still more rebellious. The girl clung to Cerise
in her helplessness and despair, and constantly implored her to set her
free. This, indeed, the Frenchwoman might have done long ago had she not
suspected such an act might cause great embarrassment to Diana Von Taer,
whom she had held on her knee as an infant and sought to protect with
loyal affection.

It was hard, though, to hear the pitiful appeals of the imprisoned girl,
and to realize how great was the wrong that was being done her. The old
woman was forced to set her jaws firmly and turn deaf ears to the
pleadings in order not to succumb to them straightway. Meantime she did
her duty conscientiously. She never left Louise's room without turning
the key in the lock, and she steadfastly refused the girl permission to
wander in the other rooms of the house. The prison was a real prison,
indeed, but the turnkey sought to alleviate the prisoner's misery by
every means in her power. She was indefatigable in her service, keeping
the room warm and neat, attending to the girl's every want and cooking
her delicious meals.

While this all tended to Louise's comfort it had little affect in
soothing her misery. Between periods of weeping she sought to cajole the
old woman to release her, and at times she succumbed to blank despair.
Arthur was always in her mind, and she wondered why he did not come to
rescue her. Every night she stole softly from her bed to try the door,
hoping Cerise had forgotten to lock it. She examined her prison by
stealth to discover any possible way of escape.

There were two small windows and one large one. The latter opened upon
the roof of a small porch, but, there were no way to descend from it
unless one used a frail lattice at one end, which in summer probably
supported a rose or other vine. Louise shrank intuitively from such a
desperate undertaking. Unless some dreadful crisis occurred she would
never dare trust herself to that frail support. Yet it seemed the only
possible way of escape.

Time finally wore out the patience of Madame Cerise, who was unable
longer to withstand Louise's pleadings. She did not indicate by word or
look that her attitude had changed, but she made a secret resolve to
have done with the affair altogether.

Often in their conversations the girl had mentioned Arthur Weldon. She
had given Cerise his address and telephone number, and implored her at
least to communicate with him and tell him his sweetheart was safe,
although unhappy. This had given the old woman the clever idea on which
she finally acted.

By telephoning Mr. Weldon she could give him the information that would
lead to his coming for Louise, without anyone knowing who it was that
had betrayed the secret. This method commended itself strongly to her,
as it would save her from any trouble or reproach.

Leaving Louise at breakfast on this Tuesday morning Madame Cerise went
down to the telephone and was soon in communication with Arthur. She
told him, in a quiet tone, that Miss Louise Merrick was being secluded
in a suburban house near East Orange, and described the place so he
could easily find it. The young man questioned her eagerly, but aside
from the information that the girl was well and uninjured she
vouchsafed no further comment.

It was enough, however. Arthur, in wild excitement, rushed to the
rescue.




CHAPTER XXI


THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS

Madame Cerise, well knowing she had accelerated the march of events to a
two-step, calmly sat herself down in the little housekeeper's room off
the lower hall and, leaving Louise to her moody solitude upstairs,
awaited the inevitable developments.

Outside the weather was cold and blustering. The wind whirled its burden
of snowflakes in every direction with blinding, bewildering
impartiality. It was a bad day to be out, thought the old Frenchwoman;
but a snowstorm was not likely to deter an anxious lover. She calculated
the time it would take Monsieur Weldon to arrive at the mansion: if he
was prompt and energetic he could cover the distance in an hour and a
half by train or three hours by motor car. But he must prepare for the
journey, and that would consume some time; perhaps she need not expect
him within two hours at the earliest.

She read, to pass away the time, selecting a book from a shelf of
well-worn French novels. Somehow she did not care to face her tearful
prisoner again until she could restore the unhappy girl to the arms of
her true lover. There was still romance in the soul of Madame Cerise,
however withered her cheeks might be. She was very glad that at last she
had summoned courage to act according to the dictates of her heart.

Eh? What is this? A rumble of wheels over the frozen snow caused her to
glance at the clock above the mantel. Not by any possibility could
Monsieur Weldon arrive so soon. Who, then, could it be?

She sat motionless while the doorbell rang, and rang again. Nothing must
interfere with the pretty _denouement_ she had so fondly anticipated
when Louise's faithful knight came to her.

But the one who had just now alighted was persistent. The vehicle had
been sent away--she heard the sound of receding wheels--and the new
arrival wanted to get in. The bell jerked and jangled unceasingly for a
time and then came a crash against the door, as if a stalwart shoulder
was endeavoring to break it down.

Madame Cerise laid down her book, placed her _pince-nez_ in the case,
and slowly proceeded down the hall. The door shook with another powerful
impact, a voice cried out demanding admittance.

"Who is it, then?" she called shrilly.

"Open the door, confound you!" was the irritated reply.

The woman reflected. This was surely young Mershone's voice. And she had
no excuse to deny him admittance. Quietly she unbolted the door and
allowed it to open an inch while she peered at the man outside.

"Oh! it is Monsieur Mershone."

"Of course it is," he roared, forcing the door open and stalking in.
"Who in thunder did you think it was?"

"A thousand pardons, m'sieur," said Cerise. "I must be cautious; it is
your own command. That you may be protected I deny admittance to all."

"That's all right," said Mershone gruffly, while he stamped his feet
upon the rug and shook the snow from his clothing. "Haven't you any fire
in this beastly old refrigerator? I'm nearly frozen. Where's Miss
Merrick?"

"She is occupying Ma'm'selle Diana's room, in the west wing. Will
monsieur please to come this way?"

She led him to her own little room, and so engrossed were they that
neither remembered he had failed to rebolt the front door.

A good fire burned in the grate of Cerise's cosy den and Mershone threw
off his overcoat and warmed his hands as he showered questions upon the
old caretaker.

"How is the girl behaving? Tears and hysterics?"

"At times, m'sieur."

"Takes it hard, eh?"

"She is very unhappy."

"Ever mention a man named Weldon?"

"Often."

"Humph!" He did not like this report. "Has anyone been here to disturb
you, or to make enquiries?"

"No one, m'sieur."

"We're safe enough, I guess. It was a mighty neat job, Cerise, taken
altogether, although the fools have been watching me night and day.
That's the reason I did not come sooner."

She made no comment. Mershone threw himself into a chair and stared
thoughtfully at the fire.

"Has Louise--Miss Merrick, you know--mentioned my name at all?"  "At
times."

"In what way?"

"With loathing and contempt."

He scowled at her savagely.

"Do you think she suspects that I carried her away?"

"She seems to know it absolutely."

He stared at the fire again.

"I've got a queer job on my hands, Cerise, and I rely on you to help
me," said he presently, assuming a more conciliating manner. "Perhaps
I'm in a box, or a hole, or whatever else you like to call it, but it's
too late too back down now--I must push ahead and win. You see the case
is this: I love the girl and had her brought here to keep her from
another man. By hook or crook I'm going to make her my wife. She won't
take kindly to that at first, perhaps, but I'll make her happy in the
end. In one way this delay has been a good thing. It must have worn her
out and broken her spirits quite a bit; eh?"

"She seems very miserable," conceded the woman.

"Do you find her hard to manage? Does she show much temper? In other
words, do you suppose she'll put up a fight?"

Madame Cerise regarded him wonderingly.

"She is a good girl," was her reply. "She loves with much devotion the
man from whom you have stolen her. I am quite positive she will never
consent to become your wife."

"Oh, you are? Well, I intend she shall marry me, and that settles it.
She's unnerved and miserable now, and I mean to grind her down till she
hasn't strength to resist me. That sounds hard. I know; but it's the
only way to accomplish my purpose. After she's my wife I'll be very kind
to her, poor thing, and teach her to love me. A man can do anything with
a woman if he sets about it the right way. I'm not taking this stand
because I'm cruel, Cerise, but because I'm desperate. All's fair in love
and war, you know, and this is a bit of both."

He was pacing the floor by this time, his hands thrust deep in his
pockets, an anxious look upon his face that belied his bombastic words.

The Frenchwoman's expression was impassive. Her scorn for the wretch
before her was tempered with the knowledge that his cowardly plan was
doomed to defeat. It was she who had checkmated him, and she was glad.
Now and again her eyes sought the clock, while she silently calculated
the time to elapse before Arthur Weldon arrived. There would be a pretty
scene then, Cerise would have much enjoyment in witnessing the
encounter.

"Now, then, take me to Louise," commanded Mershone, suddenly.

She shrank back in dismay.

"Oh, not yet, m'sieur!"

"Why not?"

"The young lady is asleep. She will not waken for an hour--perhaps two."

"I can't wait. We'll waken her now, and give her an idea of the change
of program."

"But no, m'sieur! It is outrageous. The poor thing has but now sobbed
herself to sleep, after many bitter hours. Can you not wait a brief
hour, having waited five days?"

"No. Take me to her at once."  As he came toward her the woman drew
away.

"I cannot," she said firmly.

"See here, Cerise, I intend to be obeyed. I won't endure any nonsense at
this stage of the game, believe me," he announced fiercely. "In order to
win, there's just one way to manage this affair, and I insist upon your
following my instructions. Take me to Louise!"

"I will not!" she returned, the bead-like eyes glittering as they met
his angry gaze.

"Then I'll go alone. Give me the key."

She did not move, nor did she answer him. At her waist hung a small
bunch of household keys and this he seized with a sudden movement and
jerked loose from its cord.

"You miserable hag!" he muttered, inflamed with anger at her opposition.
"If you propose to defend this girl and defy me, you'll find I'm able to
crush you as I will her. While I'm gone I expect you to come to your
senses, and decide to obey me."

With these words he advanced to the door of the little room and opened
it. Just outside stood Fogerty, smiling genially.

"Glad to meet you again, Mr. Mershone," he said. "May I come in? Thank
you."

While Mershone stood bewildered by this unexpected apparition the
detective entered the room, closed the door carefully, and putting his
back to it bowed politely to Madame Cerise.

"Pardon this seeming intrusion, ma'am," said he. "I'm here on a little
matter of business, having a warrant for the arrest of Mr. Charles
Connoldy Mershone."




CHAPTER XXII


GONE

The grim face of Madame Cerise relaxed to allow a quaint smile to flit
across it. She returned Fogerty's bow with a deep curtsy.

Mershone, after one brief exclamation of dismay, wrested from him by
surprise, threw himself into the chair again and stared at the fire.
For a few moments there was intense stillness in the little room.

"How easy it is," said Fogerty, in soft, musing tones, "to read one's
thoughts--under certain circumstances. You are thinking, Mr. Mershone,
that I'm a boy, and not very strong, while you are an athlete and can
easily overpower me. I have come at a disagreeable time, and all your
plans depend on your ability to get rid of me. But I've four good men
within call, who are just now guarding the approaches to this house.
They'd like to come in, I know, because it's very cold and disagreeable
outside; but suppose we allow them to freeze for a time? Ah, I thought
you'd agree with me, sir--I overheard you say you were about to visit
Miss Merrick, who is confined in a room upstairs, but I'd like you to
postpone that while we indulge in a little confidential chat together.
You see--"

The door-bell rang violently. Fogerty glanced at Madame Cerise.  "Will
you see who it is?" he asked.

She arose at once and left the room. Mershone turned quickly.

"What's your price, Fogerty?" he asked, meaningly.

"For what?"

"For getting out of here--making tracks and leaving me alone. Every man
has his price, and I'm trapped--I'm willing to pay anything--I'll--"

"Cut it out, sir. You've tried this once before. I'm not to be bribed."

"Have you really a warrant for my arrest?"

"I've carried it since Friday. It's no use, Mershone, the game's up and
you may as well grin and bear it."

Mershone was about to reply when the door opened and Diana Von Taer came
in with a swift, catlike tread and confronted him with flaming eyes.

"You coward! You low, miserable scoundrel! How dare you come here to
annoy and browbeat that poor girl?" she cried in clear, cutting accents,
without noticing the presence of Fogerty.

"Oh, shut up, Di, you're in it as deep as I am," he retorted, turning
away with a flushed face.

"I'm not, sir! Never have I countenanced this wicked, criminal act," she
declared. "I have come here to-day to save Louise from your wiles and
carry her back to her friends. I dare you, or your confederates," with a
scornful look at the detective, "to interfere with me in any way." Then
she turned to Cerise and continued: "Where is Miss Merrick now?"

"In your own room, ma'm'seile."

"Come with me, then."

With a defiant glance at Mershone she turned haughtily and left the
room. Cerise followed obediently, somewhat astonished at the queer turn
of events.

Left alone with Mershone, Fogerty chuckled gleefully.

"Why, it seems I wasn't needed, after all," said he, "and we've both of
us taken a lot of trouble for nothing, Mershone. The chances are Miss
Von Taer would have turned the trick in any event, don't you think so?"
 "No, you don't understand her. She wouldn't have interfered if she
hadn't been scared out," growled the other. "She's sacrificed me to save
herself, that's all."

"You may be right about that," admitted Fogerty; and then he got up to
answer the door-bell, which once more rang violently.

An automobile stood outside, and from it an excited party trooped into
the hallway, disregarding the cutting wind and blinding snowflakes that
assailed them as they passed in. There was Arthur Weldon and Uncle John,
Patricia and Beth; and all, as they saw the detective, cried with one
voice:

"Where's Louise?"

Fogerty had just managed to close the door against the wintry blast when
the answer came from the stairway just above:

"She is gone!"

The voice was shrill and despairing, and looking up they saw Diana
standing dramatically posed upon the landing, her hands clasped over her
heart and a look of fear upon her face. Over her shoulder the startled
black eyes of old Cerise peered down upon the group below.

The newcomers were evidently bewildered by this reception. They had come
to rescue Louise, whom they imagined confined in a lonely deserted villa
with no companion other than the woman who guarded her. Arthur's own
detective opened the door to them and Diana Von Taer, whom they
certainly did not expect to meet here, confronted them with the
thrilling statement that Louise had gone.

Arthur was the first to recover his wits.

"Gone!" he repeated; "gone where?"

"She had escaped--run away!" explained Diana, in real distress.

"When?" asked Uncle John.

"Just now. Within an hour, wasn't it, Cerise?"

"At ten o'clock I left her, now she is gone," said the old woman, who
appeared as greatly agitated as her mistress.

"Good gracious! you don't mean to say she's left the house in this
storm?" exclaimed Patsy, aghast at the very thought.

"What shall we do? What _can_ we do?" demanded Beth, eagerly.

Fogerty started up the stairs. Cerise turned to show him the way, and
the others followed in an awed group.

The key was in the lock of the door to the missing girl's room, but the
door itself now stood ajar. Fogerty entered, cast a sharp look around
and walked straight to the window. As the others came in, glancing
curiously about them and noting the still smouldering fire and the
evidences of recent occupation, the detective unlatched the French
window and stepped out into the snow that covered the roof of the little
porch below. Arthur sprang out beside him, leaving the rest to shiver in
the cold blast that rushed in upon them from the open window.

Fogerty, on his knees, scanned the snow carefully, and although Weldon
could discover no sign of a footprint the young detective nodded his
head sagaciously and slowly made his way to the trellis at the end. Here
it was plain that the accumulation of snow had recently been brushed
away from the frail framework.  "It was strong enough to hold her,
though," declared Fogerty, looking over the edge of the roof. "I'll
descend the same way, sir. Go back by the stairs and meet me below."

He grasped the lattice and began cautiously to lower himself to the
ground, and Arthur turned to rejoin his friends in the room.

"That is the way she escaped, without doubt," he said to them. "Poor
child, she had no idea we were about to rescue her, and her long
confinement had made her desperate."

"Did she have a cloak, or any warm clothes?" asked Beth. Madame Cerise
hurriedly examined the wardrobe in the closets.

"Yes, ma'm'selle; she has taken a thick coat and a knit scarf," she
answered. But I am sure she had no gloves, and her shoes were very
thin."

"How long do you think she has been gone?" Patsy enquired.

"Not more than an hour. I was talking with Mr. Mershone, and--"

"Mershone! Is he here?" demanded Arthur.

"He is in my room downstairs--or was when you came," said the woman.

"That accounts for her sudden flight," declared the young man, bitterly.
"She doubtless heard his voice and in a sudden panic decided to fly. Did
Mershone see her?" he asked.

"No, m'sieur," replied Cerise.

With one accord they descended to the lower hall and the caretaker led
the way to her room. To their surprise they found Mershone still seated
in the chair by the fire, his hands clasped behind his head, a cigarette
between his lips.

"Here is another crime for you to account for!" cried Arthur, advancing
upon him angrily. "You have driven Louise to her death!"

Mershone raised one hand in mild protest.

"Don't waste time cursing me," he said. "Try to find Louise before it is
too late."

The reproach seemed justified. Arthur paused and turning to Mr. Merrick
said:

"He is right. I'll go help Fogerty, and you must stay here and look
after the girls until we return."  As he went out he passed Diana
without a look. She sat in a corner of the room sobbing miserably. Beth
was thoughtful and quiet, Patsy nervous and indignant. Uncle John was
apparently crushed by the disaster that had overtaken them. Mershone's
suggestion that Louise might perish in the storm was no idle one; the
girl was not only frail and delicate but worn out with her long
imprisonment and its anxieties. They all realized this.

"I believe," said Mershone, rising abruptly, "I'll go and join the
search. Fogerty has arrested me, but you needn't worry about my trying
to escape. I don't care what becomes of me, now, and I'm going straight
to join the detective."

They allowed him to go without protest, and he buttoned his coat and set
out in the storm to find the others. Fogerty and Arthur were by this
time in the lane back of the grounds, where the detective was advancing
slowly with his eyes fixed on the ground.

"The tracks are faint, but easily followed," he was saying, "The high
heels of her shoes leave a distinct mark."

When Mershone joined them Arthur scowled at the fellow but said nothing.
Fogerty merely smiled.

From the lane the tracks, already nearly obliterated by the fast falling
snow, wandered along nearly a quarter of a mile to a crossroads, where
they became wholly lost.

Fogerty looked up and down the roads and shook his head with a puzzled
expression.

"We've surely traced her so far," said he, "but now we must guess at her
further direction. You'll notice this track of a wagon. It may have
passed fifteen minutes or an hour ago. The hoof tracks of the horses are
covered, so I'm not positive which way they headed; I only know there
are indications of hoof tracks, which proves it a farmer's wagon. The
question is, whether the young lady met it, and caught a ride, or
whether she proceeded along some of the other trails. I can't find any
indication of those high-heeled shoes from this point, in any direction.
Better get your car, Mr. Weldon, and run east a few miles, keeping sharp
watch of the wagon tracks on the way. It was a heavy wagon, for the
wheels cut deep. Mershone and I will go west. When you've driven far
enough to satisfy yourself you're going the wrong direction, you may
easily overtake us on your return. Then, if we've discovered nothing on
this road, we'll try the other."  Arthur ran back at once to the house
and in a few minutes had started on his quest. The motor car was
powerful enough to plow through the deep snow with comparative ease.

Those left together in Madam Cerise's little room were more to be pitied
than the ones engaged in active search, for there was nothing to relieve
their fears and anxieties. Diana, unable to bear the accusing looks of
Patsy and Beth, resolved to make a clean breast of her complicity in the
affair and related to them every detail of her connection with her
cousin's despicable plot. She ended by begging their forgiveness, and
wept so miserably that Uncle John found himself stroking her hair while
Patsy came close and pressed the penitent girl's hand as if to comfort
and reassure her.

Beth said nothing. She could not find it in her heart as yet to forgive
Diana's selfish conspiracy against her cousin's happiness. If Louise
perished in this dreadful storm the proud Diana Von Taer could not
escape the taint of murder. The end was not yet.




CHAPTER XXIII


THE CRISIS

Mershone and Fogerty plodded through the snow together, side by side.
They were facing the wind, which cut their faces cruelly, yet neither
seemed to mind the bitterness of the weather.  "Keep watch along the
roadside," suggested Mershone; "she may have fallen anywhere, you know.
She couldn't endure this thing long. Poor Louise!"

"You were fond of her, Mr. Mershone?" asked Fogerty, not
unsympathetically.

"Yes. That was why I made such a struggle to get her."

"It was a mistake, sir. Provided a woman is won by force or trickery
she's never worth getting. If she doesn't care for you it's better to
give her up."

"I know--now."

"You're a bright fellow, Mershone, a clever fellow. It's a pity you
couldn't direct your talents the right way. They'll jug you for this."

"Never mind. The game of life isn't worth playing. I've done with it,
and the sooner I go to the devil the better. If only I could be sure
Louise was safe I'd toss every care--and every honest thought--to the
winds, from this moment."

During the silence that followed Fogerty was thoughtful. Indeed, his
mind dwelt more upon the defeated and desperate man beside him than upon
the waif he was searching for.

"What's been done, Mr. Mershone," he said, after a time, "can't be
helped now. The future of every man is always a bigger proposition than
his past--whoever he may be. With your talents and genius you could yet
make of yourself a successful and prosperous man, respected by the
community--if you could get out of this miserable rut that has helped
to drag you down."

"But I can't," said the other, despondently.

"You can if you try. But you'll have to strike for a place a good way
from New York. Go West, forget your past, and carve out an honest future
under a new name and among new associates. You're equal to it."

Mershone shook his head.

"You forget," he said. "They'll give me a jail sentence for this folly,
as sure as fate, and that will be the end of me."

"Not necessarily. See here, Mershone, it won't help any of those people
to prosecute you. If the girl escapes with her life no real harm has
been done, although you've caused a deal of unhappiness, in one way or
another. For my part, I'd like to see you escape, because I'm sure this
affair will be a warning to you that will induce you to give up all
trickery in the future. Money wouldn't bribe me, as you know, but
sympathy and good fellowship will. If you'll promise to skip right now,
and turn over a new leaf, you are free."

"Where could I go?"

"There's a town a mile ahead of us; I can see the buildings now and
then. You've money, for you offered it to me. I haven't any assistants
here, I'm all alone on the job. That talk about four men was only a
bluff. Push me over in the snow and make tracks. I'll tell Weldon you've
escaped, and advise him not to bother you. It's very easy."

Mershone stopped short, seized the detective's hand and wrung it
gratefully.

"You're a good fellow, Fogerty. I--I thank you. But I can't do it. In
the first place, I can't rest in peace until Louise is found, or I know
her fate. Secondly, I'm game to give an account for all my deeds, now
that I've played the farce out, and lost. I--I really haven't the
ambition, Fogerty, to make a new start in life, and try to reform.
What's the use?"

Fogerty did not reply. Perhaps he realized the case was entirely
hopeless. But he had done what he could to save the misguided fellow and
give him a chance, and he was sorry he had not succeeded.

Meantime Arthur Weldon, almost dazed by the calamity that had overtaken
his sweetheart, found an able assistant in his chauffeur, who, when the
case was explained to him, developed an eager and intelligent interest
in the chase. Fortunately they moved with the storm and the snow
presently moderated in volume although the wind was still blowing a
fierce gale. This gave them a better opportunity than the others to
observe the road they followed.

Jones had good eyes, and although the trail of the heavy wagon was lost
at times he soon picked it up again and they were enabled to make fairly
good speed.

"I believe," said Arthur, presently, "that the marks are getting
clearer."

"I know they are, sir," agreed Jones.

"Then we've come in the right direction, for it is proof that the wagon
was headed this way."

"Quite right, sir."

This back section was thinly settled and the occasional farm-houses they
passed were set well back from the road. It was evident from the closed
gates and drifted snowbanks that no teams had either left these places
or arrived during a recent period. Arthur was encouraged, moreover, by
the wagon ruts growing still more clear as they proceeded, and his
excitement was great when Jones abruptly halted and pointed to a place
where the wheels had made a turn and entered a farm yard.

"Here's the place, sir," announced the chauffeur.

"Can you get in?"

"It's pretty deep, sir, but I'll try."

The snow was crisp and light, owing to the excessive cold, and the
machine plowed through it bravely, drawing up at last to the door of an
humble cottage.

As Arthur leaped out of the car a man appeared upon the steps, closing
the door softly behind him.

"Looking for the young lady, sir?" he asked.

"Is she here?" cried Arthur.

The man placed his finger on his lips, although the wind prevented any
sound of voices being heard within.

"Gently, sir, don't make a noise--but come in."

They entered what seemed to be a kitchen. The farmer, a man of advanced
years, led him to a front room, and again cautioning him to be silent,
motioned him to enter.

A sheet-iron stove made the place fairly comfortable. By a window sat a
meek-faced woman, bent over some sewing. On a couch opposite lay Louise,
covered by a heavy shawl. She was fast asleep, her hair disheveled and
straying over her crimson cheeks, flushed from exposure to the weather.
Her slumber seemed the result of physical exhaustion, for her lips were
parted and she breathed deeply.

Arthur, after gazing at her for a moment with a beating-heart, for the
mysterious actions of the old farmer had made him fear the worst, softly
approached the couch and knelt beside the girl he loved, thanking; God
in his inmost heart for her escape. Then he leaned over and pressed a
kiss upon her cheek.

Louise slowly opened her eyes, smiled divinely, and threw her arms
impulsively around his neck.

"I knew you would come for me, dear," she whispered.




CHAPTER XXIV


A MATTER OF COURSE

All explanations were barred until the girl had been tenderly taken to
her own home and under the loving care of her mother and cousins had
recovered to an extent from the terrible experiences she had undergone.
 Then by degrees she told them her story, and how, hearing the voice of
her persecutor Mershone in the hall below she had become frantic with
fear and resolved to trust herself to the mercies of the storm rather
than submit to an interview with him. Before this she had decided that
she could climb down the trellis, and that part of her flight she
accomplished easily. Then she ran toward the rear of the premises to
avoid being seen and managed to find the lane, and later the
cross-roads. It was very cold, but her excitement and the fear of
pursuit kept her warm until suddenly her strength failed her and she
sank down in the snow without power to move. At this juncture the farmer
and his wife drove by, having been on a trip to the town. The man sprang
out and lifted her in, and the woman tenderly wrapped her in the robes
and blankets and pillowed her head upon her motherly bosom. By the time
they reached the farm-house she was quite warm again, but so exhausted
that with a brief explanation that she was lost, but somebody would be
sure to find her before long, she fell upon the couch and almost
immediately lost consciousness.

So Arthur found her, and one look into his eyes assured her that all her
troubles were over.

They did not prosecute Charlie Mershone, after all. Fogerty pleaded for
him earnestly, and Uncle John pointed out that to arrest the young man
would mean to give the whole affair to the newspapers, which until now
had not gleaned the slightest inkling of what had happened. Publicity
was to be avoided if possible, as it would set loose a thousand
malicious tongues and benefit nobody. The only thing to be gained by
prosecuting Mershone was revenge, and all were willing to forego that
doubtful satisfaction.

However, Uncle John had an interview with the young man in the office of
the prosecuting attorney, at which Mershone was given permission to
leave town quietly and pursue his fortunes in other fields. If ever he
returned, or in any way molested any of the Merricks or his cousin
Diana, he was assured that he would be immediately arrested and
prosecuted to the full extent of the law.

Mershone accepted the conditions and became an exile, passing at once
out of the lives of those he had so deeply wronged.

The joyful reunion of the lovers led to an early date being set for the
wedding. They met all protests by pleading their fears of another
heartrending separation, and no one ventured to oppose their desire.

Mrs. Merrick quickly recovered her accustomed spirits during the
excitement of those anxious weeks preceding the wedding. Cards were
issued to "the very best people in town;" the _trousseau_ involved
anxiety by day and restless dreams by night--all eminently enjoyable;
there were entertainments to be attended and congratulations to be
received from every side.

Society, suspecting nothing of the tragedy so lately enacted in these
young lives, was especially gracious to the betrothed. Louise was the
recipient of innumerable merry "showers" from her girl associates, and
her cousins, Patsy and Beth, followed in line with "glass showers" and
"china showers" until the prospective bride was stocked with enough
wares to establish a "house-furnishing emporium," as Uncle John proudly
declared.

Mr. Merrick, by this time quite reconciled and palpably pleased at the
approaching marriage of his eldest niece, was not to be outdone in
"social stunts" that might add to her happiness. He gave theatre parties
and banquets without number, and gave them with the marked success that
invariably attended his efforts.

The evening before the wedding Uncle John and the Major claimed Arthur
for their own, and after an hour's conference between the three that
left the young fellow more happy and grateful than ever before, he was
entertained at his last "bachelor dinner," where he made a remarkable
speech and was lustily cheered.

Of course Beth and Patsy were the bridesmaids, and their cousin Kenneth
Forbes came all the way from Elmhurst to be Arthur's best man. No one
ever knew what it cost Uncle John for the wonderful decorations at the
church and home, for the music, the banquet and all the other details
which he himself eagerly arranged on a magnificent scale and claimed was
a part of his "wedding present."

When it was all over, and the young people had driven away to begin the
journey of life together, the little man put a loving arm around Beth
and Patsy and said, between smiles and tears:

"Well, my dears, I've lost one niece, and that's a fact; but I've still
two left. How long will they remain with me, I wonder?"

"Dear me, Uncle John," said practical Patsy; "your necktie's untied and
dangling; like a shoestring! I hope it wasn't that way at the wedding."

"It was, though," declared the Major, chuckling. "If all three of ye get
married, my dears, poor Uncle John will come to look like a scarecrow
--and all that in the face of swell society!"

"Aren't we about through with swell society now?" asked Mr. Merrick,
anxiously. "Aren't we about done with it? It caused all our troubles,
you know."

"Society," announced Beth, complacently, "is an excellent thing in the
abstract. It has its black sheep, of course; but I think no more than
any other established class of humanity."

"Dear me!" cried Uncle John; "you once denounced society."

"That," said she, "was before I knew anything at all about it."



CHAPTER I

THE ARRIVAL OF THE BOY


"What's the news, Uncle?" asked Miss Patricia Doyle, as she entered the
cosy breakfast room of a suite of apartments in Willing Square. Even as
she spoke she pecked a little kiss on the forehead of the chubby man
addressed as "Uncle"--none other, if you please, than the famous and
eccentric multi-millionaire known in Wall Street as John Merrick--and
sat down to pour the coffee.

There was energy in her method of doing this simple duty, an indication
of suppressed vitality that conveyed the idea that here was a girl
accustomed to action. And she fitted well into the homely scene: short
and somewhat "squatty" of form, red-haired, freckle-faced and
pug-nosed. Wholesome rather than beautiful was Patsy Doyle, but if you
caught a glimpse of her dancing blue eyes you straightway forgot her
lesser charms.

Quite different was the girl who entered the room a few minutes later.
Hers was a dark olive complexion, face of exquisite contour, great brown
eyes with a wealth of hair to match them and the flush of a rose in her
rounded cheeks. The poise of her girlish figure was gracious and
dignified as the bearing of a queen.

"Morning, Cousin Beth," said Patsy cheerily.

"Good morning, my dear," and then, with a trace of anxiety in her tone:
"What is the news, Uncle John?"

The little man had ignored Patsy's first question, but now he answered
absently, his eyes still fixed upon the newspaper:

"Why, they're going to build another huge skyscraper on Broadway, at
Eleventh, and I see the political pot is beginning to bubble all through
the Bronx, although--"

"Stuff and nonsense, Uncle!" exclaimed Patsy. "Beth asked for news, not
for gossip."

"The news of the war, Uncle John," added Beth, buttering her toast.

"Oh; the war, of course," he said, turning over the page of the morning
paper. "It ought to be the Allies' day, for the Germans won yesterday.
No--by cracky, Beth--the Germans triumph again; they've captured
Maubeuge. What do you think of that?"

Patsy gave a little laugh.

"Not knowing where Maubeuge is," she remarked, "my only thought is that
something is wrong with the London press bureau. Perhaps the cables got
crossed--or short circuited or something. They don't usually allow the
Germans to win two days in succession."

"Don't interrupt, please," said Beth, earnestly. "This is too important
a matter to be treated lightly. Read us the article, Uncle. I was afraid
Maubeuge would be taken."

Patsy accepted her cousin's rebuke with her accustomed good nature.
Indeed, she listened as intently as Beth to the thrilling account of the
destruction of Maubeuge, and her blue eyes became quite as serious as
the brown ones of her cousin when the tale of dead and wounded was
recounted.

"Isn't it dreadful!" cried Beth, clasping her hands together
impulsively.

"Yes," nodded her uncle, "the horror of it destroys the interest we
naturally feel in any manly struggle for supremacy."

"This great war is no manly struggle," observed Patsy with a toss of her
head. "It is merely wholesale murder by a band of selfish diplomats."

"Tut-tut!" warned Mr. Merrick; "we Americans are supposed to be neutral,
my dear. We must not criticize."

"That does not prevent our sympathizing with the innocent sufferers,
however," said Beth quietly. "My heart goes out, Uncle, to those poor
victims of the war's cruelty, the wounded and dying. I wish I could do
something to help them!"

Uncle John moved uneasily in his chair. Then he laid down his paper and
applied himself to his breakfast. But his usual merry expression had
faded into one of thoughtfulness.

"The wounded haunt me by day and night," went on Beth. "There are
thousands upon thousands of them, left to suffer terrible pain--perhaps
to die--on the spot where they fell, and each one is dear to some poor
woman who is ignorant of her loved one's fate and can do nothing but
moan and pray at home."

"That's the hard part of it," said Patsy, her cousin. "I think the
mothers and wives and sweethearts are as much to be pitied as the fallen
soldiers. The men _know_ what has happened, but the women don't. It
isn't so bad when they're killed outright; the family gets a medal to
indicate that their hero has died for his country. But the wounded are
lost sight of and must suffer in silence, with no loving hands to soothe
their agony."

"My dears!" pleaded Uncle John, plaintively, "why do you insist upon
flavoring our breakfast with these horrors? I--I--there! take it away; I
can't eat."

The conversation halted abruptly. The girls were likewise unnerved by
the mental pictures evolved by their remarks and it was now too late to
restore cheerfulness to the morning meal. They sat in pensive silence
for a while and were glad when Mr. Merrick pushed back his chair and
rose from the table.

As Beth and Patsy followed their uncle into the cosy library where he
was accustomed to smoke his morning cigar, the little man remarked:

"Let's see; this is the seventh of September."

"Quite right, Uncle," said Patsy.

"Isn't this the day Maud Stanton is due to arrive?"

"No," replied Beth; "she will come to-morrow morning. It's a good four
days' trip from California to New York, you know."

"I wonder why she is coming here at this time of year," said Patsy
reflectively, "and I wonder if her Aunt Jane or her sister Flo are with
her."

"She did not mention them in her telegram," answered Beth. "All she said
was to expect her Wednesday morning. It seems quite mysterious, that
telegram, for I had no idea Maud thought of coming East."

"Well, we will know all about it when she arrives," observed Uncle John.
"I will be glad to see Maud again, for she is one of my especial
favorites."

"She's a very dear girl!" exclaimed Patsy, with emphasis. "It will be
simply glorious to--"

The doorbell rang sharply. There was a moment's questioning pause, for
it was too early for visitors. The pattering feet of the little maid,
Mary, approached the door and next moment a boyish voice demanded:

"Is Mr. Merrick at home, or the young ladies, or--"

"Why, it's Ajo!" shouted Patsy, springing to her feet and making a dive
for the hallway.

"Jones?" said Mr. Merrick, looking incredulous.

"It must be," declared Beth, for now Patsy's voice was blended with that
of the boy in a rapid interchange of question and answer. Then in she
came, dragging him joyously by the arm.

"This is certainly a surprise!" said Mr. Merrick, shaking the tall,
slender youth by the hand with evident pleasure.

"When did you get to town?" asked Beth, greeting the boy cordially.
"And why didn't you let us know you were on the way from far-off Los
Angeles?"

"Well," said Jones, seating himself facing them and softly rubbing his
lean hands together to indicate his satisfaction at this warm reception,
"it's a long, long story and I may as well tell it methodically or
you'll never appreciate the adventurous spirit that led me again to New
York--the one place I heartily detest."

"Oh, Ajo!" protested Patsy. "Is this the way to retain the friendship of
New Yorkers?"

"Isn't honesty appreciated here?" he wanted to know.

"Go ahead with your story," said Uncle John. "We left you some months
ago at the harbor of Los Angeles, wondering what you were going to do
with that big ship of yours that lay anchored in the Pacific. If I
remember aright, you were considering whether you dared board it to
return to that mysterious island home of yours at--at--"

"Sangoa," said Patsy.

"Thank you for giving me a starting-point," returned the boy, with a
smile. "You may remember that when I landed in your country from Sangoa
I was a miserable invalid. The voyage had ruined my stomach and wrecked
my constitution. I crossed the continent to New York and consulted the
best specialists--and they nearly put an end to me. I returned to the
Pacific coast to die as near home as possible, and--and there I met
you."

"And Patsy saved your life," added Beth.

"She did. First, however, Maud Stanton saved me from drowning. Then
Patsy Doyle doctored me and made me well and strong. And now--"

"And now you look like a modern Hercules," asserted Patsy, gazing with
some pride at the bronzed cheeks and clear eyes of the former invalid
and ignoring his slight proportions. "Whatever have you been doing with
yourself since then?"

"Taking a sea voyage," he affirmed.

"Really?"

"An absolute fact. For months I dared not board the _Arabella_, my sea
yacht, for fear of a return of my old malady; but after you deserted me
and came to this--this artificial, dreary, bewildering--"

"Never mind insulting my birthplace, sir!"

"Oh! were you born here, Patsy? Then I'll give the town credit. So,
after you deserted me at Los Angeles--"

"You still had Mrs. Montrose and her nieces, Maud and Flo Stanton."

"I know, and I love them all. But they became so tremendously busy that
I scarcely saw them, and finally I began to feel lonely. Those Stanton
girls are chock full of business energy and they hadn't the time to
devote to me that you people did. So I stood on the shore and looked at
the _Arabella_ until I mustered up courage to go aboard. Surviving that,
I made Captain Carg steam slowly along the coast for a few miles.
Nothing dreadful happened. So I made a day's voyage, and still ate my
three squares a day. That was encouraging."

"I knew all the time it wasn't the voyage that wrecked your stomach,"
said Patsy confidently.

"What was it, then?"

"Ptomaine poisoning, or something like that."

"Well, anyhow, I found I could stand ocean travel again, so I determined
on a voyage. The Panama Canal was just opened and I passed through it,
came up the Atlantic coast, and--the _Arabella_ is at this moment safely
anchored in the North River!"

"And how do you feel?" inquired Uncle John.

"Glorious--magnificent! The trip has sealed my recovery for good."

"But why didn't you go home, to your Island of Sangoa?" asked Beth.

He looked at her reproachfully.

"_You_ were not there, Beth; nor was Patsy, or Uncle John. On the other
hand, there is no one in Sangoa who cares a rap whether I come home or
not. I'm the last of the Joneses of Sangoa, and while it is still my
island and the entire population is in my employ, the life there flows
on just as smoothly without me as if I were present."

"But don't they need the ship--the _Arabella_?" questioned Beth.

"Not now. I sent a cargo of supplies by Captain Carg when he made his
last voyage to the island, and there will not be enough pearls found in
the fisheries for four or five months to come to warrant my shipping
them to market. Even then, they would keep. So I'm a free lance at
present and I had an idea that if I once managed to get the boat around
here you folks might find a use for it."

"In what way?" inquired Patsy, with interest.

"We might all make a trip to Barbadoes, Bermuda and Cuba. Brazil is said
to be an interesting country. I'd prefer Europe, were it not for the
war."

"Oh, Ajo, isn't this war terrible?"

"No other word expresses it. Yet it all seems like a fairy tale to me,
for I've never been in any other country than the United States since I
made my first voyage here from Sangoa--the island where my eyes first
opened to the world."

"It isn't a fairy tale," said Beth with a shudder. "It's more like a
horrible nightmare."

"I can't bear to read about it any more," he returned, musingly. "In
fact, I've only been able to catch rumors of the progress of the war in
the various ports at which I've touched, and I came right here from my
ship. But I've no sympathy with either side. The whole thing annoys me,
somehow--the utter uselessness and folly of it all."

"Maubeuge has fallen," said Beth, and went on to give him the latest
tidings. Finding that the war was the absorbing topic in this little
household, the boy developed new interest in it and the morning passed
quickly away.

Jones stayed to lunch and then Mr. Merrick's automobile took them all to
the river to visit the beautiful yacht _Arabella_, which was already,
they found, attracting a good deal of attention in the harbor, where
beautiful yachts are no rarity.

The _Arabella_ was intended by her builders for deep sea transit and as
Patsy admiringly declared, "looked like a baby liner." While she was
yacht-built in all her lines and fittings, she was far from being merely
a pleasure craft, but had been designed by the elder Jones, the boy's
father, to afford communication between the Island of Sangoa, in the
lower South Seas, and the continent of America.

Sangoa is noted for its remarkable pearl fisheries, which were now owned
and controlled entirely by this youth; but his father, an experienced
man of affairs, had so thoroughly established the business of production
and sale that little remained for his only son and heir to do, more than
to invest the profits that steadily accrued and to care for the great
fortune left him. Whether he was doing this wisely or not no one--not
even his closest friends--could tell. But he was frank and friendly
about everything else.

They went aboard the _Arabella_ and were received by that grim and
grizzled old salt, Captain Carg, with the same wooden indifference he
always exhibited. But Patsy detected a slight twinkle in the shrewd gray
eyes that made her feel they were welcome. Carg, a seaman of vast
experience, was wholly devoted to his young master. Indeed, the girls
suspected that young Jones was a veritable autocrat in his island, as
well as aboard his ship. Everyone of the Sangoans seemed to accept his
dictation, however imperative it might be, as a matter of course, and
the gray old captain--who had seen much of the world--was not the least
subservient to his young master.

On the other hand, Jones was a gentle and considerate autocrat,
unconsciously imitating his lately deceased father in his kindly
interest in the welfare of all his dependents. These had formerly been
free-born Americans, for when the Island of Sangoa was purchased it had
no inhabitants.

This fortunate--or perhaps unfortunate--youth had never been blessed
with a given name, more than the simple initial "A." The failure of his
mother and father to agree upon a baptismal name for their only child
had resulted in a deadlock; and, as the family claimed a direct descent
from the famous John Paul Jones, the proud father declared that to be "a
Jones" was sufficient honor for any boy; hence he should be known merely
as "A. Jones." The mother called her child by the usual endearing pet
names until her death, after which the islanders dubbed the master's
son--then toddling around in his first trousers--"Ajo," and the name had
stuck to him ever since for want of a better one.

With the Bohemian indifference to household routine so characteristic of
New Yorkers, the party decided to dine at a down-town restaurant before
returning to Willing Square, and it was during this entertainment that
young Jones first learned of the expected arrival of Maud Stanton on the
following morning. But he was no wiser than the others as to what
mission could have brought the girl to New York so suddenly that a
telegram was required to announce her coming.

"You see, I left Los Angeles weeks ago," the boy explained, "and at that
time Mrs. Montrose and her nieces were busy as bees and much too
occupied to pay attention to a drone like me. There was no hint then of
their coming East, but of course many things may have happened in the
meantime."

The young fellow was so congenial a companion and the girls were so well
aware of his loneliness, through lack of acquaintances, that they
carried him home with them to spend the evening. When he finally left
them, at a late hour, it was with the promise to be at the station next
morning to meet Maud Stanton on her arrival.




CHAPTER II

THE ARRIVAL OF THE GIRL


A sweet-faced girl, very attractive but with a sad and anxious
expression, descended from the Pullman and brightened as she found her
friends standing with outstretched arms to greet her.

"Oh, Maud!" cried Patsy, usurping the first hug, "how glad I am to see
you again!"

Beth looked in Maud Stanton's face and forbore to speak as she embraced
her friend. Then Jones shook both hands of the new arrival and Uncle
John kissed her with the same tenderness he showed his own nieces.

This reception seemed to cheer Maud Stanton immensely. She even smiled
during the drive to Willing Square--a winning, gracious smile that would
have caused her to be instantly recognized in almost any community of
our vast country; for this beautiful young girl was a famous motion
picture actress, possessing qualities that had endeared her to every
patron of the better class photo-dramas.

At first she had been forced to adopt this occupation by the stern
necessity of earning a livelihood, and under the careful guidance of her
aunt--Mrs. Jane Montrose, a widow who had at one time been a favorite in
New York social circles--Maud and her sister Florence had applied
themselves so intelligently to their art that their compensation had
become liberal enough to enable them to save a modest competence.

One cause of surprise at Maud's sudden journey east was the fact that
her services were in eager demand by the managers of the best producing
companies on the Pacific Coast, where nearly all the American pictures
are now made. Another cause for surprise was that she came alone,
leaving her Aunt Jane and her sister Flo--usually her inseparable
companion--in Los Angeles.

But they did not question her until the cosy home at Willing Square was
reached, luncheon served and Maud installed in the "Guest Room." Then
the three girls had "a good, long talk" and presently came trooping
into the library to enlighten Uncle John and Ajo.

"Oh, Uncle! What do you think?" cried Patsy. "Maud is going to the war!"

"The war!" echoed Mr. Merrick in a bewildered voice. "What on earth
can--"

"She is going to be a nurse," explained Beth, a soft glow of enthusiasm
mantling her pretty face. "Isn't it splendid, Uncle!"

"H-m," said Uncle John, regarding the girl with wonder. "It is certainly
a--a--surprising venture."

"But--see here, Maud--it's mighty dangerous," protested young Jones.
"It's a tremendous undertaking, and--what can one girl do in the midst
of all those horrors?"

Maud seated herself quietly between them. Her face was grave and
thoughtful.

"I have had to answer many such arguments before now, as you may
suspect," she began in even tones, "but the fact that I am here, well on
my journey, is proof that I have convinced my aunt, my sister and all my
western friends that I am at least determined on my mission, whether it
be wise or foolish. I do not think I shall incur danger by caring for
the wounded; the Red Cross is highly respected everywhere, these days."

"The Red Cross?" quoth Uncle John.

"Yes; I shall wear the Red Cross," she continued. "You know that I am a
trained nurse; it was part of my education before--before--"

"I had not known that until now," said Mr. Merrick, "but I am glad you
have had that training. Beth began a course at the school here, but I
took her away to Europe before she graduated. However, I wish more girls
could be trained for nursing, as it is a more useful and admirable
accomplishment than most of them now acquire."

"Fox-Trots and Bunny-Hugs, for instance," said Patricia with fine
disdain.

"Patsy is a splendid nurse," declared Ajo, with a grateful look toward
that chubby miss.

"But untrained," she answered laughingly. "It was just common sense that
enabled me to cure your malady, Ajo. I couldn't bandage a cut or a
bullet wound to save me."

"Fortunately," said Maud, "I have a diploma which will gain for me the
endorsement of the American Red Cross Society. I am counting on that to
enable me to get an appointment at the seat of war, where I can be of
most use."

"Where will you go?" asked the boy. "To Germany, Austria, Russia,
Belgium, or--"

"I shall go to France," she replied. "I speak French, but understand
little of German, although once I studied the language."

"Are you fully resolved upon this course, Maud?" asked Mr. Merrick in a
tone of regret.

"Fully decided, sir. I am going to Washington to-morrow, to get my
credentials, and then I shall take the first steamer to Europe."

There was no use arguing with Maud Stanton when she assumed that tone.
It was neither obstinate nor defiant, yet it conveyed a quiet resolve
that was unanswerable.

For a time they sat in silence, musing on the many phases of this
curious project; then Beth came to Mr. Merrick's side and asked
pleadingly:

"May I go with her, Uncle?"

"Great Scott!" he exclaimed, with a nervous jump. "_You_, Beth?"

"Yes, Uncle. I so long to be of help to those poor fellows who are
being so cruelly sacrificed; and I know I can soothe much suffering, if
I have the opportunity."

He stared at her, not knowing what to reply. This quaint little man was
so erratic himself, in his sudden resolves and eccentric actions, that
he could scarcely quarrel with his niece for imitating an example he had
frequently set. Still, he was shrewd enough to comprehend the reckless
daring of the proposition.

"Two unprotected girls in the midst of war and carnage, surrounded by
foreigners, inspired to noble sacrifice through ignorance and
inexperience, and hardly old enough to travel alone from Hoboken to
Brooklyn! Why, the thing's absurd," he said.

"Quite impractical," added Ajo, nodding wisely. "You're both too pretty,
my dears, to undertake such an adventure. Why, the wounded men would all
fall in love with their nurses and follow you back to America in a
flock; and that might put a stop to the war for lack of men to fight
it."

"Don't be silly, Ajo," said Patsy, severely. "I've decided to go with
Maud and Beth, and you know very well that the sight of my freckled face
would certainly chill any romance that might arise."

"That's nonsense, Patsy!"

"Then you consider me beautiful, Uncle John?"

"I mean it's nonsense about your going with Maud and Beth. I won't allow
it."

"Oh, Uncle! You know I can twine you around my little finger, if I
choose. So don't, for goodness' sake, start a rumpus by trying to set
your will against mine."

"Then side with me, dear. I'm quite right, I assure you."

"You're always right, Nunkie, dear," she cried, giving him a resounding
smack of a kiss on his chubby cheek as she sat on the arm of his chair,
"but I'm going with the girls, just the same, and you may as well make
up your mind to it."

Uncle John coughed. He left his chair and trotted up and down the room a
moment. Then he carefully adjusted his spectacles, took a long look at
Patsy's face, and heaved a deep sigh of resignation.

"Thank goodness, that's settled," said Patsy cheerfully.

Uncle John turned to the boy, saying dismally:

"I've done everything in my power for these girls, and now they defy me.
They've declared a thousand times they love me, and yet they'd trot off
to bandage a lot of unknown foreigners and leave me alone to worry my
heart out."

"Why don't you go along?" asked Jones. "I'm going."

"You!"

"Of course. I've a suspicion our girls have the right instinct, sir--the
tender, womanly instinct that makes us love them. At any rate, I'm going
to stand by them. It strikes me as the noblest and grandest idea a girl
ever conceived, and if anything could draw me closer to these three
young ladies, who had me pretty well snared before, it is this very
proposition."

"I don't see why," muttered Uncle John, wavering.

"I'll tell you why, sir. For themselves, they have all the good things
of life at their command. They could bask in luxury to the end of their
days, if they so desired. Yet their wonderful womanly sympathy goes out
to the helpless and suffering--the victims of the cruellest war the
world has ever known--and they promptly propose to sacrifice their ease
and brave whatever dangers may befall, that they may relieve to some
extent the pain and agony of those wounded and dying fellow creatures."

"Foreigners," said Uncle John weakly.

"Human beings," said the boy.

Patsy marched over to Ajo and gave him a sturdy whack upon the back that
nearly knocked him over.

"The spirit of John Paul Jones still goes marching on!" she cried. "My
boy, you're the right stuff, and I'm glad I doctored you."

He smiled, looking from one to another of the three girls questioningly.

"Then I'm to go along?" he asked.

"We shall be grateful," answered Maud, after a moment's hesitation.
"This is all very sudden to me, for I had planned to go alone."

"That wouldn't do at all," asserted Uncle John briskly. "I'm astonished
and--and grieved--that my nieces should want to go with you, but perhaps
the trip will prove interesting. Tell me what steamer you want to catch,
Maud, and I'll reserve rooms for our entire party."

"No," said Jones, "don't do it, sir."

"Why not?"

"There's the _Arabella_. Let's use her."

"To cross the ocean?"

"She has done that before. It will assist our enterprise, I'm sure, to
have our own boat. These are troublous times on the high seas."

Patsy clapped her hands gleefully.

"That's it; a hospital ship!" she exclaimed.

They regarded her with various expressions: startled, doubtful,
admiring, approving. Presently, with added thought on the matter, the
approval became unanimous.

"It's an amazing suggestion," said Maud, her eyes sparkling.

"Think how greatly it will extend our usefulness," said Beth.

Uncle John was again trotting up and down the room, this time in a
state of barely repressed excitement.

"The very thing!" he cried. "Clever, practical,
and--eh--eh--tremendously interesting. Now, then, listen carefully--all
of you! It's up to you, Jones, to accompany Maud on the night express to
Washington. Get the Red Cross Society to back our scheme and supply us
with proper credentials. The _Arabella_ must be rated as a hospital ship
and our party endorsed as a distinct private branch of the Red
Cross--what they call a 'unit.' I'll give you a letter to our senator
and he will look after our passports and all necessary papers. I--I
helped elect him, you know. And while you're gone it shall be my
business to fit the ship with all the supplies we shall need to promote
our mission of mercy."

"I'll share the expense," proposed the boy.

"No, you won't. You've done enough in furnishing the ship and crew. I'll
attend to the rest."

"And Beth and I will be Uncle John's assistants," said Patsy. "We shall
want heaps of lint and bandages, drugs and liniments and--"

"And, above all, a doctor," advised Ajo. "One of the mates on my yacht,
Kelsey by name, is a half-way physician, having studied medicine in his
youth and practiced it on the crew for the last dozen years; but what we
really need on a hospital ship is a bang-up surgeon."

"This promises to become an expensive undertaking," remarked Maud, with
a sigh. "Perhaps it will be better to let me go alone, as I originally
expected to do. But, if we take along the hospital ship, do not be
extravagant, Mr. Merrick, in equipping it. I feel that I have been the
innocent cause of drawing you all into this venture and I do not want it
to prove a hardship to my friends."

"All right, Maud," returned Uncle John, with a cheerful grin, "I'll try
to economize, now that you've warned me."

Ajo smiled and Patsy Doyle laughed outright. They knew it would not
inconvenience the little rich man, in the slightest degree, to fit out a
dozen hospital ships.




CHAPTER III

THE DECISION OF DOCTOR GYS


Uncle John was up bright and early next morning, and directly after
breakfast he called upon his old friend and physician, Dr. Barlow. After
explaining the undertaking on which he had embarked, Mr. Merrick added:

"You see, we need a surgeon with us; a clever, keen chap who understands
his business thoroughly, a sawbones with all the modern scientific
discoveries saturating him to his finger-tips. Tell me where to get
him."

Dr. Barlow, recovering somewhat from his astonishment, smiled
deprecatingly.

"The sort of man you describe," said he, "would cost you a fortune, for
you would oblige him to abandon a large and lucrative practice in order
to accompany you. I doubt, indeed, if any price would tempt him to
abandon his patients."

"Isn't there some young fellow with these requirements?"

"Mr. Merrick, you need a physician and surgeon combined. Wounds lead to
fever and other serious ailments, which need skillful handling. You
might secure a young man, fresh from his clinics, who would prove a good
surgeon, but to master the science of medicine, experience and long
practice are absolutely necessary."

"We've got a half-way medicine man on the ship now--a fellow who has
doctored the crew for years and kept 'em pretty healthy. So I guess a
surgeon will about fill our bill."

"H-m, I know these ship's doctors, Mr. Merrick, and I wouldn't care to
have you and your nieces trust your lives to one, in case you become
ill. Believe me, a good physician is as necessary to you as a good
surgeon. Do you know that disease will kill as many of those soldiers as
bullets?"

"No."

"It is true; else the history of wars has taught us nothing. We haven't
heard much of plagues and epidemics yet, in the carefully censored
reports from London, but it won't be long before disease will devastate
whole armies."

Uncle John frowned. The thing was growing complicated.

"Do you consider this a wild goose chase, Doctor?" he asked.

"Not with your fortune, your girls and your fine ship to back it. I
think Miss Stanton's idea of venturing abroad unattended, to nurse the
wounded, was Quixotic in the extreme. Some American women are doing it,
I know, but I don't approve of it. On the other hand, your present plan
is worthy of admiration and applause, for it is eminently practical if
properly handled."

Dr. Barlow drummed upon the table with his fingers, musingly. Then he
looked up.

"I wonder," said he, "if Gys would go. If you could win him over, he
would fill the bill."

"Who is Gys?" inquired Uncle John.

"An eccentric; a character. But clever and competent. He has just
returned from Yucatan, where he accompanied an expedition of exploration
sent out by the Geographical Society--and, by the way, nearly lost his
life in the venture. Before that, he made a trip to the frozen North
with a rescue party. Between times, he works in the hospitals, or acts
as consulting surgeon with men of greater fame than he has won; but Gys
is a rolling stone, erratic and whimsical, and with all his talent can
never settle down to a steady practice."

"Seems like the very man I want," said Uncle John, much interested.
"Where can I find him?"

"I've no idea. But I'll call up Collins and inquire."

He took up the telephone receiver and got his number.

"Collins? Say, I'm anxious to find Gys. Have you any idea--Eh? Sitting
with you now? How lucky. Ask him if he will come to my office at once;
it's important."

Uncle John's face was beaming with satisfaction. The doctor waited, the
receiver at his ear.

"What's that, Collins?... He won't come?... Why not?... Absurd!... I've
a fine proposition for him.... Eh? He isn't interested in propositions?
What in thunder _is_ he interested in?... Pshaw! Hold the phone a
minute."

Turning to Mr. Merrick, he said:

"Gys wants to go on a fishing trip. He plans to start to-night for the
Maine woods. But I've an idea if you could get him face to face you
might convince him."

"See if he'll stay where he is till I can get there."

The doctor turned to the telephone and asked the question. There was a
long pause. Gys wanted to know who it was that proposed to visit him.
John Merrick, the retired millionaire? All right; Gys would wait in
Collins' office for twenty minutes.

Uncle John lost no time in rushing to his motor car, where he ordered
the driver to hasten to the address Dr. Barlow had given him.

The offices of Dr. Collins were impressive. Mr. Merrick entered a
luxurious reception room and gave his name to a businesslike young woman
who advanced to meet him. He had called to see Dr. Gys.

The young woman smothered a smile that crept to her lips, and led Uncle
John through an examination room and an operating room--both vacant
just now--and so into a laboratory that was calculated to give a well
person the shivers. Here was but one individual, a man in his
shirt-sleeves who was smoking a corncob pipe and bending over a test
tube.

Uncle John coughed to announce his presence, for the woman had slipped
away as she closed the door. The man's back was turned partially toward
his visitor. He did not alter his position as he said:

"Sit down. There's a chair in the southwest corner."

Uncle John found the chair. He waited patiently a few moments and then
his choler began to rise.

"If you're in such a blamed hurry to go fishing, why don't you get rid
of me now?" he asked.

The shoulders shook gently and there was a chuckling laugh. The man laid
down his test tube and swung around on his stool.

For a moment Mr. Merrick recoiled. The face was seared with livid scars,
the nose crushed to one side, the mouth crooked and set in a sneering
grin. One eye was nearly closed and the other round and wide open. A
more forbidding and ghastly countenance Mr. Merrick had never beheld and
in his surprise he muttered a low exclamation.

"Exactly," said Gys, his voice quiet and pleasant. "I don't blame you
and I'm not offended. Do you wonder I hesitate to meet strangers?"

"I--I was not--prepared," stammered Uncle John.

"That was Barlow's fault. He knows me and should have told you. And now
I'll tell you why I consented to see you. No! never mind your own
proposition, whatever it is. Listen to mine first. I want to go fishing,
and I haven't the money. None of my brother physicians will lend me
another sou, for I owe them all. You are John Merrick, to whom money is
of little consequence. May I venture to ask you for an advance of a
couple of hundred for a few weeks? When I return I'll take up your
proposition, whatever it may be, and recompense you in services."

He refilled and relighted the corncob while Mr. Merrick stared at him
in thoughtful silence. As a matter of fact, Uncle John was pleased with
the fellow. A whimsical, irrational, unconventional appeal of this sort
went straight to his heart, for the queer little man hated the
commonplace most cordially.

"I'll give you the money on one condition," he said.

"I object to the condition," said Gys firmly. "Conditions are
dangerous."

"My proposition," went on Uncle John, "won't wait for weeks. When you
hear it, if you are not anxious to take it up, I don't want you. Indeed,
I'm not sure I want you, anyhow."

"Ah; you're frightened by my features. Most people with propositions
are. I'm an unlucky dog, sir. They say it's good luck to touch a
hunchback; to touch me is the reverse. Way up North in a frozen sea a
poor fellow went overboard. I didn't get him and he drowned; but I got
caught between two cakes of floating ice that jammed my nose out of its
former perfect contour. In Yucatan I tumbled into a hedge of poisoned
cactus and had to operate on myself--quickly, too--to save my life.
Wild with pain, I slashed my face to get the poisoned tips of thorn out
of the flesh. Parts of my body are like my face, but fortunately I can
cover them. It was bad surgery. On another I could have operated without
leaving a scar, but I was frantic with pain. Don't stare at that big
eye, sir; it's glass. I lost that optic in Pernambuco and couldn't find
a glass substitute to fit my face. Indeed, this was the only one in
town, made for a fat Spanish lady who turned it down because it was not
exactly the right color."

"You certainly have been--eh--unfortunate," murmured Uncle John.

"See here," said Gys, taking a leather book from an inside pocket of the
coat that hung on a peg beside him, and proceeding to open it. "Here is
a photograph of me, taken before I embarked upon my adventures."

Uncle John put on his glasses and examined the photograph curiously. It
was a fine face, clean-cut, manly and expressive. The eyes were
especially frank and winning.

"How old were you then?" he asked.

"Twenty-four."

"And now?"

"Thirty-eight. A good deal happened in that fourteen years, as you may
guess. And now," reaching for the photograph and putting it carefully
back in the book, "state your proposition and I'll listen to it, because
you have listened so patiently to me."

Mr. Merrick in simple words explained the plan to take a hospital ship
to Europe, relating the incidents that led up to the enterprise and
urging the need of prompt action. His voice dwelt tenderly on his girls
and the loyal support of young Jones.

Dr. Gys smoked and listened silently. Then he picked up the telephone
and called a number.

"Tell Hawkins I've abandoned that fishing trip," he said. "I've got
another job." Then he faced Mr. Merrick. His smile was not pretty, but
it was a smile.

"That's my answer, sir."

"But we haven't talked salary yet."

"Bother the salary. I'm not mercenary."

"And I'm not sure--"

"Yes, you are. I'm going with you. Do you know why?"

"It's a novel project, very appealing from a humanitarian standpoint
and--"

"I hadn't thought of that. I'm going because you're headed for the
biggest war the world has ever known; because I foresee danger ahead,
for all of us; but mainly because--"

"Well?"

"Because I'm a coward--a natural born coward--and I can have a lot of
fun forcing myself to face the shell and shrapnel. That's the truth; I'm
not a liar. And for a long time I've been wondering--wondering--" His
voice died away in a murmur.

"Well, sir?"

Dr. Gys roused himself.

"Oh; do you want a full confession? For a long time, then, I've been
wondering what's the easiest way for a man to die. No, I'm not morbid.
I'm simply ruined, physically, for the practice of a profession I love,
a profession I have fully mastered, and--I'll be happier when I can
shake off this horrible envelope of disfigurement."




CHAPTER IV

THE HOSPITAL SHIP


The energy of Doctor Gys was marvelous. He knew exactly what supplies
would be needed to fit the _Arabella_ thoroughly for her important
mission, and with unlimited funds at his command to foot the bills, he
quickly converted the handsome yacht into a model hospital ship. Gys
from the first developed a liking for Kelsey, the mate, whom he found a
valuable assistant, and the two came to understand each other perfectly.
Kelsey was a quiet man, more thoughtful than experienced in medical
matters, but his common sense often guided him aright when his technical
knowledge was at fault.

Captain Carg accepted the novel conditions thrust upon him, without a
word of protest. He might secretly resent the uses to which his ship was
being put, but his young master's commands were law and his duty was to
obey. The same feeling prevailed among the other members of the crew,
all of whom were Sangoans.

In three days Jones and Maud Stanton returned from Washington. They were
jubilant over their success.

"We've secured everything we wanted," the boy told Uncle John, Beth and
Patsy, with evident enthusiasm. "Not only have we the full sanction of
the American Red Cross Society, but I have letters to the different
branches in the war zone, asking for us every consideration. Not only
that, but your senator proved himself a brick. What do you think? Here's
a letter from our secretary of state--another from the French charge
d'affairs--half a dozen from prominent ambassadors of other countries!
We've a free field in all Europe, practically, that will enable us to
work to the best advantage."

"It's wonderful!" cried Patsy.

"Mr. Merrick is so well known as a philanthropist that his name was a
magic talisman for us," said Maud. "Moreover, our enterprise commands
the sympathy of everyone. We had numerous offers of financial
assistance, too."

"I hope you didn't accept them," said Uncle John nervously.

"No," answered the boy, "I claimed this expedition to be our private and
individual property. We can now do as we please, being under no
obligations to any but ourselves."

"That's right," said Uncle John. "We don't want to be hampered by the
necessity of advising with others."

"By the way, have you found a doctor?"

"Yes."

"A good one?" asked Maud quickly.

"Highly recommended, but homely as a rail fence," continued Patsy, as
her uncle hesitated.

"That's nothing," said Ajo lightly.

"Nothing, eh? Well, wait till you see him," she replied. "You'll never
look Doctor Gys in the face more than once, I assure you. After that,
you'll be glad to keep your eyes on his vest buttons."

"I like him immensely, though," said Beth. "He is clever, honest and
earnest. The poor man can't help his mutilations, which are the result
of many unfortunate adventures."

"Sounds like just the man we wanted," declared Ajo, and afterward he had
no reason to recall that assertion.

A week is a small time in which to equip a big ship, but money and
energy can accomplish much and the news from the seat of war was so
eventful that they felt every moment to be precious and so they worked
with feverish haste. The tide of German success had turned and their
great army, from Paris to Vitry, was now in full retreat, fighting every
inch of the way and leaving thousands of dead and wounded in its wake.

"How long will it take us to reach Calais?" they asked Captain Carg
eagerly.

"Eight or nine days," said he.

"We are not as fast as the big passenger steamers," explained young
Jones, "but with good weather the _Arabella_ may be depended upon to
make the trip in good shape and fair time."

On the nineteenth of September, fully equipped and with her papers in
order, the beautiful yacht left her anchorage and began her voyage. The
weather proved exceptionally favorable. During the voyage the girls
busied themselves preparing their modest uniforms and pumping Dr. Gys
for all sorts of information, from scratches to amputations. He gave
them much practical and therefore valuable advice to guide them in
whatever emergencies might arise, and this was conveyed in the
whimsical, half humorous manner that seemed characteristic of him. At
first Gys had shrunk involuntarily from facing this bevy of young girls,
but they had so frankly ignored his physical blemishes and exhibited so
true a comradeship to all concerned in the expedition, that the doctor
soon felt perfectly at ease in their society.

During the evenings he gave them practical demonstrations of the
application of tourniquets, bandages and the like, while Uncle John and
Ajo by turns posed as wounded soldiers. Gys was extraordinarily deft in
all his manipulations and although Maud Stanton was a graduate
nurse--with little experience, however--and Beth De Graf had studied the
art for a year or more, it was Patsy Doyle who showed the most dexterity
in assisting the doctor on these occasions.

"I don't know whether I'll faint at the sight of real blood," she said,
"but I shall know pretty well what to do if I can keep my nerve."

The application of anaesthetics was another thing fully explained by
Gys, but this could not be demonstrated. Patsy, however, was taught the
use of the hypodermic needle, which Maud and Beth quite understood.

"We've a big stock of morphia, in its various forms," said the doctor,
"and I expect it to prove of tremendous value in comforting our
patients."

"I'm not sure I approve the use of that drug," remarked Uncle John.

"But think of the suffering we can allay by its use," exclaimed Maud.
"If ever morphia is justifiable, it is in war, where it can save many a
life by conquering unendurable pain. I believe the discovery of morphine
was the greatest blessing that humanity has ever enjoyed. Don't you,
Doctor Gys?"

The one good eye of Gys had a queer way of twinkling when he was amused.
It twinkled as the girl asked this question.

"Morphine," he replied, "has destroyed more people than it has saved.
You play with fire when you feed it to anyone, under any circumstances.
Nevertheless, I believe in its value on an expedition of this sort, and
that is why I loaded up on the stuff. Let me advise you never to tell a
patient that we are administering morphine. The result is all that he is
concerned with and it is better he should not know what has relieved
him."

On a sunny day when the sea was calm they slung a scaffold over the bow
and painted a big red cross on either side of the white ship. Everyone
aboard wore the Red Cross emblem on an arm band, even the sailors being
so decorated. Uncle John was very proud of the insignia and loved to
watch his girls moving around the deck in their sober uniforms and white
caps.

Jones endured the voyage splendidly and by this time had convinced
himself that he was not again to be subject to the mal-de-mer of his
first ocean trip. As they drew near to their destination an atmosphere
of subdued excitement pervaded the _Arabella_, for even the sailors had
caught the infection of the girls' eagerness and were anxious to get
into action at the earliest moment.

It was now that Uncle John began to busy himself with his especial
prize, a huge motor ambulance he had purchased in New York and which had
been fully equipped for the requirements of war. Indeed, an enterprising
manufacturer had prepared it with the expectation that some of the
belligerent governments would purchase it, and Mr. Merrick considered
himself fortunate in securing it. It would accommodate six seriously
wounded, on swinging beds, and twelve others, slightly wounded, who
might be able to sit upon cushioned seats. The motor was very powerful
and the driver was protected from stray bullets by an armored hood.

In addition to this splendid machine, Mr. Merrick had secured a smaller
ambulance that had not the advantage of the swinging beds but could be
rushed more swiftly to any desired location. Both ambulances were
decorated on all sides with the emblem of the Red Cross and would be
invaluable in bringing the wounded to the _Arabella_. The ship carried a
couple of small motor launches for connecting the shore with her
anchorage.

They had purposely brought no chauffeurs with them, as Uncle John
believed foreign drivers, who were thoroughly acquainted with the
country, would prove more useful than the American variety, and from
experience he knew that a French chauffeur is the king of his
profession.

During the last days of the voyage Mr. Merrick busied himself in
carefully inspecting every detail of his precious vehicles and
explaining their operation to everyone on board. Even the girls would be
able to run an ambulance on occasion, and the boy developed quite a
mechanical talent in mastering the machines.

"I feel," said young Jones, "that I have had a rather insignificant part
in preparing this expedition, for all I have furnished--aside from the
boat itself--consists of two lots of luxuries that may or may not be
needed."

"And what may they be?" asked Dr. Gys, who was standing in the group
beside him.

"Thermos flasks and cigarettes."

"Cigarettes!" exclaimed Beth, in horror.

The doctor nodded approvingly.

"Capital!" said he. "Next to our anodynes and anaesthetics, nothing will
prove so comforting to the wounded as cigarettes. They are supplied by
nurses in all the hospitals in Europe. How many did you bring?"

"Ten cases of about twenty-five thousand each."

"A quarter of a million cigarettes!" gasped Beth.

"Too few," asserted the doctor in a tone of raillery, "but we'll make
them go as far as possible. And the thermos cases are also valuable.
Cool water to parched lips means a glimpse of heaven. Hot coffee will
save many from exhaustion. You've done well, my boy."




CHAPTER V

NEARING THE FRAY


On September twenty-eighth they entered the English Channel and were
promptly signalled by a British warship, so they were obliged to lay to
while a party of officers came aboard. The _Arabella_ was flying the
American flag and the Red Cross flag, but the English officer
courteously but firmly persisted in searching the ship. What he found
seemed to interest him, as did the papers and credentials presented for
his perusal.

"And which side have you come to assist?" he asked.

"No side at all, sir," replied Jones, as master of the _Arabella_. "The
wounded, the sick and helpless, whatever uniform they chance to wear,
will receive our best attention. But we are bound for Calais and intend
to follow the French army."

The officer nodded gravely.

"Of course," said he, "you are aware that the channel is full of mines
and that progress is dangerous unless you have our maps to guide you. I
will furnish your pilot with a diagram, provided you agree to keep our
secret and deliver the diagram to the English officer you will meet at
Calais."

They agreed to this and after the formalities were concluded the officer
prepared to depart.

"I must congratulate you," he remarked on leaving, "on having the best
equipped hospital ship it has been my fortune to see. There are many in
the service, as you know, but the boats are often mere tubs and the
fittings of the simplest description. The wounded who come under your
care will indeed be fortunate. It is wonderful to realize that you have
come all the way from America, and at so great an expense, to help the
victims of this sad war. For the Allies I thank you, and--good-bye!"

They remembered this kindly officer long afterward, for he proved more
generous than many of the English they met.

Captain Carg now steamed ahead, watching his chart carefully to avoid
the fields of mines, but within two hours he was again hailed, this
time by an armored cruiser. The first officer having vised the ship's
papers, they were spared the delay of another search and after a brief
examination were allowed to proceed. They found the channel well
patrolled by war craft and no sooner had they lost sight of one, than
another quickly appeared.

At Cherbourg a French dreadnaught halted them and an officer came aboard
to give them a new chart of the mine fields between there and Calais and
full instructions how to proceed safely. This officer, who spoke
excellent English, asked a thousand questions and seemed grateful for
their charitable assistance to his countrymen.

"You have chosen a dangerous post," said he, "but the Red Cross is
respected everywhere--even by the Germans. Have you heard the latest
news? We have driven them back to the Aisne and are holding the enemy
well in check. Antwerp is under siege, to be sure, but it can hold out
indefinitely. The fighting will be all in Belgium soon, and then in
Germany. Our watchword is 'On to Berlin!'"

"Perhaps we ought to proceed directly to Ostend," said Uncle John.

"The Germans still hold it, monsieur. In a few days, perhaps, when
Belgium is free of the invaders, you will find work enough to occupy you
at Ostend; but I advise you not to attempt to go there now."

In spite of the friendly attitude of this officer and of the authorities
at Cherbourg, they were detained at this port for several days before
finally receiving permission to proceed. The delay was galling but had
to be endured until the infinite maze of red tape was at an end. They
reached Calais in the early evening and just managed to secure an
anchorage among the fleet of warships in the harbor.

Again they were obliged to show their papers and passports, now vised by
representatives of both the English and French navies, but this
formality being over they were given a cordial welcome.

Uncle John and Ajo decided to go ashore for the latest news and arrived
in the city between nine and ten o'clock that same evening. They found
Calais in a state of intense excitement. The streets were filled with
British and French soldiery, with whom were mingled groups of citizens,
all eagerly discussing the war and casting uneasy glances at the black
sky overhead for signs of the dreaded German Zeppelins.

"How about Antwerp?" Jones asked an Englishman they found in the lobby
of one of the overcrowded hotels.

The man turned to stare at him; he looked his questioner up and down
with such insolence that the boy's fists involuntarily doubled; then he
turned his back and walked away. A bystander laughed with amusement. He
also was an Englishman, but wore the uniform of a subaltern.

"What can you expect, without a formal introduction?" he asked young
Jones. "But I'll answer your question, sir; Antwerp is doomed."

"Oh; do you really think so?" inquired Uncle John uneasily.

"It's a certainty, although I hate to admit it. We at the rear are not
very well posted on what is taking place over in Belgium, but it's said
the bombardment of Antwerp began yesterday and it's impossible for the
place to hold out for long. Perhaps even now the city has fallen under
the terrific bombardment."

There was something thrilling in the suggestion.

"And then?" asked Jones, almost breathlessly.

The man gave a typical British shrug.

"Then we fellows will find work to do," he replied. "But it is better to
fight than to eat our hearts out by watching and waiting. We're the
reserves, you know, and we've hardly smelled powder yet."

After conversing with several of the soldiers and civilians--the latter
being mostly too unnerved to talk coherently--the Americans made their
way back to the quay with heavy hearts. They threaded lanes filled with
sobbing women, many of whom had frightened children clinging to their
skirts, passed groups of old men and boys who were visibly trembling
with trepidation and stood aside for ranks of brisk soldiery who marched
with an alertness that was in strong contrast with the terrified
attitude of the citizens. There was war in the air--fierce, relentless
war in every word and action they encountered--and it had the effect of
depressing the newcomers.

That night an earnest conference was held aboard the _Arabella_.

"As I understand it, here is the gist of the situation," began Ajo. "The
line of battle along the Aisne is stationary--for the present, at least.
Both sides are firmly entrenched and it's going to be a long, hard
fight. Antwerp is being bombarded, and although it's a powerful
fortress, the general opinion is that it can't hold out for long. If it
falls, there will be a rush of Germans down this coast, first to capture
Dunkirk, a few miles above here, and then Calais itself."

"In other words," continued Uncle John, "this is likely to be the most
important battleground for the next few weeks. Now, the question to
decide is this: Shall we disembark our ambulances and run them across to
Arras, beginning our work behind the French trenches, or go on to
Dunkirk, where we are likely to plunge into the thickest of the war?
We're not fighters, you know, but noncombatants, bent on an errand of
mercy. There are wounded everywhere."

They considered this for a long time without reaching a decision, for
there were some in the party to argue on either side of the question.
Uncle John continued to favor the trenches, as the safest position for
his girls to work; but the girls themselves, realizing little of the
dangers to be encountered, preferred to follow the fortunes of the
Belgians.

"They've been so brave and noble, these people of Belgium," said Beth,
"that I would take more pleasure in helping them than any other branch
of the allied armies."

"But, my dear, there's a mere handful of them left," protested her
uncle. "I'm told that at Dunkirk there is still a remnant of the Belgian
army--very badly equipped--but most of the remaining force is with King
Albert in Antwerp. If the place falls they will either be made prisoners
by the Germans or they may escape into Holland, where their fighting
days will be ended for the rest of the war. However, there is no need to
decide this important question to-night. To-morrow I am to see the
French commandant and I will get his advice."

The interview with the French commandant of Calais, which was readily
accorded the Americans, proved very unsatisfactory. The general had just
received reports that Antwerp was in flames and the greater part of the
city already demolished by the huge forty-two-centimetre guns of the
Germans. The fate of King Albert's army was worrying him exceedingly and
he was therefore in little mood for conversation.

The American consul could do little to assist them. After the matter was
explained to him, he said:

"I advise you to wait a few days for your decision. Perhaps a day--an
hour--will change the whole angle of the war. Strange portents are in
the air; no one knows what will happen next. Come to me, from time to
time, and I will give you all the information I secure."

Dr. Gys had accompanied Jones and Mr. Merrick into Calais to-day, and
while he had little to say during the various interviews his
observations were shrewd and comprehensive. When they returned to the
deck of the _Arabella_, Gys said to the girls:

"There is nothing worth while for us to do here. The only wounded I saw
were a few Frenchmen parading their bandaged heads and hands for the
admiration of the women. The hospitals are well organized and quite
full, it is true, but I'm told that no more wounded are being sent here.
The Sisters of Mercy and the regular French Red Cross force seem very
competent to handle the situation, and there are two government hospital
ships already anchored in this port. We would only be butting in to
offer our services. But down the line, from Arras south, there is real
war in the trenches and many are falling every day. Arras is less than
fifty miles from here--a two or three hours' run for our ambulances--and
we could bring the wounded here and care for them as we originally
intended."

"Fifty miles is a long distance for a wounded man to travel," objected
Maud.

"True," said the doctor, "but the roads are excellent."

"Remember those swinging cots," said Ajo.

"We might try it," said Patsy, anxious to be doing something. "Couldn't
we start to-morrow for Arras, Uncle?"

"It occurs to me that we must first find a chauffeur," answered Mr.
Merrick, "and from my impressions of the inhabitants of Calais, that
will prove a difficult task."

"Why?"

"Every man jack of 'em is scared stiff," said Ajo, with a laugh. "But we
might ask the commandant to recommend someone. The old boy seems
friendly enough."

The next day, however, brought important news from Antwerp. The city had
surrendered, the Belgian army had made good its escape and was now
retreating toward Ostend, closely followed by the enemy.

This news was related by a young orderly who met them as they entered
the Hotel de Ville. They were also told that the commandant was very
busy but would try to see them presently. This young Frenchman spoke
English perfectly and was much excited by the morning's dispatches.

"This means that the war is headed our way at last!" he cried
enthusiastically. "The Germans will make a dash to capture both Dunkirk
and Calais, and already large bodies of reinforcements are on the way to
defend these cities."

"English, or French?" asked Uncle John.

"This is French territory," was the embarrassed reply, "but we are glad
to have our allies, the English, to support us. Their General French is
now at Dunkirk, and it is probable the English will join the French and
Belgians at that point."

"They didn't do much good at Antwerp, it seems," remarked Ajo.

"Ah, they were naval reserves, monsieur, and not much could be expected
of them. But do not misunderstand me; I admire the English private--the
fighting man--exceedingly. Were the officers as clever as their soldiers
are brave, the English would be irresistible."

As this seemed a difficult subject to discuss, Uncle John asked the
orderly if he knew of a good chauffeur to drive their ambulance--an
able, careful man who might be depended upon in emergencies.

The orderly reflected.

"We have already impressed the best drivers," he said, "but it may be
the general will consent to spare you one of them. Your work is so
important that we must take good care of you."

But when they were admitted to the general they found him in a more
impatient mood than before. He really could not undertake to direct Red
Cross workers or advise them. They were needed everywhere; everywhere
they would be welcome. And now, he regretted to state that he was very
busy; if they had other business with the department, Captain Meroux
would act as its representative.

Before accepting this dismissal Uncle John ventured to ask about a
chauffeur. Rather brusquely the general stated that they could ill
afford to spare one from the service. A desperate situation now faced
the Allies in Flanders. Captain Meroux must take care of the Americans;
doubtless he could find a driver for their ambulance--perhaps a Belgian.

But in the outer office the orderly smiled doubtfully.

A driver? To be sure; but such as he could furnish would not be of the
slightest use to them. All the good chauffeurs had been impressed and
the general was not disposed to let them have one.

"He mentioned a Belgian," suggested Uncle John.

"I know; but the Belgians in Calais are all fugitives, terror-stricken
and unmanned." He grew thoughtful a moment and then continued: "My
advice would be to take your ship to Dunkirk. It is only a little way,
through a good channel, and you will be as safe there as at Calais. For,
if Dunkirk falls, Calais will fall with it. From there, moreover, the
roads are better to Arras and Peronne, and it is there you stand the
best chance of getting a clever Belgian chauffeur. If you wish--" he
hesitated, looking at them keenly.

"Well, sir?"

"If you are really anxious to get to the firing line and do the most
good, Dunkirk is your logical station. If you are merely seeking the
notoriety of being charitably inclined, remain here."

They left the young man, reflecting upon his advice and gravely
considering its value. They next visited one of the hospitals, where an
overworked but friendly English surgeon volunteered a similar
suggestion. Dunkirk, he declared, would give them better opportunities
than Calais.

The remainder of the day they spent in getting whatever news had
filtered into the city and vainly seeking a competent man for chauffeur.
On the morning of October eleventh they left Calais and proceeded slowly
along the buoyed channel that is the only means of approaching the port
of Dunkirk by water. The coast line is too shallow to allow ships to
enter from the open sea.

On their arrival at the Flemish city--twelve miles nearer the front than
Calais--they found an entirely different atmosphere. No excitement, no
terror was visible anywhere. The people quietly pursued their accustomed
avocations and the city was as orderly as in normal times.

The town was full of Belgians, however, both soldiers and civilians,
while French and British troops were arriving hourly in regiments and
battalions. General French, the English commander in chief, had located
his headquarters at a prominent hotel, and a brisk and businesslike air
pervaded the place, with an entire lack of confusion. Most of the
Belgians were reservists who were waiting to secure uniforms and arms.
They crowded all the hotels, cafs and inns and seemed as merry and
light-hearted as if no news of their king's defeat and precipitate
retreat had arrived. Not until questioned would they discuss the war at
all, yet every man was on the _qui vive_, expecting hourly to hear the
roar of guns announcing the arrival of the fragment of the Belgian army
that had escaped from Antwerp.

To-day the girls came ashore with the men of their party, all three
wearing their Red Cross uniforms and caps, and it was almost pathetic to
note the deference with which all those warriors--both bronzed and
fair--removed their caps until the "angels of mercy" had passed them by.

They made the rounds of the hospitals, which were already crowded with
wounded, and Gys stopped at one long enough to assist the French doctor
in a delicate operation. Patsy stood by to watch this surgery, her face
white and drawn, for this was her first experience of the sort; but Maud
and Beth volunteered their services and were so calm and deft that
Doctor Gys was well pleased with them.




CHAPTER VI

LITTLE MAURIE


It was nearly evening when the Americans finally returned to the quay,
close to which the _Arabella_ was moored. As they neared the place a
great military automobile came tearing along, scattering pedestrians
right and left, made a sudden swerve, caught a man who was not agile
enough to escape and sent him spinning along the dock until he fell
headlong, a crumpled heap.

"Ah, here is work for us!" exclaimed Doctor Gys, running forward to
raise the man and examine his condition. The military car had not paused
in its career and was well out of sight, but a throng of indignant
civilians gathered around.

"There are no severe injuries, but he seems unconscious," reported Gys.
"Let us get him aboard the ship."

The launch was waiting for them, and with the assistance of Jones, the
doctor placed the injured man in the boat and he was taken to the ship
and placed in one of the hospital berths.

"Our first patient is not a soldier, after all," remarked Patsy, a
little disappointed. "I shall let Beth and Maud look after him."

"Well, he is wounded, all right," answered Ajo, "and without your kind
permission Beth and Maud are already below, looking after him. I'm
afraid he won't require their services long, poor fellow."

"Why didn't he get out of the way?" inquired Patsy with a shudder.

"Can't say. Preoccupied, perhaps. There wasn't much time to jump,
anyhow. I suppose that car carried a messenger with important news, for
it isn't like those officers to be reckless of the lives of citizens."

"No; they seem in perfect sympathy with the people," she returned. "I
wonder what the news can be, Ajo."

For answer a wild whistling sounded overhead; a cry came from those
ashore and the next instant there was a loud explosion. Everyone rushed
to the side, where Captain Carg was standing, staring at the sky.

"What was it, Captain?" gasped Patsy.

Carg stroked his grizzled beard.

"A German bomb, Miss Patsy; but I think it did no damage."

"A bomb! Then the Germans are on us?"

"Not exactly. An aeroplane dropped the thing."

"Oh. Where is it?"

"The aeroplane? Pretty high up, I reckon," answered the captain. "I had
a glimpse of it, for a moment; then it disappeared in the clouds."

"We must get our ambulances ashore," said Jones.

"No hurry, sir; plenty of time," asserted the captain. "I think I saw
the airship floating north, so it isn't likely to bother us again just
now."

"What place is north of us?" inquired the girl, trembling a little in
spite of her efforts at control.

"I think it is Nieuport--or perhaps Dixmude," answered Carg. "I visited
Belgium once, when I was a young man, but I cannot remember it very
well. We're pretty close to the Belgian border, at Dunkirk."

"There's another!" cried Ajo, as a second whistling shriek sounded above
them. This time the bomb fell into the sea and raised a small
water-spout, some half mile distant. They could now see plainly a second
huge aircraft circling above them; but this also took flight toward the
north and presently disappeared.

Uncle John came hurrying on deck with an anxious face and together the
group of Americans listened for more bombs; but that was all that came
their way that night.

"Well," said Patsy, when she had recovered her equanimity, "we're at the
front at last, Uncle. How do you like it?"

"I hadn't thought of bombs," he replied. "But we're in for it, and I
suppose we'll have to take whatever comes."

Now came the doctor, supporting the injured man on one side while Maud
Stanton held his opposite arm. Gys was smiling broadly--a rather ghastly
expression.

"No bones broken, sir," he reported to Mr. Merrick. "Only a good
shake-up and plenty of bruises. He can't be induced to stay in bed."

"Bed, when the Germans come?" exclaimed the invalid, scornfully,
speaking in fair English. "It is absurd! We can sleep when we have
driven them back to their dirty Faderland--we can sleep, then, and rest.
Now, it is a crime to rest."

They looked at him curiously. He was a small man--almost a tiny
man--lean and sinewy and with cheeks the color of bronze and eyes the
hue of the sky. His head was quite bald at the top; his face wrinkled;
he had a bushy mustache and a half-grown beard. His clothing was soiled,
torn and neglected; but perhaps his accident accounted for much of its
condition. His age might be anywhere from thirty to forty years. He
looked alert and shrewd.

"You are Belgian?" said Uncle John.

He leaned against the rail, shaking off the doctor's support, as he
replied:

"Yes, monsieur. Belgian born and American trained." There was a touch of
pride in his voice. "It was in America that I made my fortune."

"Indeed."

"It is true. I was waiter in a New York restaurant for five years. Then
I retired. I came back to Belgium. I married my wife. I bought land. It
is near Ghent. I am, as you have guessed, a person of great importance."

"Ah; an officer, perhaps. Civil, or military?" inquired Ajo with mock
deference.

"Of better rank than either. I am a citizen."

"Now, I like that spirit," said Uncle John approvingly. "What is your
name, my good man?"

"Maurie, monsieur; Jakob Maurie. Perhaps you have met me--in New York."

"I do not remember it. But if you live in Ghent, why are you in
Dunkirk?"

He cast an indignant glance at his questioner, but Uncle John's serene
expression disarmed him.

"Monsieur is not here long?"

"We have just arrived."

"You cannot see Belgium from here. If you are there--in my country--you
will find that the German is everywhere. I have my home at Brussels
crushed by a shell which killed my baby girl. My land is devastate--my
crop is taken to feed German horse and German thief. There is no home
left. So my wife and my boy and girl I take away; I take them to Ostend,
where I hope to get ship to England. At Ostend I am arrested by Germans.
Not my wife and children; only myself. I am put in prison. For three
weeks they keep me, and then I am put out. They push me into the street.
No one apologize. I ask for my family. They laugh and turn away. I
search everywhere for my wife. A friend whom I meet thinks she has gone
to Ypres, for now no Belgian can take ship from Ostend to England. So I
go to Ypres. The wandering people have all been sent to Nieuport and
Dunkirk. Still I search. My wife is not in Nieuport. I come here, three
days ago; I cannot find her in Dunkirk; she has vanished. Perhaps--but I
will not trouble you with that. This is my story, ladies and gentlemen.
Behold in me--a wealthy landowner of Liege--the outcast from home and
country!"

"It is dreadful!" cried Patsy.

"It is fierce," said the man. "Only an American can understand the
horror of that word."

"Your fate is surely a cruel one, Maurie," declared Mr. Merrick.

"Perhaps," ventured Beth, "we may help you to find your wife and
children."

The Belgian seemed pleased with these expressions of sympathy. He
straightened up, threw out his chest and bowed very low.

"That is my story," he repeated; "but you must know it is also the story
of thousands of Belgians. Always I meet men searching for wives. Always
I meet wives searching for husbands. Well! it is our fate--the fate of
conquered Belgium."

Maud brought him a deck chair and made him sit down.

"You will stay here to-night," she said.

"That's right," said Dr. Gys. "He can't resume his search until morning,
that's certain. Such a tumble as he had would have killed an ordinary
man; but the fellow seems made of iron."

"To be a waiter--a good waiter--develops the muscles," said Maurie.

Ajo gave him a cigarette, which he accepted eagerly. After a few puffs
he said:

"I heard the German bombs. That means the enemy grows insolent. First
they try to frighten us with bombs, then they attack."

"How far away do you think the Germans are?" asked Beth.

"Nieuport les Bains. But they will get no nearer."

"No?"

"Surely not, mamselle. Our soldiers are there, awaiting them. Our
soldiers, and the French."

"And you think the enemy cannot capture Dunkirk?" inquired Jones.

"Dunkirk! The Germans capture Dunkirk? It is impossible."

"Why impossible?"

"Dunkirk is fortified; it is the entrance to Calais, to Dover and
London. Look you, m'sieur; we cannot afford to lose this place. We
cannot afford to lose even Nieuport, which is our last stand on Belgian
soil. Therefore, the Germans cannot take it, for there are still too
many of us to kill before Kitchener comes to save us." He spoke
thoughtfully, between puffs of his cigarette, and added: "But of course,
if the great English army does not come, and they kill us all, then it
will not matter in the least what becomes of our country."

Maurie's assertion did not wholly reassure them. The little Belgian was
too bombastic to win their confidence in his judgment. Yet Jones
declared that Maurie doubtless knew the country better than anyone they
had yet met and the doctor likewise defended his patient. Indeed, Gys
seemed to have taken quite a fancy to the little man and long after the
others had retired for the night he sat on deck talking with the Belgian
and getting his views of the war.

"You say you had land at Ghent?" he once asked.

"It is true, Doctor."

"But afterward you said Brussels."

Maurie was not at all confused.

"Ah; I may have done so. You see, I traded my property."

"And, if I am not mistaken, you spoke of a home at Liege."

Maurie looked at him reproachfully.

"Is there not much land in Belgium?" he demanded; "and is a rich man
confined to one home? Liege was my summer home; in the winter I removed
to Antwerp."

"You said Ghent."

"Ghent it was, Doctor. Misfortune has dulled my brain. I am not the man
I was," he added with a sigh.

"Nevertheless," said Gys, "you still possess the qualities of a good
waiter. Whatever happens here, Maurie, you can always go back to
America."




CHAPTER VII

ON THE FIRING LINE


Next morning they were all wakened at an early hour by the roar of
artillery, dimly heard in the distance. The party aboard the _Arabella_
quickly assembled on deck, where little Maurie was found leaning over
the rail.

"They're at it," he remarked, wagging his head. "The Germans are at
Nieuport, now, and some of them are over against Pervyse. I hear sounds
from Dixmude, too; the rattle of machine guns. It will be a grand
battle, this! I wonder if our Albert is there."

"Who is he?" asked Patsy.

"The king. They told me yesterday he had escaped."

"We must get the ambulances out at once," said Beth.

"I'll attend to that," replied Uncle John, partaking of the general
excitement. "Warp up to the dock, Captain Carg, and I'll get some of
those men to help us swing the cars over the side."

"How about a chauffeur?" asked Dr. Gys, who was already bringing out
bandages and supplies for the ambulances.

"If we can't find a man, I'll drive you myself," declared Ajo.

"But you don't know the country."

Gys turned to the little Belgian.

"Can't you find us a driver?" he asked. "We want a steady, competent man
to run our ambulance."

"Where are you going?" asked Maurie.

"To the firing line."

"Good. I will drive you myself."

"You? Do you understand a car?"

"I am an expert, monsieur."

"A waiter in a restaurant?"

"Pah! That was five years ago. I will show you. I can drive any car ever
made--and I know every inch of the way."

"Then you're our man," exclaimed Mr. Merrick, much relieved.

As the yacht swung slowly alongside the dock the Belgian said:

"While you get ready, I will go ashore for news. When I come back--very
quick--then I will know everything."

Before he ran down the ladder Patsy clasped around his arm a band
bearing the insignia of the Red Cross. He watched her approvingly, with
little amused chuckles, and then quickly disappeared in the direction of
the town.

"He doesn't seem injured in the least by his accident," said the girl,
looking after him as he darted along.

"No," returned Gys; "he is one of those fellows who must be ripped to
pieces before they can feel anything. But let us thank heaven he can
drive a car."

Mr. Merrick had no difficulty in getting all the assistance required to
lower the two ambulances to the dock. They had already been set up and
put in order, so the moment they were landed they were ready for use.

A few surgical supplies were added by Dr. Gys and then they looked
around for the Belgian. Although scarce an hour had elapsed since he
departed, he came running back just as he was needed, puffing a little
through haste, his eyes shining with enthusiasm.

"Albert is there!" he cried. "The king and his army are at Nieuport.
They will open the dykes and flood all the country but the main road,
and then we can hold the enemy in check. They will fight, those Germans,
but they cannot advance, for we will defend the road and the sand
dunes."

"Aren't they fighting now?" asked Jones.

"Oh, yes, some of the big guns are spitting, but what is that? A few
will fall, but we have yet thousands to face the German horde."

"Let us start at once," pleaded Maud.

Maurie began to examine the big ambulance. He was spry as a cat. In ten
minutes he knew all that was under the hood, had tested the levers,
looked at the oil and gasoline supply and started the motor.

"I'll sit beside you to help in case of emergency," said Ajo, taking his
place. Dr. Gys, Dr. Kelsey and the three girls sat inside. Patsy had
implored Uncle John not to go on this preliminary expedition and he had
hesitated until the last moment; but the temptation was too strong to
resist and even as the wheels started to revolve he sprang in and closed
the door behind him.

"You are my girls," he said, "and wherever you go, I'll tag along."

Maurie drove straight into the city and to the north gate, Jones
clanging the bell as they swept along. Every vehicle gave them the right
of way and now and then a cheer greeted the glittering new Red Cross
ambulance, which bore above its radiator a tiny, fluttering American
flag.

They were not stopped at the gate, for although strict orders had been
issued to allow no one to leave Dunkirk, the officer in charge realized
the sacred mission of the Americans and merely doffed his cap in
salutation as the car flashed by.

The road to Furnes was fairly clear, but as they entered that town they
found the streets cluttered with troops, military automobiles, supply
wagons, artillery, ammunition trucks and bicycles. The boy clanged his
bell continuously and as if by magic the way opened before the Red Cross
and cheers followed them on their way.

The eyes of the little Belgian were sparkling like jewels; his hands on
the steering wheel were steady as a rock; he drove with skill and
judgment. Just now the road demanded skill, for a stream of refugees was
coming toward them from Nieuport and a stream of military motors,
bicycles and wagons, with now and then a horseman, flowed toward the
front. A mile or two beyond Furnes they came upon a wounded soldier, one
leg bandaged and stained with blood while he hobbled along leaning upon
the shoulder of a comrade whose left arm hung helpless.

Maurie drew up sharply and Beth sprang out and approached the soldiers.

"Get inside," she said in French.

"No," replied one, smiling; "we are doing nicely, thank you. Hurry
forward, for they need you there."

"Who dressed your wounds?" she inquired.

"The Red Cross. There are many there, hard at work; but more are needed.
Hurry forward, for some of our boys did not get off as lightly as we."

She jumped into the ambulance and away it dashed, but progress became
slower presently. The road was broad and high; great hillocks of
sand--the Dunes--lay between it and the ocean; on the other side the
water from the opened dykes was already turning the fields into an
inland sea. In some places it lapped the edges of the embankment that
formed the roadway.

Approaching Nieuport, they discovered the Dunes to be full of soldiers,
who had dug pits behind the sandy hillocks for protection, and in them
planted the dog-artillery and one or two large machine guns. These were
trained on the distant line of Germans, who were also entrenching
themselves. All along the edge of the village the big guns were in
action and there was a constant interchange of shot and shell from both
sides.

As Maurie dodged among the houses with the big car a shell descended
some two hundred yards to the left of them, exploded with a crash and
sent a shower of brick and splinters high into the air. A little way
farther on the ruins of a house completely blocked the street and they
were obliged to turn back and seek another passage. Thus partially
skirting the town they at last left the houses behind them and
approached the firing line, halting scarcely a quarter of a mile distant
from the actual conflict.

As far as the eye could reach, from Nieuport to the sea at the left, and
on toward Ypres at the right of them, the line of Belgians, French and
British steadily faced the foe. Close to where they halted the ambulance
stood a detachment that had lately retired from the line, their places
having been taken by reserves. One of the officers told Mr. Merrick that
they had been facing bullets since daybreak and the men seemed almost
exhausted. Their faces were blackened by dust and powder and their
uniforms torn and disordered; many stood without caps or coats despite
the chill in the air. And yet these fellows were laughing together and
chatting as pleasantly as children just released from school. Even those
who had wounds made light of their hurts. Clouds of smoke hovered low in
the air; the firing was incessant.

Our girls were thrilled by this spectacle as they had never been
thrilled before--perhaps never might be again. While they still kept
their seats, Maurie started with a sudden jerk, made a sharp turn and
ran the ambulance across a ridge of solid earth that seemed to be the
only one of such character amongst all that waste of sand. It brought
them somewhat closer to the line but their driver drew up behind a great
dune that afforded them considerable protection.

Fifty yards away was another ambulance with its wheels buried to the
hubs in the loose sand. Red Cross nurses and men wearing the emblem on
their arms and caps were passing here and there, assisting the injured
with "first aid," temporarily bandaging heads, arms and legs or carrying
to the rear upon a stretcher a more seriously injured man. Most of this
corps were French; a few were English; some were Belgian. Our friends
were the only Americans on the field.

Uncle John's face was very grave as he alighted in the wake of his
girls, who paid no attention to the fighting but at once ran to assist
some of the wounded who came staggering toward the ambulance, some even
creeping painfully on hands and knees. In all Mr. Merrick's conceptions
of the important mission they had undertaken, nothing like the nature
of this desperate conflict had even dawned upon him. He had known that
the Red Cross was respected by all belligerents, and that knowledge had
led him to feel that his girls would be fairly safe; but never had he
counted on spent bullets, stray shells or the mad rush of a charge.

"Very good!" cried Maurie briskly. "Here we see what no one else can
see. The Red Cross is a fine passport to the grand stand of war."

"Come with me--quick!" shouted Ajo, his voice sounding shrill through
the din. "I saw a fellow knocked out--there--over yonder!"

As he spoke he grabbed a stretcher and ran forward, Maurie following at
his heels. Uncle John saw the smoke swallow them up, saw Beth and Maud
each busy with lint, plasters and bandages, saw Patsy supporting a tall,
grizzled warrior who came limping toward the car. Then he turned and saw
Doctor Gys, crouching low against the protecting sand, his disfigured
face working convulsively and every limb trembling as with an ague.




CHAPTER VIII

THE COWARD


"Great heavens!" gasped Mr. Merrick, running toward the doctor. "Are you
hit?"

Gys looked up at him appealingly and nodded.

"Where did it strike you? Was it a bullet--or what?"

The doctor wrung his hands, moaning pitifully. Uncle John bent over him.

"Tell me," he said. "Tell me, Gys!"

"I--I'm scared, sir--s-s-scared stiff. It's that yellow s-s-s-streak in
me; I--I--can't help it, sir." Then he collapsed, crouching lifelessly
close to the sand.

Uncle John was amazed. He drew back with such an expression of scorn
that Gys, lying with face upward, rolled over to hide his own features
in the sand. But his form continued to twist and shake convulsively.

Patsy came up with her soldier, whose gaudy uniform proclaimed him an
officer. He had a rugged, worn face, gray hair and mustache, stern eyes.
His left side was torn and bleeding where a piece of shell had raked him
from shoulder to knee. No moan did he utter as Mr. Merrick and the girl
assisted him to one of the swinging beds, and then Patsy, with white,
set face but steady hands, began at once to cut away the clothing and
get at the wound. This was her first practical experience and she meant
to prove her mettle or perish in the attempt.

Uncle John skipped over to the sand bank and clutched Gys savagely by
the collar.

"Get up!" he commanded. "Here's a man desperately wounded, who needs
your best skill--and at once."

Gys pulled himself free and sat up, seeming dazed for the moment. Then
he rubbed his head briskly with both hands, collected his nerve and
slowly rose to his feet. He cast fearful glances at the firing line, but
the demand for his surgical skill was a talisman that for a time enabled
him to conquer his terror. With frightened backward glances he ran to
the ambulance and made a dive into it as if a pack of wolves was at his
heels.

Safely inside, one glance at the wounded man caused Gys to stiffen
suddenly. He became steady and alert and noting that Patsy had now bared
a portion of the gaping wound the doctor seized a thermos flask of hot
water and in a moment was removing the clotted blood in a deft and
intelligent manner.

Now came Jones and Maurie bearing the man they had picked up. As they
set the stretcher down, Uncle John came over.

"Shall we put him inside?" asked Mr. Merrick.

"No use, I think," panted the Belgian.

"Where's the doctor?" asked Ajo.

Kelsey, who had been busy elsewhere, now approached and looked at the
soldier on the stretcher.

"The man is dead," he said. "He doesn't need us now."

"Off with him, then!" cried Maurie, and they laid the poor fellow upon
the sand and covered him with a cloth. "Come, then," urged the little
chauffeur, excitedly, "lots more out there are still alive. We get one
quick."

They left in a run in one direction while Kelsey, who had come to the
ambulance for supplies, went another way. Mr. Merrick looked around for
the other two girls. Only Maud Stanton was visible through the smoky
haze. Uncle John approached her just as a shell dropped into the sand
not fifty feet away. It did not explode but plowed a deep furrow and
sent a shower of sand in every direction.

Maud had just finished dressing a bullet wound in the arm of a young
soldier who smiled as he watched her. Then, as she finished the work, he
bowed low, muttered his thanks, and catching up his gun rushed back into
the fray. It was a flesh wound and until it grew more painful he could
still fight.

"Where are the Germans?" asked Uncle John. "I haven't seen one yet."

As he spoke a great cheer rose from a thousand throats. The line before
them wavered an instant and then rushed forward and disappeared in the
smoke of battle.

"Is it a charge, do you think?" asked Maud, as they stood peering into
the haze.

"I--I don't know," he stammered. "This is so--so bewildering--that it
all seems like a dream. Where's Beth?"

"I don't know."

"Are you looking for a young lady--a nurse?" asked a voice beside them.
"She's over yonder," he swung one arm toward the distant sand dunes. The
other was in a sling. "She has just given me first aid and sent me to
the rear--God bless her!" Then he trailed on, a British Tommy Atkins,
while with one accord Maud and Uncle John moved in the direction he had
indicated.

"She mustn't be so reckless," said Beth's uncle, nervously. "It's bad
enough back here, but every step nearer the firing line doubles the
danger."

"I do not agree with you, sir," answered Maud quietly. "A man was killed
not two paces from me, a little while ago."

He shuddered and wiped the sweat from his forehead with a handkerchief,
but made no reply. They climbed another line of dunes and in the hollow
beyond came upon several fallen soldiers, one of whom was moaning with
pain. Maud ran to kneel beside him and in a twinkling had her hypodermic
needle in his arm.

"Bear it bravely," she said in French. "The pain will stop in a few
minutes and then I'll come and look after you."

He nodded gratefully, still moaning, and she hurried to rejoin Mr.
Merrick.

"Beth must be in the next hollow," said Uncle John as she overtook him,
and his voice betrayed his nervous tension. "I do wish you girls would
not be so reckless."

Yes; they found her in the next hollow, where several men were grouped
about her. She was dressing the shattered hand of a soldier, while two
or three others were patiently awaiting her services. Just beside her a
sweet-faced Sister of Mercy was bending over a dying man, comforting him
with her prayers. Over the ridge of sand could be heard the "ping" of
small arms mingled with the hoarse roar of machine guns. Another great
shout--long and enthusiastic--was borne to their ears.

"That is good," said a tall man standing in the group about Beth; "I
think, from the sound, we have captured their guns."

"I'm sure of it, your Majesty," replied the one whom Beth was attending.
"There; that will do for the present. I thank you. And now, let us get
forward."

As they ran toward the firing Uncle John exclaimed:

"His Majesty! I wonder who they are?"

"That," said a private soldier, an accent of pride in his voice, "is our
Albert."

"The king?"

"Yes, monsieur; he is the tall one. The other is General Mays. I'm sure
we have driven the Germans back, and that is lucky, for before our
charge they had come too close for comfort."

"The king gave me a ring," said Beth, displaying it. "He seemed glad I
was here to help his soldiers, but warned me to keep further away from
the line. King Albert speaks English perfectly and told me he loves
America better than any other country except his own."

"He has traveled in your country," explained the soldier. "But then,
our Albert has traveled everywhere--before he was king."

Betwixt them Maud and Beth quickly applied first aid to the others in
the group and then Uncle John said:

"Let us take the king's advice and get back to the ambulance. We left
only Patsy and Dr. Gys there and I'm sure you girls will be needed."

On their return they came upon a man sitting in a hollow and calmly
leaning against a bank of sand, smoking a cigarette. He wore a gray
uniform.

"Ah, a German!" exclaimed Maud. She ran up to him and asked: "Are you
hurt?"

He glanced at her uniform, nodded, and pointed to his left foot. It had
nearly all been torn away below the ankle. A handkerchief was twisted
about the leg, forming a rude tourniquet just above the wound, and this
had served to stay the flow of blood.

"Run quickly for the stretcher," said Maud to Uncle John. "I will stay
with him until your return."

Without a word he hurried away, Beth following. They found, on reaching
the ambulance, that Maurie and Jones had been busy. Five of the swinging
beds were already occupied.

"Save the other one," said Beth. "Maud has found a German." Then she
hurried to assist Patsy, as the two doctors had their hands full.

Jones and Maurie started away with the stretcher, Uncle John guiding
them to the dunes where Maud was waiting, and presently they had the
wounded German comfortably laid in the last bed.

"Now, then, back to the ship," said Gys. "We have in our care two lives,
at least, that can only be saved by prompt operations."

Maurie got into the driver's seat.

"Careful, now!" cautioned Jones, beside him.

"Of course," replied the Belgian, starting the motor; "there are many
sores inside. But if they get a jolt, now and then, it will serve to
remind them that they are suffering for their country."

He began to back up, for the sand ahead was too deep for a turn, and the
way he managed the huge car along that narrow ridge aroused the
admiration of Ajo, who alone was able to witness the marvelous
performance. Slowly, with many turns, they backed to the road, where
Maurie swung the ambulance around and then stopped with a jerk that drew
several groans from the interior of the car.

"What's wrong?" asked Mr. Merrick, sticking his head from a window.

"We nearly ran over a man," answered Jones, climbing down from his seat.
"Our front wheels are right against him, but Maurie stopped in time."

Lying flat upon his face, diagonally across the roadway, was the form of
a man in the blue-and-red uniform of the Belgian army. Maurie backed the
ambulance a yard or so as Maud sprang out and knelt beside the prostrate
form.

The firing, which had lulled for a few minutes, suddenly redoubled in
fury. There rose a wild, exultant shout, gradually drawing nearer.

"Quick!" shouted Gys, trembling and wringing his hands. "The Germans are
charging. Drive on, man--drive on!"

But Maurie never moved.

"The Germans are charging, sure enough," he answered, as the line of
retreating Belgians became visible. "But they must stop here, for we've
blocked the road."

All eyes but those of Maud were now turned upon the fray, which was
practically a hand to hand conflict. Nearer and nearer came the confused
mass of warriors and then, scarce a hundred yards away, it halted and
the Belgians stood firm.

"He isn't dead," said Maud, coming to the car. "Help me to put him
inside."

"There is no room," protested Gys.

The girl looked at him scornfully.

"We will make room," she replied.

A bullet shattered a pane of glass just beside the crouching doctor, but
passed on through an open window without injuring anyone. In fact,
bullets were singing around them with a freedom that made others than
Dr. Gys nervous. It was chubby little Uncle John who helped Jones carry
the wounded man to the ambulance, where they managed to stretch him upon
the floor. This arrangement sent Patsy to the front seat outside, with
Maurie and Ajo, although her uncle strongly protested that she had no
right to expose her precious life so wantonly.

There was little time for argument, however. Even as the girl was
climbing to her seat the line of Belgians broke and came pouring toward
them. Maurie was prompt in starting the car and the next moment the
ambulance was rolling swiftly along the smooth highway in the direction
of Dunkirk and the sounds of fray grew faint behind them.




CHAPTER IX

COURAGE, OR PHILOSOPHY?


"I never realized," said Maud, delightedly, "what a strictly modern,
professional hospital ship Uncle John has made of this, until we put it
to practical use. I am sure it is better than those makeshifts we
observed at Calais, and more comfortable than those crowded hospitals on
land. Every convenience is at our disposal and if our patients do not
recover rapidly it will be because their condition is desperate."

She had just come on deck after a long and trying session in assisting
Doctors Gys and Kelsey to care for the injured, a session during which
Beth and Patsy had also stood nobly to their gruesome task. There were
eleven wounded, altogether, in their care, and although some of these
were in a critical condition the doctors had insisted that the nurses
needed rest.

"It is Dr. Gys who deserves credit for fitting the ship," replied Mr.
Merrick, modestly, to Maud's enthusiastic comment, "and Ajo is
responsible for the ship itself, which seems admirably suited to our
purpose. By the way, how is Gys behaving now? Is he still shaking with
fear?"

"No, he seems to have recovered his nerve. Isn't it a terrible
affliction?"

"Cowardice? Well, my dear, it is certainly an unusual affliction in this
country and in these times. I have been amazed to-day at the courage I
have witnessed. These Belgians are certainly a brave lot."

"But no braver than the German we brought with us," replied Maud
thoughtfully. "One would almost think he had no sensation, yet he must
be suffering terribly. The doctor will amputate the remnants of his foot
in an hour or so, but the man positively refuses to take an
anaesthetic."

"Does he speak English or French?"

"No; only German. But Captain Carg understands German and so he has been
acting as our interpreter."

"How about the Belgian we picked up on the road?"

"He hasn't recovered consciousness yet. He is wounded in the back and in
trying to get to the rear became insensible from loss of blood."

"From what I saw I wouldn't suppose any Belgian could be wounded in the
back," remarked Uncle John doubtfully.

"It was a shell," she said, "and perhaps exploded behind him. It's a bad
wound, Dr. Gys says, but if he regains strength he may recover."

During this conversation Patsy Doyle was lying in her stateroom below
and crying bitterly, while her cousin Beth strove to soothe her. All
unused to such horrors as she had witnessed that day, the girl had
managed to retain her nerve by sheer force of will until the Red Cross
party had returned to the ship and extended first aid to the wounded;
but the moment Dr. Gys dismissed her she broke down completely.

Beth was no more accustomed to bloodshed than her cousin, but she had
anticipated such scenes as they had witnessed, inasmuch as her year of
training as nurse had prepared her for them. She had also been a close
student of the daily press and from her reading had gleaned a knowledge
of the terrible havoc wrought by this great war. Had Patsy not given
way, perhaps Beth might have done so herself, and really it was Maud
Stanton who bore the ordeal with the most composure.

After a half hour on deck Maud returned to the hospital section quite
refreshed, and proceeded to care for the patients. She alone assisted
Gys and Kelsey to amputate the German's foot, an operation the man bore
splendidly, quite unaware, however, that they had applied local
anaesthetics to dull the pain. Dr. Gys was a remarkably skillful surgeon
and he gave himself no rest until every one of the eleven had received
such attention as his wounds demanded. Even Kelsey felt the strain by
that time and as Maud expressed her intention of remaining to minister
to the wants of the crippled soldiers, the two doctors went on deck for
a smoke and a brief relaxation.

By this time Beth had quieted Patsy, mainly by letting her have her cry
out, and now brought her on deck to join the others and get the fresh
air. So quickly had events followed one another on this fateful day
that it was now only four o'clock in the afternoon. None of them had
thought of luncheon, so the ship's steward now brought tea and
sandwiches to those congregated on deck.

As they sat together in a group, drinking tea and discussing the
exciting events of the day, little Maurie came sauntering toward them
and removed his cap.

"Your pardon," said he, "but--are the wounded all cared for?"

"As well as we are able to care for them at present," answered Beth.
"And let me thank you, Jakob Maurie--let us all thank you--for the noble
work you did for us to-day."

"Pah! it was nothing," said he, shifting from one foot to another. "I
enjoyed it, mamselle. It was such fun to dive into the battle and pull
out the wounded. It helped them, you see, and it gave us a grand
excitement. Otherwise, had I not gone with you, I would be as ignorant
as all in Dunkirk still are, for the poor people do not yet know what
has happened at the front."

"We hardly know ourselves what has happened," said Uncle John. "We can
hear the boom of guns yet, even at this distance, and we left the battle
line flowing back and forth like the waves of the ocean. Have a cup of
tea, Maurie?"

The man hesitated.

"I do not like to disturb anyone," he said slowly, "but if one of the
young ladies is disengaged I would be grateful if she looks at my arm."

"Your arm!" exclaimed Beth, regarding him wonderingly as he stood before
her.

Maurie smiled.

"It is hardly worth mentioning, mamselle, but a bullet--"

"Take off your coat," she commanded, rising from her seat to assist him.

Maurie complied. His shirt was stained with blood. Beth drew out her
scissors and cut away the sleeve of his left arm. A bullet had passed
directly through the flesh, but without harming bone or muscle.

"Why didn't you tell us before?" she asked reproachfully.

"It amounted to so little, beside the other hurts you had to attend," he
answered. "I am shamed, mamselle, that I came to you at all. A little
water and a cloth will make it all right."

Patsy had already gone for the water and in a few minutes Beth was
deftly cleansing the wound.

"How did it happen, Maurie?" asked Jones. "I was with you most of the
time and noticed nothing wrong. Besides, you said nothing about it."

"It was on the road, just as we picked up that fallen soldier with the
hole in his back. The fight jumped toward us pretty quick, you remember,
and while I sat at the wheel the bullet came. I knew when it hit me, but
I also knew I could move my arm, so what did it matter? I told myself to
wait till we got to the ship. Had we stayed there longer, we might all
have stopped bullets--and some bullets might have stopped us." He
grinned, as if the aphorism amused him, and added: "To know when to run
is the perfection of courage."

"Does it hurt?" asked Uncle John, as Beth applied the lint and began
winding the bandage.

"It reminds me it is there, monsieur; but I will be ready for another
trip to-morrow. Thank you, mamselle. Instead of the tea, I would like a
little brandy."

"Give him some in the tea," suggested Gys, noting that Maurie swayed a
little. "Sit down, man, and be comfortable. That's it. I'd give a
million dollars for your nerve."

"Have you so much money?" asked Maurie.

"No."

"Then I cannot see that you lack nerve," said the little Belgian
thoughtfully. "I was watching you to-day, M'sieur Doctor, and I believe
what you lack is courage."

Gys stared so hard at him with the one good eye that even Maurie became
embarrassed and turned away his head. Sipping his tea and brandy he
presently resumed, in a casual tone:

"Never have I indulged in work of more interest than this. We go into
the thick of the fight, yet are we safe from harm. We do good to both
sides, because the men who do the fighting are not to blame for the war,
at all. The leaders of politics say to the generals: 'We have declared
war; go and fight.' The generals say to the soldiers: 'We are told to
fight, so come on. We do not know why, but it is our duty, because it is
our profession. So go and die, or get shot to pieces, or lose some arms
and legs, as it may happen.' The business of the soldiers is to obey;
they must back up the policies of their country, right or wrong. But do
those who send them into danger ever get hurt? Not to the naked eye."

"Why, you're quite a philosopher, Maurie," said Patsy.

"It is true," agreed the Belgian. "But philosophy is like courage--easy
to assume. We strut and talk big; we call the politicians sharks, the
soldiers fools; but does it do any good? The war will go on; the enemy
will destroy our homes, separate our families, take away our bread and
leave us to starve; but we have the privilege to philosophize, if we
like. For myself, I thank them for nothing!"

"I suppose you grieve continually for your wife," said Patsy.

"Not so much that, mamselle, but I know she is grieving for me," he
replied.

"As soon as we find time," continued the girl, "we intend to search for
your wife and children. I am sure we can find them for you."

Maurie moved uneasily in his chair.

"I beg you to take no trouble on my account," said he. "With the Red
Cross you have great work to accomplish. What is the despair of one poor
Walloon to you?"

"It is a great deal to us, Maurie," returned the girl, earnestly. "You
have been a friend in need; without you we could not have made our dash
to the front to-day. We shall try to repay you by finding your wife."

He was silent, but his troubled look told of busy thoughts.

"What does she look like?" inquired Beth. "Have you her photograph?"

"No; she would not make a good picture, mamselle," he answered with a
sigh. "Clarette is large; she is fat; she has a way of scowling when one
does not bring in more wood than the fire can eat up; and she is very
religious."

"With that description I am sure we can find her," cried Patsy
enthusiastically.

He seemed disturbed.

"If you please," said he plaintively, "Clarette is quite able to take
care of herself. She has a strong will."

"But if you know she is safe it will relieve your anxiety," suggested
Beth. "You told us yesterday you had been searching everywhere for her."

"If I said everywhere, I was wrong, for poor Clarette must be somewhere.
And since yesterday I have been thinking with more deliberation, and I
have decided," he added, his tone becoming confidential, "that it is
better I do not find Clarette just now. It might destroy my usefulness
to the Red Cross."

"But your children!" protested Patsy. "Surely you cannot rest at ease
with your two dear children wandering about, in constant danger."

"To be frank, mamselle," said he, "they are not my children. I had a
baby, but it was killed, as I told you. The boy and girl I have
mentioned were born when Clarette was the wife of another man--a
blacksmith at Dinant--who had a sad habit of beating her."

"But you love the little ones, I am sure."

He shook his head.

"They have somewhat the temper of their father, the blacksmith. I took
them when I took Clarette--just as I took the silver spoons and the
checkered tablespread she brought with her--but now that a cruel fate
has separated me from the children, perhaps it is all for the best."

The doctor gave a snort of disgust, while Ajo smiled. The girls were too
astonished to pursue the conversation, but now realized that Maurie's
private affairs did not require their good offices to untangle. Uncle
John was quite amused at the Belgian's confession and was the only one
to reply.

"Fate often seems cruel when she is in her happiest mood," said he.
"Perhaps, Maurie, your Clarette will come to you without your seeking
her, for all Belgium seems headed toward France just now. What do you
think? Will the Germans capture Dunkirk?"

The man brightened visibly at this turn in the conversation.

"Not to-day, sir; not for days to come," he replied. "The French cannot
afford to lose Dunkirk, and by to-morrow they will pour an irresistible
horde against the German invader. If we stay here, we are sure to remain
in the rear of the firing line."




CHAPTER X

THE WAR'S VICTIMS


While the others were conversing on deck Maud Stanton was ministering to
the maimed victims of the war's cruelty, who tossed and moaned below.
The main cabin and its accompanying staterooms had been fitted with all
the conveniences of a modern hospital. Twenty-two could easily be
accommodated in the rooms and a dozen more in the cabin, so that the
eleven now in their charge were easily cared for. Of these, only three
had been seriously injured. One was the German, who, however, was now
sleeping soundly under the influence of the soothing potion that
followed his operation. The man's calmness and iron nerve indicated that
he would make a rapid recovery. Another was the young Belgian soldier
picked up in the roadway near the firing line, who had been shot in the
back and had not yet recovered consciousness. Dr. Gys had removed
several bits of exploded shell and dressed the wound, shaking his head
discouragingly. But since the young man was still breathing, with a
fairly regular respiration, no attempt was made to restore him to his
senses.

The third seriously injured was a French sergeant whose body was
literally riddled with shrapnel. A brief examination had convinced Gys
that the case was hopeless.

"He may live until morning," was the doctor's report as he calmly looked
down upon the moaning sergeant, "but no longer. Meanwhile, we must
prevent his suffering."

This he accomplished by means of powerful drugs. The soldier soon lay in
a stupor, awaiting the end, and nothing more could be done for him.

Of the others, two Belgians with bandaged heads were playing a quiet
game of cart in a corner of the cabin, while another with a slight
wound in his leg was stretched upon a couch, reading a book. A young
French officer who had lost three fingers of his hand was cheerfully
conversing with a comrade whose scalp had been torn by a bullet and who
declared that in two days he would return to the front. The others Maud
found asleep in their berths or lying quietly to ease their pain. It was
remarkable, however, how little suffering was caused these men by flesh
wounds, once they were properly dressed and the patients made
comfortable with food and warmth and the assurance of proper care.

So it was that Maud found her duties not at all arduous this evening.
Indeed, the sympathy she felt for these brave men was so strong that it
wearied her more than the actual work of nursing them. A sip of water
here, a cold compress there, the administration of medicines to keep
down or prevent fever, little attentions of this character were all that
were required. Speaking French fluently, she was able to converse with
all those under her charge and all seemed eager to relate to their
beautiful nurse their experiences, hopes and griefs. Soon she realized
she was beginning to learn more of the true nature of war than she had
ever gleaned from the correspondents of the newspapers.

When dinner was served in the forward cabin Beth relieved Maud and after
the evening meal Dr. Gys made another inspection of his patients. All
seemed doing well except the young Belgian. The condition of the French
sergeant was still unchanged. Some of those with minor injuries were
ordered on deck for a breath of fresh air.

Patsy relieved Beth at midnight and Maud came on duty again at six
o'clock, having had several hours of refreshing sleep. She found Patsy
trembling with nervousness, for the sergeant had passed away an hour
previous and the horror of the event had quite upset the girl.

"Oh, it is all so unnecessary!" she wailed as she threw herself into
Maud's arms.

"We must steel ourselves to such things, dear," said Maud, soothing her,
"for they will be of frequent occurrence, I fear. And we must be
grateful and glad that we were able to relieve the poor man's anguish
and secure for him a peaceful end."

"I know," answered Patsy with a little sob, "but it's so dreadful. Oh,
what a cruel, hateful thing war is!"

From papers found on the sergeant Uncle John was able to notify his
relatives of his fate. His home was in a little village not fifty miles
away and during the day a brother arrived to take charge of the remains
and convey them to their last resting place.

The following morning Captain Carg was notified by the authorities to
withdraw the _Arabella_ to an anchorage farther out in the bay, and
thereafter it became necessary to use the two launches for intercourse
between the ship and the city. Continuous cannonading could be heard
from the direction of Nieuport, Dixmude and Ypres, and it was evident
that the battle had doubled in intensity at all points, owing to heavy
reinforcements being added to both sides. But, as Maurie had predicted,
the Allies were able to hold the foe at bay and keep them from advancing
a step farther.

Uncle John had not been at all satisfied with that first day's
experience at the front. He firmly believed it was unwise, to the verge
of rashness, to allow the girls to place themselves in so dangerous a
position. During a serious consultation with Jones, Kelsey, Captain
Carg and Dr. Gys, the men agreed upon a better plan of procedure.

"The three nurses have plenty to do in attending to the patients in our
hospital," said Gys, "and when the ship has its full quota of wounded
they will need assistance or they will break down under the strain. Our
young ladies are different from the professional nurses; they are so
keenly sensitive that they suffer from sympathy with every patient that
comes under their care."

"I do not favor their leaving the ship," remarked Dr. Kelsey, the mate.
"There seems to be plenty of field workers at the front, supplied by the
governments whose troops are fighting."

"Therefore," added Jones, "we men must assume the duty of driving the
ambulances and bringing back the wounded we are able to pick up. As
Maurie is too stiff from his wound to drive to-day, I shall undertake
the job myself. I know the way, now, and am confident I shall get along
nicely. Who will go with me?"

"I will, of course," replied Kelsey quietly.

"Doctor Gys will be needed on the ship," asserted Uncle John.

"Yes, it will be best to leave me here," said Gys. "I'm too great a
coward to go near the firing line again. It destroys my usefulness, and
Kelsey can administer first aid as well as I."

"In that case, I think I shall take the small ambulance to-day," decided
Ajo. "With Dr. Kelsey and one of the sailors we shall manage very well."

A launch took them ashore, where the ambulances stood upon the dock.
Maurie had admitted his inability to drive, but asked to be allowed to
go into the town. So he left the ship with the others and disappeared
for the day.

Ajo took the same route he had covered before, in the direction of
Nieuport, but could not get within five miles of the town, which was now
held by the Germans. From Furnes to the front the roads were packed with
reinforcements and wagon trains bearing ammunition and supplies, and
further progress with the ambulance was impossible.

However, a constant stream of wounded flowed to the rear, some with
first aid bandages covering their injuries, others as yet uncared for.
Kelsey chose those whom he considered most in need of surgical care or
skillful nursing, and by noon the ambulance was filled to overflowing.
It was Jones who advised taking none of the fatally injured, as the army
surgeons paid especial attention to these. The Americans could be of
most practical use, the boy considered, by taking in charge such as had
a chance to recover. So nine more patients were added to the ship's
colony on this occasion, all being delivered to the care of Dr. Gys
without accident or delay--a fact that rendered Ajo quite proud of his
skillful driving.

While the ambulance was away the girls quietly passed from berth to
berth, encouraging and caring for their wounded. It was surprising how
interested they became in the personality of these soldiers, for each
man was distinctive either in individuality or the character of his
injury, and most of them were eager to chat with their nurses and
anxious for news of the battle.

During the morning the young Belgian who had lain until now in a
stupor, recovered consciousness. He had moaned once or twice, drawing
Maud to his side, but hearing a different sound from him she approached
the berth where he lay, to find his eyes wide open. Gradually he turned
them upon his nurse, as if feeling her presence, and after a moment of
observation he sighed and then smiled wanly.

"Still on earth?" he said in French.

"I am so glad," she replied. "You have been in dreamland a long time."

He tried to move and it brought a moan to his lips.

"Don't stir," she counseled warningly; "you are badly wounded."

He was silent for a time, staring at the ceiling. She held some water to
his lips and he drank eagerly. Finally he said in a faint voice:

"I remember, now. I had turned to reload and it hit me in the back. A
bullet, mademoiselle?"

"Part of a shell."

"Ah, I understand.... I tried to get to the rear. The pain was terrible.
No one seemed to notice me. At last I fell, and--then I slept. I
thought it was the end."

She bathed his forehead, saying:

"You must not talk any more at present. Here comes the doctor to see
you."

Gys, busy in the cabin, had heard their voices and now came to look at
his most interesting patient. The soldier seemed about twenty years of
age; he was rather handsome, with expressive eyes and features bearing
the stamp of culture. Already they knew his name, by means of an
identification card found upon him, as well as a small packet of letters
carefully pinned in an inner pocket of his coat. These last were all
addressed in the same handwriting, which was undoubtedly feminine, to
Andrew Denton. The card stated that Andrew Denton, private, was formerly
an insurance agent at Antwerp.

Doctor Gys had rather impatiently awaited the young man's return to
consciousness that he might complete his examination. He now devoted the
next half hour to a careful diagnosis of Denton's injuries. By this time
the patient was suffering intense pain and a hypodermic injection of
morphine was required to relieve him. When at last he was quietly
drowsing the doctor called Maud aside to give her instructions.

"Watch him carefully," said he, "and don't let him suffer. Keep up the
morphine."

"There is no hope, then?" she asked.

"Not the slightest. He may linger for days--even weeks, if we sustain
his strength--but recovery is impossible. That bit of shell tore a
horrible hole in the poor fellow and all we can do is keep him
comfortable until the end. Without the morphine he would not live twelve
hours."

"Shall I let him talk?"

"If he wishes to. His lungs are not involved, so it can do him no harm."

But Andrew Denton did not care to talk any more that day. He wanted to
think, and lay quietly until Beth came on duty. To her he gave a smile
and a word of thanks and again lapsed into thoughtful silence.

When Ajo brought the new consignment of wounded to the ship the doctors
and nurses found themselves pretty busy for a time. With wounds to dress
and one or two slight operations to perform, the afternoon passed
swiftly away. The old patients must not be neglected, either, so Captain
Carg said he would sit with the German and look after him, as he was
able to converse with the patient in his own tongue.

The German was resting easily to-day but proved as glum and
uncommunicative as ever. That did not worry the captain, who gave the
man a cigarette and, when it was nonchalantly accepted, lighted his own
pipe. Together they sat in silence and smoked, the German occupying an
easy chair and resting his leg upon a stool, for he had refused to lie
in a berth. Through the open window the dull boom of artillery could
constantly be heard. After an hour or so:

"A long fight," remarked the captain in German.

The other merely looked at him, contemplatively. Carg stared for five
minutes at the bandaged foot. Finally:

"Hard luck," said he.

This time the German nodded, looking at the foot also.

"In America," resumed the captain, puffing slowly, "they make fine
artificial feet. Walk all right. Look natural."

"Vienna," said the German.

"Yes, I suppose so." Another pause.

"Name?" asked the German, with startling abruptness. But the other never
winked.

"Carg. I'm a sailor. Captain of this ship. Live in Sangoa, when ashore."

"Sangoa?"

"Island in South Seas."

The wounded man reached for another cigarette and lighted it.

"Carg," he repeated, musingly. "German?"

"Why, my folks were, I believe. I've relations in Germany, yet. Munich.
Visited them once, when a boy. Mother's name was Elbl. The Cargs lived
next door to the Elbls. But they've lost track of me, and I of them.
Nothing in common, you see."

The German finished his cigarette, looking at the captain at times
reflectively. Carg, feeling his biography had not been appreciated, had
lapsed into silence. At length the wounded man began feeling in his
breast pocket--an awkward operation because the least action disturbed
the swathed limb--and presently drew out a leather card case. With much
deliberation he abstracted a card and handed it to the captain, who put
on his spectacles and read:

     "Otto Elbl. 12th Uhlans"

"Oh," he said, looking up to examine the German anew. "Otto Elbl of
Munich?"

"Yes."

"H-m. Number 121 Friedrichstrasse?"

"Yes."

"I didn't see you when I visited your family. They said you were at
college. Your father was William Elbl, my mother's brother."

The German stretched out his hand and gripped the fist of the captain.

"Cousins," he said.

Carg nodded, meditating.

"To be sure," he presently returned; "cousins. Have another cigarette."




CHAPTER XI

PATSY IS DEFIANT


That evening the captain joined Dr. Gys on deck.

"That German, Lieutenant Elbl," he began.

"Oh, is that his name?" asked Gys.

"Yes. Will he get well?"

"Certainly. What is a foot, to a man like him? But his soldiering days
are past."

"Perhaps that's fortunate," returned the captain, ruminatively. "When I
was a boy, his father was burgomaster--mayor--in Munich. People said he
was well-to-do. The Germans are thrifty, so I suppose there's still
money in the Elbl family."

"Money will do much to help reconcile the man to the loss of his foot,"
declared the doctor.

"Will he suffer much pain, while it is getting well?"

"Not if I can help it. The fellow bears pain with wonderful fortitude.
When I was in Yucatan, and had to slash my face to get out the poisoned
darts of the cactus, I screamed till you could have heard me a mile. And
I had no anaesthetic to soothe me. Your lieutenant never whimpered or
cringed with his mangled foot and he refused morphine when I operated on
it. But I fooled him. I hate to see a brave man suffer. I stuck a needle
just above the wound when he wasn't looking, and I've doped his medicine
ever since."

"Thank you," said Carg; "he's my cousin."

In the small hours of the next morning, while Patsy was on duty in the
hospital section, the young Belgian became wakeful and restless. She
promptly administered a sedative and sat by his bedside. After a little
his pain was eased and he became quiet, but he lay there with wide open
eyes.

"Can I do anything more for you?" she asked.

"If you would be so kind," replied Andrew Denton.

"Well?"

"Please read to me some letters you will find in my pocket. I cannot
read them myself, and--they will comfort me."

Patsy found the packet of letters.

"The top one first," he said eagerly. "Read them all!"

She opened the letter reluctantly. It was addressed in a dainty, female
hand and the girl had the uncomfortable feeling that she was about to
pry into personal relations of a delicate character.

"Your sweetheart?" she asked gently.

"Yes, indeed; my sweetheart and my wife."

"Oh, I see. And have you been married long?" He seemed a mere boy.

"Five months, but for the last two I have not seen her."

The letters were dated at Charleroi and each one began: "My darling
husband." Patsy read the packet through, from first to last, her eyes
filling with tears at times as she noted the rare devotion and
passionate longing of the poor young wife and realized that the boyish
husband was even now dying, a martyr to his country's cause. The
letters were signed "Elizabeth." In one was a small photograph of a
sweet, dark-eyed girl whom she instantly knew to be the bereaved wife.

"And does she still live at Charleroi?" Patsy asked.

"I hope so, mademoiselle; with her mother. The Germans now occupy the
town, but you will notice the last letter states that all citizens are
treated courteously and with much consideration, so I do not fear for
her."

The reading of the letters, in conjunction with the opiate, seemed to
comfort him, for presently he fell asleep. With a heavy heart the girl
left him to attend to her other patients and at three o'clock Ajo came
in and joined her, to relieve the tedium of the next three hours. The
boy knew nothing of nursing, but he could help Patsy administer potions
and change compresses and his presence was a distinct relief to her.

The girl was supposed to sleep from six o'clock--at which time she was
relieved from duty--until one in the afternoon, but the next morning at
eight she walked into the forward salon, where her friends were at
breakfast, and sat down beside Uncle John.

"I could not sleep," said she, "because I am so worried over Andrew
Denton."

"That is foolish, my dear," answered Mr. Merrick, affectionately patting
the hand she laid in his. "The doctor says poor Denton cannot recover.
If you're going to take to heart all the sad incidents we encounter on
this hospital ship, it will not only ruin your usefulness but destroy
your happiness."

"Exactly so," agreed Gys, coming into the salon in time to overhear this
remark. "A nurse should be sympathetic, but impersonally so."

"Denton has been married but five months," said Patsy. "I have seen his
wife's picture--she's a dear little girl!--and her letters to him are
full of love and longing. She doesn't know, of course, of his--his
accident--or that he--he--" Her voice broke with a sob she could not
repress.

"M-m," purred Uncle John; "where does she live, this young wife?"

"At Charleroi."

"Well; the Germans are there."

"Yes, Uncle. But don't you suppose they would let her come to see her
dying husband?"

"A young girl, unprotected? Would it be--safe?"

"The Germans," remarked Captain Carg from his end of the table, "are
very decent people."

"Ahem!" said Uncle John.

"Some of them, I've no doubt, are quite respectable," observed Ajo; "but
from all reports the rank and file, in war time, are--rather unpleasant
to meet."

"Precisely," agreed Uncle John. "I think, Patsy dear, it will be best to
leave this Belgian girl in ignorance of her husband's fate."

"I, myself, have a wife," quoth little Maurie, with smug assurance, "but
she is not worrying about me, wherever she may be; nor do I feel
especial anxiety for Clarette. A woman takes what comes--especially if
she is obliged to."

Patsy regarded him indignantly.

"There are many kinds of women," she began.

"Thank heaven!" exclaimed Maurie, and then she realized how futile it
was to argue with him.

A little later she walked on deck with Uncle John and pleaded her cause
earnestly. It was said by those who knew him well that the kindly little
gentleman was never able to refuse Patsy anything for long, and he was
himself so well aware of this weakness that he made a supreme effort to
resist her on this occasion.

"You and I," said she, "would have no trouble in passing the German
lines. We are strictly neutral, you know, we Americans, and our
passports and the Red Cross will take us anywhere in safety."

"It won't do, my dear," he replied. "You've already been in danger
enough for one war. I shudder even now as I think of those bullets and
shells at Nieuport."

"But we can pass through at some place where they are not fighting."

"Show me such a place!"

"And distances are very small in this part of the Continent. We could
get to Charleroi in a day, and return the next day with Mrs. Denton."

"Impossible."

"The doctor says he may live for several days, but it may be only for
hours. If you could see his face light up when he speaks of her, you
would realize what a comfort her presence would be to him."

"I understand that, Patsy. But can't you see, my dear, that we're not
able to do everything for those poor wounded soldiers? You have twenty
in your charge now, and by to-night there may be possibly a dozen more.
Many of them have wives at home, but--"

"But all are not dying, Uncle--and after only five months of married
life, three of which they passed together. Here, at least, is one brave
heart we may comfort, one poor woman who will be ever grateful for our
generous kindness."

Mr. Merrick coughed. He wiped his eyes and blew his nose on his pink
bordered handkerchief. But he made no promise.

Patsy left him and went to Ajo.

"See here," she said; "I'm going to Charleroi in an hour."

"It's a day's journey, Patsy."

"I mean I'm going to start in an hour. Will you go with me?"

"What does Uncle John say?" he inquired cautiously.

"I don't care what he says. I'm going!" she persisted, her eyes blazing
with determination.

The boy whistled softly, studying her face. Then he walked across the
deck to Mr. Merrick.

"Patsy is rampant, sir," said he. "She won't be denied. Go and argue
with her, please."

"I _have_ argued," returned Uncle John weakly.

"Well, argue again."

The little man cast a half frightened, half reproachful glance at his
niece.

"Let's go and consult the doctor," he exclaimed, and together Uncle John
and Ajo went below.

To their surprise, Gys supported Patsy's plea.

"He's a fine fellow, this Denton," said he, "and rather above the
average soldier. Moreover, his case is a pitiful one. I'll agree to keep
him alive until his wife comes."

Uncle John looked appealingly at Ajo.

"How on earth can we manage to cross the lines?" he asked.

"Take one of our launches," said the boy.

"Skim the coast to Ostend, and you'll avoid danger altogether."

"That's the idea!" exclaimed the doctor approvingly. "Why, it's the
easiest thing in the world, sir."

Uncle John began to feel slightly reassured.

"Who will run the launch?" he inquired.

"I'll give you the captain and one of the men," said the boy. "Carg's an
old traveler and knows more than he appears to. Besides, he speaks
German. We can't spare very many, you understand, and the ambulances
will keep Maurie and me pretty busy. Patsy will be missed, too, from the
hospital ward, so you must hurry back."

"Two days ought to accomplish our object," said Uncle John.

"Easily," agreed Gys. "I've arranged for a couple of girls from the town
to come and help us to-day, for I must save the strength of my expert
nurses as much as possible, and I'll keep them with us until you return.
The French girls are not experienced in nursing, but I'll take Miss
Patsy's watch myself, so we shall get along all right."

Mr. Merrick and Jones returned to the deck.

"Well?" demanded Patsy.

"Get ready," said Uncle John; "we leave in an hour."

"For Charleroi?"

"Of course; unless you've changed your mind."

Patsy flew to her stateroom.




CHAPTER XII

THE OTHER SIDE


The launch in which they embarked bore the Red Cross on its sides, and
an American flag floated from the bow and a Red Cross flag from the
stern. Its four occupants wore the Red Cross uniforms. Yet three miles
out of Dunkirk a shot came singing across their prow and they were
obliged to lay to until a British man-of-war could lower a boat to
investigate their errand. The coast is very shallow in this section,
which permits boats of only the lightest draught to navigate in-shore,
but the launch was able to skim over the surface at twelve miles an
hour.

"This is pleasant!" grumbled Uncle John, as they awaited the approach of
the warship's boat. "Our very appearance ought to insure us safe
conduct, but I suppose that in these times every craft is regarded with
suspicion."

The boat came alongside.

"Where are you going?" demanded an officer, gruffly.

"To Ostend."

"On what business?"

"Our own," replied Mr. Merrick.

"Be respectful, sir, or I'll arrest your entire outfit," warned the
officer.

"You'll do nothing of the sort," declared Mr. Merrick. "You'll examine
our papers, apologize for your interference and row back to your ship.
We have the authority of the Red Cross to go wherever our duty calls us,
and moreover we're American citizens. Permit me to add that we're in a
hurry."

The officer turned first white and then red, but he appreciated the
force of the argument.

"Your papers!" he commanded.

Uncle John produced them and waited patiently for their inspection,
which was very deliberate. Finally the officer returned them and gave
the order to his men to row back to the ship.

"One moment!" called Uncle John. "You haven't made the apology."

There was no answer. The boat moved swiftly away and at a gesture from
Captain Carg the sailor started the launch again.

"I wonder why it is," mused Mr. Merrick, "that there is always this
raspy feeling when the English meet Americans. On the surface we're
friendly enough and our governments always express in diplomatic
relations the most cordial good will; but I've always noticed in the
English individual an undercurrent of antipathy for Americans that
cannot be disguised. As a race the English hate us, I'm positive, and I
wonder why?"

"I believe you're wrong, Uncle," remarked Patsy. "A few of the British
may individually dislike us, but I'm sure the two nations are not
antagonistic. Why should they be?"

"Yorktown," muttered the captain.

"I don't believe it," declared the girl. "They're too good sportsmen to
bear grudges."

"All the same," persisted Uncle John, "the English have never favored us
as the French have, or even the Russians."

From Dunkirk to Ostend, by the coast line, is only some twenty-five
miles, yet although they started at a little after eleven o'clock it was
three in the afternoon before they finally landed at the Belgian
seaport. Interruptions were numerous, and although they were treated
courteously, in the main, it was only after rigid questioning and a
thorough examination that they were permitted to proceed. A full hour
was consumed at the harbor at Ostend before they could even land.

As they stepped upon the wharf a group of German soldiers met them and
now Captain Carg became the spokesman of the party. The young officer in
command removed his helmet to bow deferentially to Patsy and then turned
to ask their business at Ostend.

"He says we must go before the military governor," said Carg,
translating. "There, if our papers are regular, permits will be issued
for us to proceed to Charleroi."

They left the sailor in charge of the launch, which was well provisioned
and contained a convertible bunk, and followed the officer into the
town. Ostend is a large city, fortified, and was formerly one of the
most important ports on the North Sea, as well as a summer resort of
prominence. The city now being occupied by the Germans, our friends
found few citizens on the streets of Ostend and these hurried nervously
on their way. The streets swarmed with German soldiery.

Arriving at headquarters they found that the commandant was too busy to
attend to the Red Cross Americans. He ordered them taken before Colonel
Grau for examination.

"But why examine us at all?" protested Mr. Merrick. "Doesn't our sacred
mission protect us from such annoying details?"

The young officer regretted that it did not. They would find Colonel
Grau in one of the upper rooms. It would be a formal examination, of
course, and brief. But busy spies had even assumed the insignia of the
Red Cross to mask their nefarious work and an examination was therefore
necessary as a protective measure. So they ascended a broad staircase
and proceeded along a corridor to the colonel's office.

Grau was at the head of the detective service at Ostend and invested
with the task of ferreting out the numerous spies in the service of the
Allies and dealing with them in a summary manner. He was a very stout
man, and not very tall. His eyes were light blue and his grizzled
mustache was a poor imitation of that affected by the Kaiser. When Grau
looked up, on their entrance, Patsy decided that their appearance had
startled him, but presently she realized that the odd expression was
permanent.

In a chair beside the colonel's desk sat, or rather lounged, another
officer, encased in a uniform so brilliant that it arrested the eye
before one could discover its contents. These were a wizened,
weather-beaten man of advanced age, yet rugged as hickory. His eyes had
a periodical squint; his brows wore a persistent frown. There was a
broad scar on his left cheek and another across his forehead. A warrior
who had seen service, probably, but whose surly physiognomy was somewhat
disconcerting.

The two officers had been in earnest conversation, but when Mr.
Merrick's party was ushered in, the elder man leaned back in his chair,
squinting and scowling, and regarded them silently.

"Huh!" exclaimed the colonel, in a brusque growl. "What is it, von
Holtz?"

The young officer explained that the party had just arrived from Dunkirk
in a launch; the commandant had asked Colonel Grau kindly to examine
them. Uncle John proceeded to state the case, Captain Carg interpreting.
They operated a Red Cross hospital ship at Dunkirk, and one of their
patients, a young Belgian, was dying of his wounds. They had come to
find his young wife and take her back with them to Dunkirk in their
launch, that she might comfort the last moments of her husband. The
Americans asked for safe conduct to Charleroi, and permission to take
Mrs. Denton with them to Dunkirk. Then he presented his papers,
including the authority of the American Red Cross Society, the letter
from the secretary of state and the recommendation of the German
ambassador at Washington.

The colonel looked them all over. He uttered little guttural
exclamations and tapped the desk with his finger-tips as he read, and
all the time his face wore that perplexing expression of surprise.
Finally he asked:

"Which is Mr. Merrick?"

Hearing his name, Uncle John bowed.

"Huh! But the description does not fit you."

Captain Carg translated this.

"Why not?" demanded Uncle John.

"It says you are short, stout, blue-eyed, bald, forty-five years of
age."

"Of course."

"You are not short; I think you are as tall as I am. Your eyes are not
blue; they are olive green. You are not bald, for there is still hair
over your ears. Huh! How do you explain that?"

"It's nonsense," said Uncle John scornfully.

Carg was more cautious in interpreting the remark. He assured the
colonel, in German, that the description of Mr. Merrick was considered
close enough for all practical purposes. But Grau was not satisfied. He
went over the papers again and then turned to face the other officer.

"What do you think, General?" he asked, hesitatingly.

"Suspicious!" was the reply.

"I think so, myself," said the colonel. "Mark you: Here's a man who
claims to come from Sangoa, a place no one has ever heard of; and the
other has endorsements purporting to come from the highest officials in
America. Huh! what does it mean?"

"Papers may be forged, or stolen from their proper owners," suggested
the squinting general. "This excuse of coming here to get the wife of a
hurt Belgian seems absurd. If they are really Red Cross workers, they
are not attending to their proper business."

When the captain interpreted this speech Patsy said angrily:

"The general is an old fool."

"An idiot, I'll call him," added Uncle John. "I wish I could tell him
so."

"You _have_ told him," said the general in good English, squinting now
more rapidly than ever, "and your manner of speech proves you to be
impostors. I have never known a respectable Red Cross nurse, of any
country, who called a distinguished officer a fool--and to his face."

"I didn't know you understood English," she said.

"That is no excuse!"

"But I _did_ know," she added, "that I had judged you correctly. No one
with a spark of intelligence could doubt the evidence of these papers."

"The papers are all right. Where did you get them?"

"From the proper authorities."

He turned to speak rapidly in German to Colonel Grau, who had been
uneasy during the conversation in English, because he failed to
understand it. His expression of piquant surprise was intensified as he
now turned to the Americans.

"You may as well confess your imposture," said he. "It will make your
punishment lighter. However, if on further examination you prove to be
spies, your fate is beyond my power to mitigate."

"See here," said Uncle John, when this was translated to him, "if you
dare to interfere with us, or cause us annoyance, I shall insist on your
being courtmartialed. You are responsible to your superiors, I suppose,
and they dare not tolerate an insult to the Red Cross, nor to an
American citizen. You may have the sense to consider that if these
papers and letters are genuine, as I declare they are, I have friends
powerful enough to bring this matter before the Kaiser himself, in which
case someone will suffer a penalty, even if he is a general or a
colonel."

As he spoke he glared defiantly at the older officer, who calmly
proceeded to translate the speech to the colonel. Carg reported that it
was translated verbatim. Then the general sat back and squinted at his
companion, who seemed fairly bewildered by the threat. Patsy caught the
young officer smothering a smile, but neither of them interrupted the
silence that followed.

Once again the colonel picked up the papers and gave them a rigid
examination, especially that of the German ambassador, which was written
in his own language. "I cannot understand," he muttered, "how one
insignificant American citizen could secure such powerful endorsements.
It has never happened before in my experience."

"It is extraordinary," said the general.

"Mr. Merrick," said Patsy to him, "is a very important man in America.
He is so important that any indignity to him will be promptly resented."

"I will investigate your case further," decided Colonel Grau, after
another sotto voce conference with the general. "Spies are getting to be
very clever, these days, and we cannot take chances. However, I assure
you there is no disposition to worry you and until your standing is
determined you will be treated with every consideration."

"Do you mean that we are prisoners?" asked Uncle John, trying to control
his indignation.

"No, indeed. You will be detained, of course, but you are not
prisoners--as yet. I will keep your papers and submit them to the
general staff. It will be for that august body to decide."

Uncle John protested vigorously; Patsy faced the old general and told
him this action was an outrage that would be condemned by the entire
civilized world; Captain Carg gravely assured both officers that they
were making a serious mistake. But nothing could move the stolid
Germans. The general, indeed, smiled grimly and told them in English
that he was in no way responsible, whatever happened. This was Colonel
Grau's affair, but he believed, nevertheless, that the colonel was
acting wisely.

The young officer, who had stood like a statue during the entire
interview, was ordered to accompany the Americans to a hotel, where they
must be kept under surveillance but might follow, to an extent, their
own devices. They were not to mail letters nor send telegrams.

The officer asked who should guard the suspects.

"Why not yourself, Lieutenant? You are on detached duty, I believe?"

"At the port, Colonel."

"There are too many officers at the port; it is a sinecure. I will
appoint you to guard the Americans. You speak their language, I
believe?"

The young man bowed.

"Very well; I shall hold you responsible for their safety."

They were then dismissed and compelled to follow their guard from the
room.

Patsy was now wild with rage and Uncle John speechless. Even Carg was
evidently uneasy.

"Do not mind," said the young lieutenant consolingly. "It is merely a
temporary inconvenience, you know, for your release will come very soon.
And since you are placed in my care I beg you to accept this delay with
good grace and be happy as possible. Ostend is full of life and I am
conducting you to an excellent hotel."




CHAPTER XIII

TARDY JUSTICE


The courtesy of Lieutenant von Holtz was beyond criticism. He obtained
for his charges a comfortable suite of rooms in an overcrowded hotel,
obliging the landlord to turn away other guests that Mr. Merrick's party
might be accommodated. The dinner that was served in their cosy sitting
room proved excellent, having been ordered by von Holtz after he had
requested that privilege. When the young officer appeared to see that it
was properly served, Patsy invited him to join them at the table and he
laughingly consented.

"You are one of our party, by force of circumstances," said the girl,
"and since we've found you good-natured and polite, and believe you are
not to blame for our troubles, we may as well be friendly while we are
together."

The young man was evidently well pleased.

"However evil your fortune may be," said he, "I cannot fail to be
impressed by my own good luck. Perhaps you may guess what a relief this
pleasant commission is to one who for days has been compelled to patrol
those vile smelling docks, watching for spies and enduring all sorts of
weather."

"To think," said Uncle John gloomily, "that _we_ are accused of being
spies!"

"It is not for me," returned von Holtz, "to criticize the acts of my
superiors. I may say, however, that were it my province to decide the
question, you would now be free. Colonel Grau has an excellent record
for efficiency and seldom makes a mistake, but I suspect his judgment
was influenced by the general, whose son was once jilted by an American
girl."

"We're going to get even with them both, before this affair is ended,"
declared Patsy, vindictively; "but although you are our actual jailer I
promise that you will escape our vengeance."

"My instructions are quite elastic, as you heard," said the lieutenant.
"I am merely ordered to keep you in Ostend, under my eye, until your
case has been passed upon by the commandant or the general staff. Since
you have money, you may enjoy every luxury save that of travel, and I
ask you to command my services in all ways consistent with my duty."

"What worries me," said Patsy to Uncle John, "is the delay. If we are
kept here for long, poor Denton will die before we can find his wife and
take her to him."

"How long are we liable to be detained?" Uncle John asked the officer.

"I cannot say. Perhaps the council of the general staff will meet
to-morrow morning; perhaps not for several days," was the indefinite
reply.

Patsy wiped away the tears that began to well into her eyes. She had so
fondly set her heart on reuniting the Dentons that her disappointment
was very great.

Von Holtz noticed the girl's mood and became thoughtful. Captain Carg
had remained glum and solemn ever since they had left the colonel's
office. Uncle John sat in silent indignation, wondering what could be
done to influence these stupid Germans. Presently the lieutenant
remarked:

"That sailor whom you left with the launch seemed an intelligent
fellow."

Patsy gave a start; Uncle John looked at the young man expectantly; the
captain nodded his head as he slowly replied:

"Henderson is one of the picked men I brought from Sangoa. He is both
intelligent and loyal."

"Curiously enough," said von Holtz, "I neglected to place the man under
arrest. I even forgot to report him. He is free."

"Ah!" exclaimed Patsy, her eyes lighting.

"I know a civilian here--a bright young Belgian--who is my friend and
will do anything I ask of him," resumed von Holtz, still musingly. "I
had the good fortune to protect his mother when our troops entered the
city, and he is grateful."

Patsy was thinking very fast now.

"Could Henderson get to Charleroi, do you imagine?" she asked. "He has a
passport."

"We do not consider passports of much value," said the officer; "but a
Red Cross appointment--"

"Oh, he has that, too; all our men carry them."

"In that case, with my friend Rondel to guide him, I believe Henderson
could accomplish your errand."

"Let us send for him at once!" exclaimed Uncle John.

Carg scribbled on a card.

"He wouldn't leave the launch without orders, unless forced by the
Germans," asserted the captain, and handed the card to von Holtz.

The young lieutenant took his cap, bowed profoundly and left the room.
In ten minutes he returned, saying: "I am not so fortunate as I had
thought. All our troops are on the move, headed for the Yser. There will
be fighting, presently, and--I must remain here," he added despondently.

"It won't be your last chance, I'm sure," said Patsy. "Will that
dreadful Colonel Grau go, too?"

"No; he is to remain. But all regiments quartered here are now marching
out and to-morrow a fresh brigade will enter Ostend."

They were silent a time, until someone rapped upon the door. Von Holtz
admitted a slim, good-looking young Belgian who grasped his hand and
said eagerly in French:

"You sent for me?"

"Yes. You may speak English here, Monsieur Rondel." Then he presented
his friend to the Americans, who approved him on sight.

Henderson came a few minutes later and listened respectfully to the plan
Miss Doyle unfolded. He was to go with Monsieur Rondel to Charleroi,
find Mrs. Denton, explain that her husband was very ill, and bring her
back with him to Ostend. He would report promptly on his return and they
would tell him what to do next.

The man accepted the mission without a word of protest. Charleroi was in
central Belgium, but that did not mean many miles away and Rondel
assured him they would meet with no difficulties. The trains were
reserved for soldiers, but the Belgian had an automobile and a German
permit to drive it. The roads were excellent.

"Now, remember," said Patsy, "the lady you are going for is Mrs. Albert
Denton. She lives with her mother, or did, the last we heard of her."

"And her mother's name and address?" inquired Henderson.

"We are ignorant of either," she confessed; "but it's not a very big
town and I'm sure you'll easily find her."

"I know the place well," said Rondel, "and I have friends residing there
who will give me information."

Uncle John supplied them liberally with money, impressed upon them the
necessity of haste, and sent them away. Rondel declared the night time
was best for the trip and promised to be on the way within the hour, and
in Charleroi by next morning.

Notwithstanding the fact that they had succeeded in promoting by proxy
the mission which had brought them to Belgium, the Americans found the
next day an exceedingly irksome one. In the company of Lieutenant von
Holtz they were permitted to walk about the city, but they found little
pleasure in that, owing to the bustle of outgoing troops and the arrival
of others to replace them. Nor did they care to stray far from their
quarters, for fear the council would meet and they might be sent for.

However, no sign from Colonel Grau was received that day. Patsy went to
bed with a nervous headache and left Uncle John and the captain to smoke
more than was good for them. Both the men had now come to regard their
situation as serious and as the American consul was at this time absent
in Brussels they could think of no way to secure their freedom. No one
knew when the consul would return; Mr. Merrick had been refused the
privilege of using the telegraph or mails. During one of their strolls
they had met the correspondent of an American newspaper, but when the
man learned they were suspects he got away from them as soon as
possible. He did not know Mr. Merrick and his own liberty was too
precarious for him to argue with Colonel Grau.

"I'm beginning to think," said Uncle John, "that we're up against a hard
proposition. Letters and endorsements from prominent Americans seem to
have no weight with these Germans. I'd no idea our identity could ever
be disputed."

"We must admit, sir," returned the captain, reflectively, "that the spy
system in this war is something remarkable. Spies are everywhere; clever
ones, too, who adopt every sort of subterfuge to escape detection. I do
not blame Grau so much for caution as for lack of judgment."

"He's a blockhead!" cried Mr. Merrick testily.

"He is. I'm astonished they should place so much power in the hands of
one so slow witted."

"He has insulted us," continued Uncle John. "He has dared to arrest
three free-born Americans."

"Who came into a troubled country, occupied by a conquering army,
without being invited."

"Well--that's true," sighed the little millionaire, "but what are we
going to do about it?"

"Wait," counseled the captain.

The next day dawned dark and rainy and the weather had a depressing
effect upon the prisoners. It was too damp to stir out of doors and the
confinement of the hotel rooms became especially irksome. Not only were
they anxious about their own fate but it was far past the time when they
should have heard from Henderson and Rondel. Patsy's nerves were getting
beyond her control; Uncle John stumped around with his hands thrust deep
in his pockets and a frown wrinkling his forehead; the captain smoked
innumerable pipes of tobacco and said not a word. Von Holtz, noting the
uneasiness of his charges, discreetly forbore conversation and retired
to a far corner where he hid behind a book.

It was nearing evening when a commotion was heard on the stairs,
followed by the heavy tramp of feet in the corridor. A sharp rap sounded
on the door of their sitting room. Uncle John stepped forward to open
it, when in stalked a group of German officers, their swords and spurs
clanking and their cloaks glistening with rain-drops. At sight of the
young girl off came cap and helmet and with one accord they bowed low.

The leader was a tall, thin man with a leathern face, hooked nose and
piercing gray eyes. His breast glittered with orders. It was von
Kargenbrut, the military governor.

"Pardon our intrusion," he said in English, his harsh voice having a
guttural accent. "Which gentleman is Mr. John Merrick?"

"I am John Merrick."

The eagle eyes swept over him with a swift glance.

"We owe you our apology," continued the governor, speaking as fiercely
as if he were ordering Uncle John beheaded. "I have been too busy to
take up your case before to-day, when I discover that we have treated
you discourteously. You will consider our fault due to these troubled
times, when mistakes occur in spite of our watchfulness. Is it not so?"

"Your error has caused us great inconvenience," responded Mr. Merrick
stiffly.

The governor whirled around. "Colonel Grau!" he called, and from the
rear of the group the colonel stepped forward. His face still wore the
expression of comical surprise. "Return to Mr. Merrick his papers and
credentials."

The colonel drew the packet of papers from his breast pocket and handed
it to Uncle John. Then he glanced hesitatingly at his superior, who
glared at him.

"He cannot speak the English," said the governor to Mr. Merrick, "but he
owes you reparation."

"Grau's stupidity has been very annoying, to say the least," was the
ungracious reply. "We came here on important business, and presented our
papers--all in proper order--on demand. We had the right to expect
decent treatment, as respectable American citizens engaged in
humanitarian work; yet this--this--man," pointing an accusing finger at
the colonel, "ordered us detained--arrested!--and kept our papers."

The governor listened coldly and at the end of the speech inclined his
head.

"Colonel Grau," said he, "has been relieved of his duties here and
transferred to another station. To you I have personally apologized. You
will find my endorsement on your papers and, in addition, an order that
will grant you safe conduct wherever you may wish to go. If that is not
enough, make your demands and I will consider them."

"Why, that is all I can expect, your Excellency, under the
circumstances," replied Mr. Merrick. "I suppose I ought to thank you for
your present act of justice."

"No; it is your due. Good evening, Mr. Merrick."

He swung around on his heel and every officer of the group turned with
him, like so many automatons, all facing the door. But Mr. Merrick
touched the governor upon the arm.

"One moment, your Excellency. This young officer, Lieutenant von Holtz,
has treated us kindly and courteously. I want you to know that one of
your men, at least, has performed his duty in a way to merit our
thanks--and yours."

The governor scowled at Lieutenant von Holtz, who stood like a statue,
with lowered eyes.

"Lieutenant, you are commissioned to guide Mr. Merrick as long as he
remains within our lines. You will guard his safety and that of his
party. When he departs, come to me personally with your report."

The young officer bowed; the governor tramped to the door and went out,
followed by his staff. Grau left the room last, with hang-dog look, and
Patsy slammed the door in the hope of bumping his wooden head.

"So we're free?" she said, turning to von Holtz.

"Not only that, Fraulein, but you are highly favored," he replied. "All
German territory is now open to you."

"It's about time they came to their senses," remarked Uncle John, with a
return to his accustomed cheerfulness.

"And, best of all," said Patsy exultantly, "they've fired that awful
colonel!"

The captain thoughtfully filled and lighted his pipe.

"I wonder," said he, "how that happened. Was it the council, do you
think, Lieutenant?"

Von Holtz shook his head.

"I think it was the governor," he replied. "He is a just man, and had
you been able to see him personally on your arrival you would have been
spared any annoyance."

"Perhaps," said Patsy doubtfully. "But your governor's a regular bear."

"I believe that is merely his way," asserted Uncle John. "I didn't mind
the man's tone when I found his words and deeds were all right. But
he--"

Another rap at the door. Patsy opened it and admitted Henderson. He
saluted the captain, bowed to the others and said:

"We've got her, sir."

"Mrs. Denton?" cried Patsy, delightedly.

Henderson nodded.

"Yes, Miss Doyle; Mrs. Denton and the children."

"The children! Why, there aren't any."

"I beg your pardon, Miss; there are two."

"Two children!" she exclaimed in dismay. "There must be some mistake.
The young people have only been married five months."

Henderson stood stiff as a poker, refusing to argue the point.

"A governess, maybe," suggested the captain.

"More likely," said Uncle John, "young Denton married a widow,
with--eh--eh--incumbrances."

"That's it, sir," said Henderson earnestly.

"What's it?"

"The incumbrances, sir. No other word could describe 'em."

Patsy's heart sank; she was greatly disappointed.

"And she so young and pretty!" she murmured.

Henderson started to smile, but quickly suppressed it.

"Shall I show them up, Miss?" he inquired.

"Of course," answered Uncle John, as the girl hesitated. "You should
have brought her to us at once. Where is that Belgian--Rondel?"

"He is guarding the woman, sir."

"Guarding her!"

"She's a little difficult to manage, sir, at times. She left Charleroi
willingly enough, but she's tricky, and it is our duty to deliver her to
you safely."

"Get her at once, Henderson," exclaimed Patsy, recovering her wits; "and
the dear children, too."

Presently there was a sound of shuffling on the stairs and through the
corridor. The door opened to admit the arrivals from Charleroi.

Henderson first pushed in a big woman dressed in a faded blue-checked
gown, belted around the waist in a manner that made her look like a sack
tied in the middle. Her head was bare, her hair awry, her face sullen
and hard; she was undeniably "fleshy" and not altogether clean. She
resisted Henderson at every step and glared around her with shrewd and
shifting eyes.

Following her came Monsieur Rondel leading a boy and a girl, the latter
being a small replica of the woman. The boy was viciously struggling to
bite the hand of the Belgian, who held him fast.

"Ah, well," said Rondel, first sighing and then turning with a smile to
face the lieutenant, "we have performed our mission. But heaven guard us
from another like it!"

Patsy stared hard at the woman.

"This cannot be Mrs. Denton," she gasped, bewildered.

"Indeed?" answered Rondel in English. "She declares that is her name.
Question her in French or Flemish, Miss Doyle."

Patsy addressed the woman in French but could elicit no reply. She stood
impassive and silent.

"How did you make the mistake?" asked the girl, looking reproachfully
first at Henderson and then at Rondel, both of whom were evidently
astonished to find themselves at fault. "I have seen a photograph of
Mrs. Andrew Denton, taken recently, and she is young and pretty
and--and--rather small."

Monsieur Rondel cleared his throat to answer:

"It happened in this way, mademoiselle: We searched one whole day in
Charleroi for Mrs. Denton but could not find her. My friends, on whom I
had relied for assistance, had unfortunately moved away or joined the
army. The townspeople were suspicious of Monsieur Henderson, who is a
foreigner. We could get no information whatever. I appealed to the
burgomaster and he said he would try to find Mrs. Denton for us the
next day. In the morning came to us this woman, who said she was the
person we sought. If we promised her safe conduct to Dunkirk, she would
go with us. She had wanted to go to Dunkirk for some weeks, but the
Germans would not let her pass the lines. We suspected nothing wrong,
for she admitted she was aware that her husband is in Dunkirk, and she
wanted to get to him. So we brought her to you."

Patsy faced the woman resolutely and said in French:

"Why did you wish to get to Dunkirk?"

"He has said it. To find my husband," replied the woman in a surly tone.

"What is your name?"

No reply.

"Answer me!"

The woman eyed her obstinately and remained silent.

"Very well. Release those children, Monsieur Rondel. Madam, you have
imposed upon us; you have tricked us in order to get to Ostend at our
expense. Now go, and take your children with you."

She pointed dramatically at the door, but the woman retained her
position, only moving to cuff the boy, who was kicking Henderson on his
shins. Then, setting her hands on her hips she said defiantly:

"They promised me passage to Dunkirk, and they must take me there."

"Who promised you?"

"Those men," pointing to them, "and the burgomaster."

"Yes," admitted Henderson, "we agreed with the burgomaster to take her
out of the country. We signed a paper to that effect."

"But she is a Belgian. And she is not the person she claimed to be."

To this neither Rondel nor Henderson had an answer.

"See here," said Uncle John, "I'll untangle this matter in a jiffy. Here
is money; give it to the woman and tell her to get out--or we'll eject
her by force."

The woman grabbed the money eagerly, but after placing it in an ample
pocket she said: "I will go no place but Dunkirk. I will not leave you
until you take me there."

But here the lieutenant interfered. He suddenly faced the woman, who had
not noticed his presence before, and she shrank back in fear at sight of
his uniform. The boy and girl both began to cry.

"I know you," said von Holtz sternly. "You are the wife of a spy who has
been condemned to death by both the Belgians and the Germans, since he
betrayed them both. The last time you came to Ostend to annoy us you
were driven out of the city. There is still an edict against you. Will
you leave this room peaceably, or shall I order you under arrest?"

"Dog of a German!" she hissed, "the day is coming when I will help to
drive you out of Belgium, even as you now drive me. Brave soldiers are
you, to make war on women and children. Guh! I would kill you where you
stand--if I dared." With venomous hate she spat upon the floor, then
seized her wailing children, shook them and waddled out of the room.

There was a general sigh of relief.

"You may return to the launch, Henderson," said the captain.

"Monsieur Rondel," said Uncle John, grasping the young Belgian's hand,
"we are grateful to you for your kindness. The failure of your mission
was not your fault. We thank you. The governor has given us our liberty
and permission to travel where we please, so to-morrow we will go to
Charleroi ourselves to search for Mrs. Denton."

"My motor car is at your disposal, sir, and my services."

"To-morrow? Oh, let us go to-night, Uncle!" cried Patsy.

Mr. Merrick looked inquiringly at the Belgian.

"I am ready now," said Rondel with a bow.

"Then," said Patsy, "we will start in half an hour. You see, we have
wasted two whole days--two precious days! I hope Dr. Gys will keep his
promise, and that we shall find poor Denton alive on our return."




CHAPTER XIV

FOUND AT LAST


The pretty city of Charleroi had suffered little damage from the German
invasion, yet many of the townspeople had gone away since the occupation
and those who remained kept well within their houses or huddled in
anxious groups upon the streets. The civic affairs were still
administered by the Belgian burgomaster, but the martial law of the
Germans prevailed over all.

When Patsy Doyle, escorted by Uncle John and accompanied by Captain
Carg, Lieutenant von Holtz and Monsieur Rondel, arrived in the early
morning, the streets were comparatively deserted. The Hotel Royal
received them hospitably and the landlord and his daughters prepared
them an excellent breakfast.

While eating, Patsy chatted with the Belgian girls, who were neat,
modest and intelligent. She found that Henderson and Rondel had not
stopped at this hotel while in Charleroi, but at a smaller inn at the
other end of the town. The girls remembered hearing of their visit and
of their inquiries for a Mrs. Denton, but did not know whether they had
succeeded in their quest or not.

"We have lived here all our lives," said the eldest of the landlord's
three daughters, "but we have not known, during that time, any family of
Dentons in Charleroi."

Patsy reflected.

"They were married only five months ago, these Dentons," said she, "and
the young man may have come from some other town. Do you remember that
any of your young girls were married about five months ago?"

Yes; there was Hildegarde Bentel, but she had married Anthony Mattison,
who was not a soldier. Could the American mamselle remember what the
girl's first name was?

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Patsy. "She signed her letters 'Elizabeth.'"

They shook their heads.

"My name is also Elizabeth," said one. "We have many Elizabeths in
Charleroi, but none has lately married."

"And her husband told me that she was now living here with her mother."

"Ah, let us see, then," responded another. "Could she have been a lady
of rank, think you?"

"I--I do not know."

"Is her husband an officer?"

"No; a private, I believe."

"Then we are on the wrong scent," laughed the girl. "I had in mind the
daughter of the Countess Voig, whose name chances to be Elizabeth. She
was educated at a convent in Antwerp, and the countess has lived in that
city for several years, in order to be nearer her daughter. There was
some gossip here that the young lady had married in Antwerp, just after
leaving the convent; but we know little of the life of the Voigs because
they are very reserved. Two or three months ago they returned to their
castle, which is four miles to the north of Charleroi, and there they
are still living in retirement. Every day the old steward drives into
town to visit the post office, but we have not seen the countess nor
her daughter since they came back."

Patsy related this news to Uncle John, who did not understand French.

"Let us drive over to Castle Voig the first thing," she said.

"But, my dear, it's unreasonable," he objected. "Do you suppose a
high-born young lady would marry a common soldier? In America, where we
have no caste, it would be quite probable, but here--"

"He wasn't a soldier five months ago," said Patsy. "He's just a
volunteer, who joined the army when his country needed him, as many of
the wealthy and aristocratic Belgians did. He may be high-born himself,
for all we know. At any rate I mean to visit that castle. Tell Rondel to
bring around the automobile."

They had no trouble in passing the guards, owing to the presence of von
Holtz, and in half an hour they were rolling through a charming,
peaceful country that as yet had suffered no blemish through the German
conquest.

At Castle Voig they were received by an aged retainer who was visibly
nervous at their arrival. He eyed the uniform of young von Holtz with
ill-concealed terror and hurried away to carry their cards to the
countess. After a long wait they learned that the countess would receive
the Americans, but it was a full half hour after that when they were
ushered into a reception room where a lady sat in solitary state.

Under other circumstances Patsy could have spent a day in admiring the
quaint, old-fashioned furniture and pictures and the wonderful carvings
of the beamed ceiling, but now she was so excited that she looked only
at the countess. The lady was not very imposing in form or dress but her
features were calm and dignified and she met her guests with a grave
courtesy that was impressive if rather chilly. Before Patsy had summoned
courage to explain her errand a younger woman--almost a girl--hurriedly
entered the room and took a position beside the other.

"Oh, it's Elizabeth--it really is!" cried Patsy, clapping her hands
together joyfully.

Mother and daughter regarded the American girl wonderingly and somewhat
haughtily, but Patsy was not in the least dismayed.

"Isn't this Mrs. Denton?" she asked, stepping forward to lay a hand upon
the other girl's arm.

"Yes," was the quiet reply.

Patsy's great eyes regarded her a moment with so sad and sympathetic a
look that Mrs. Denton shrank away. Then she noticed for the first time
the Red Cross uniform, and her hand went swiftly to her heart as she
faltered:

"You--you have brought bad news of Andrew--of my husband?"

"Yes, I am sorry to admit that it is bad news," answered Patsy soberly.
"He has been wounded and is now lying ill in our hospital ship at
Dunkirk. We came here to find you, and to take you to him."

Mrs. Denton turned to her mother, a passionate appeal in her eyes. But
it was some moments before the hard, set look on the face of the
countess softened. It did soften at last, however, and she turned to
Patsy and said simply:

"We will prepare for the journey at once. Pray excuse us; Niklas will
serve refreshments. We will not detain you long."

As they turned to leave the room Elizabeth Denton suddenly seized
Patsy's hand.

"He will live?" she whispered. "Tell me he will live!"

Patsy's heart sank, but she summoned her wits by an effort.

"I am not a surgeon, my dear, and do not know how serious the wound may
be," she answered, "but I assure you it will gladden his heart to see
you again. He thinks and speaks only of you."

The girl-wife studied her face a moment and then dropped her hand and
hurried after her mother.

"I fibbed, Uncle," said Patsy despondently. "I fibbed willfully.
But--how could I help it when she looked at me that way?"




CHAPTER XV

DR. GYS SURPRISES HIMSELF


Henderson was waiting with the launch at the Ostend docks. Lieutenant
von Holtz was earnestly thanked by Patsy and Uncle John for his kindness
and in return he exacted a promise from them to hunt him up in Germany
some day, when the war was ended. The countess and Mrs. Denton, sad and
black-robed, had been made comfortable in the stern seats of the boat
and the captain was just about to order Henderson to start the engine
when up to them rushed the fat Belgian woman and her two children.

Without an instant's hesitation the two youngsters leaped aboard like
cats and their mother would have followed but for the restraining hand
of Captain Carg.

"What does this mean?" cried Mr. Merrick angrily.

The woman jabbered volubly in French.

"She says," interpreted Patsy, "that we promised to take her to Dunkirk,
so she may find her husband."

"Let her walk!" said Uncle John.

"The Germans won't allow her to cross the lines. What does it matter,
Uncle? We have plenty of room. In three hours we can be rid of them, and
doubtless the poor thing is really anxious to find her lost husband, who
was last seen in Dunkirk."

"He is a spy, and a traitor to both sides, according to report."

"That isn't our affair, is it? And I suppose even people of that class
have hearts and affections."

"Well, let her come aboard, Captain," decided Uncle John. "We can't
waste time in arguing."

They stowed her away in the bow, under Henderson's care, and threatened
the children with dire punishment if they moved from under her shadow.
Then the launch sped out into the bay and away toward Dunkirk.

Three days had brought many changes to the hospital ship _Arabella_. Of
the original batch of patients only Lieutenant Elbl, the German, and
Andrew Denton now remained. All the others had been sent home,
transferred to the government hospitals or gone back to the front,
according to the character of their injuries. This was necessary because
their places were needed by the newly wounded who were brought each day
from the front. Little Maurie was driving the ambulance again and, with
Ajo beside him and Dr. Kelsey and a sailor for assistants, the Belgian
would make a dash to Ypres or Dixmude or Furnes and return with a full
load of wounded soldiers.

These were the days of the severest fighting in Flanders, fighting so
severe that it could not keep up for long. There would come a lull
presently, when the overworked nurses and surgeons could get a bit of
sleep and draw a long breath again.

Gys had elected to remain aboard the ship, where with Maud and Beth he
was kept busy night and day. Two French girls--young women of good birth
and intelligence--had been selected by Dr. Gys from a number of
applicants as assistant nurses, and although they were inexperienced,
their patriotic zeal rendered them valuable. They now wore the Red Cross
uniforms and it was decided to retain them as long as the ship's
hospital remained crowded.

There was plenty of work for all and the worry and long hours might have
broken down the health and strength of Beth and Maud had not the doctor
instituted regular periods of duty for each member of the force and
insisted on the schedule being carried out.

This hospital ship was by no means so gloomy a place as the reader may
imagine. The soldiers were prone to regard their hurts lightly, as "a
bit of hard luck," and since many had slight injuries it was customary
for them to gather in groups upon the deck, where they would laugh and
chat together, play cards for amusement or smoke quantities of
cigarettes. They were mainly kind-hearted and grateful fellows and
openly rejoiced that the misfortunes of war had cast their lot on this
floating hospital.

Under the probe of the surgeon to-day, a fortnight hence back on the
firing line, was not very unusual with these brave men. The ambulances
had gathered in a few German soldiers, who would become prisoners of
war on their recovery, and while these were inclined to be despondent
and unsociable they were treated courteously by all, the Americans
showing no preference for any nation. The large majority of the
patients, however, came from the ranks of the Allies--French, English
and Belgian--and these were men who could smile and be merry with
bandaged heads, arms a-sling, legs in splints, bullet holes here and
there, such afflictions being regarded by their victims with a certain
degree of pride.

Dr. Gys was in his element, for now he had ample opportunity to display
his skill and his patients were unable to "jump to another doctor" in
case his ugly features revolted them. His main interest, however, lay in
the desperately wounded Belgian private, Andrew Denton, whom he had
agreed to keep alive until the return of Miss Doyle and her uncle.

In making this promise Gys had figured on a possible delay of several
days, but on the second day following Patsy's departure the sudden
sinking of his patient aroused a defiant streak in the surgeon and he
decided to adopt drastic measures in order to prevent Denton from
passing away before his wife's arrival.

"I want you to assist me in a serious operation," he said to Maud
Stanton. "By all the rules and precedents of human flesh, that fellow
Denton ought to succumb to his wound within the next three hours. The
shell played havoc with his interior and I have never dared, until now,
to attempt to patch things up; but if we're going to keep him alive
until morning, or until your cousin's return, we must accomplish the
impossible."

"What is that?" she inquired.

"Remove his vital organs, tinker them up and put them back so they will
work properly."

"Can that be done, doctor?"

"I think not. But I'm going to try it. I am positive that if we leave
him alone he has less than three hours of life remaining; so, if we
fail, Miss Stanton, as it is reasonable to expect, poor Denton will
merely be spared a couple of hours of pain. Get the anaesthetics,
please."

With all her training and experience as a nurse, Maud was half terrified
at the ordeal before her. But she realized the logic of the doctor's
conclusion and steeled her nerves to do her part.

An hour later she stood looking down upon the patient. He was still upon
the operating table but breathing quietly and as strongly as at any time
since he had received his wound.

"This shows," Dr. Gys said to her, his voice keen with elation, "what
fools we are to take any human condition for granted. Man is a machine.
Smash his mechanism and it cannot work; make the proper repairs before
it is too late and--there he goes, ticking away as before. Not as good a
machine as it was prior to the break, but with care and caution it will
run a long time."

"He will live, then, you think?" she asked softly, marveling that after
what she had witnessed the man was still able to breathe.

Gys leaned down and put his ear to the heart of the patient. For two
minutes he remained motionless. Then he straightened up and a smile
spread over his disfigured features.

"I confidently believe, Miss Stanton, we have turned the trick! Luck,
let us call it, for no sensible surgeon would have attempted the thing.
Rest assured that Andrew Denton will live for the next ten days. More
than that, with no serious set-back he may fully recover and live for
many years to come."

He was so pleased that tears stood in his one good eye and he wiped them
away sheepishly. The girl took his hand and pressed it in both her own.

"You are wonderful--wonderful!" she said.

"Don't, please--don't look in my face," he pleaded.

"I won't," she returned, dropping her eyes; "I will think only of the
clever brain, the skillful hand and the stout heart."

"Not even that," he said. "Think of the girl wife--of Elizabeth. It was
she who steadied my hand to-day. Indeed, Miss Stanton, it was
Elizabeth's influence that saved him. But for her we would have let him
die."




CHAPTER XVI

CLARETTE


So it was toward evening of the fourth day that the launch finally
sighted the ship _Arabella_. Delays and difficulties had been
encountered in spite of government credentials and _laissez-passer_ and
Patsy had begun to fear they would not reach the harbor of Dunkirk
before dark.

All through the journey the Belgian woman and her children had sat
sullenly in the bow, the youngsters kept from mischief by the stern eye
of Henderson. In the stern seats, however, the original frigid silence
had been thawed by Patsy Doyle's bright chatter. She began by telling
the countess and Elizabeth all about herself and Beth and Maud and Uncle
John, relating how they had come to embark upon this unusual mission of
nursing the wounded of a foreign war, and how they had secured the
services of the clever but disfigured surgeon, Dr. Gys. She gave the
ladies a clear picture of the hospital ship and told how the girls had
made their dash to the firing line during the battle of Nieuport and
brought back an ambulance full of wounded--including Andrew Denton.

Patsy did not answer very fully Elizabeth Denton's eager questions
concerning the nature of her husband's injuries, but she tried to
prepare the poor young wife for the knowledge that the wound would prove
fatal. This was a most delicate and difficult thing to do and Patsy
blundered and floundered until her very ambiguity aroused alarm.

"Tell me the worst!" begged Elizabeth Denton, her face pale and tensely
drawn.

"Why, I cannot do that, you see," replied Patsy, "because the worst
hasn't happened yet; nor can I tell you the best, because a wound is
such an uncertain thing. It was a shell, you know, that exploded behind
him, and Dr. Gys thought it made a rather serious wound. Mr. Denton was
unconscious a long time, and when he came to himself we eased his pain,
so he would not suffer."

"You came to get me because you thought he would die?"

"I came because he asked me to read to him your letters, and I found
they comforted him so much that your presence would, I knew, comfort him
more."

There was a long silence. Presently the countess asked in her soft, even
voice:

"Will he be alive when we get there?"

Patsy thought of the days that had been wasted, because of their
detention at Ostend through Colonel Grau's stupidity.

"I hope so, madam," was all she could reply.

Conversation lagged after this episode. Elizabeth was weeping quietly on
her mother's shoulder. Patsy felt relief in the knowledge that she had
prepared them, as well as she could, for whatever might wait upon their
arrival.

The launch made directly for the ship and as she came alongside to the
ladder the rail was lined with faces curious to discover if the errand
had been successful. Doctor Gys was there to receive them, smiling
horribly as he greeted the two women in black. Maud, seeing that they
recoiled from the doctor's appearance, took his place and said
cheerfully:

"Mr. Denton is asleep, just now, but by the time you have bathed and had
a cup of tea I am quite sure he will be ready to receive you."

"Tell me; how is he? Are you his nurse?" asked the young wife with
trembling lips.

"I am his nurse, and I assure you he is doing very well," answered Maud
with her pleasant, winning smile. "When he finds you by his side I am
sure his recovery will be rapid. No nurse can take the place of a wife,
you know."

Patsy looked at her reproachfully, thinking she was misleading the poor
young wife, but Maud led the ladies away to a stateroom and it was Dr.
Gys who explained the wonderful improvement in the patient.

"Well," remarked Uncle John, "if we'd known he had a chance, we wouldn't
have worried so because we were held up. In fact, if we'd known he would
get well, we needn't have gone at all."

"Oh, Uncle John!" cried Patsy reprovingly.

"It was your going that saved him," declared the doctor. "I promised to
keep him alive, for that little wife of his, and when he took a turn for
the worse I had to assume desperate chances--which won out."

Meantime the big Belgian woman and her children had been helped up the
ladder by Henderson, who stood respectfully by, awaiting orders for
their disposal. The mother had her eye on the shore and was scowling
steadily upon it when little Maurie came on deck and strolled toward Mr.
Merrick to greet him on his return. Indeed, he had approached to within
a dozen feet of the group when the woman at the rail suddenly turned and
saw him.

"Aha--mon Henri!" she cried and made a dash toward him with outstretched
arms.

"Clarette!"

Maurie stopped short; he grew pallid; he trembled. But he did not await
her coming. With a howl that would have shamed a wild Indian he leaped
upon the rail and made a dive into the water below.

Even as her engulfing arms closed around the spot where he had stood,
there was a splash and splutter that drew everyone to the side to watch
the little Belgian swim frantically to the docks.

The woman grabbed a child with either arm and held them up.

"See!" she cried. "There is your father--the coward--the traitor--the
deserter of his loving family. He thinks to escape; but we shall capture
him yet, and when we do--"

"Hurry, father," screamed the little girl, "or she'll get you."

A slap on the mouth silenced her and set the boy wailing dismally. The
boy was accustomed to howl without provocation. He kicked his mother
until she let him down. By this time they could discern only Maurie's
head bobbing in the distant water. Presently he clambered up the dock
and ran dripping toward the city, disappearing among the buildings.

"Madam," said Uncle John, sternly, "you have cost us the best chauffeur
we ever had."

She did not understand English, but she shook her fist in Mr. Merrick's
face and danced around in an elephantine fashion and jabbered a stream
of French.

"What does she say?" he asked Patsy, who was laughing merrily at the
absurd scene.

"She demands to be put ashore at once. But shall we do that, and put
poor Maurie in peril of being overtaken?"

"Self preservation is the first law of nature, my dear," replied Uncle
John. "I'm sorry for Maurie, but he alone is responsible. Henderson," he
added, turning to the sailor, "put this woman ashore as soon as
possible. We've had enough of her."




CHAPTER XVII

PERPLEXING PROBLEMS


Although the famous battle of Nieuport had come to an end, the fighting
in West Flanders was by no means over. All along the line fierce and
relentless war waged without interruption and if neither side could
claim victory, neither side suffered defeat. Day after day hundreds of
combatants fell; hundreds of disabled limped to the rear; hundreds were
made prisoners. And always a stream of reinforcements came to take the
places of the missing ones. Towns were occupied to-day by the Germans,
to-morrow by the Allies; from Nieuport on past Dixmude and beyond Ypres
the dykes had been opened and the low country was one vast lake. The
only approaches from French territory were half a dozen roads built high
above the water line, which rendered them capable of stubborn defence.

Dunkirk was thronged with reserves--English, Belgian and French. The
Turcos and East Indians were employed by the British in this section and
were as much dreaded by the civilians as the enemy. Uncle John noticed
that military discipline was not so strict in Dunkirk as at Ostend; but
the Germans had but one people to control while the French town was host
to many nations and races.

Strange as it may appear, the war was growing monotonous to those who
were able to view it closely, perhaps because nothing important resulted
from all the desperate, continuous fighting. The people were pursuing
their accustomed vocations while shells burst and bullets whizzed around
them. They must manage to live, whatever the outcome of this struggle of
nations might be.

Aboard the American hospital ship there was as yet no sense of monotony.
The three girls who had conceived and carried out this remarkable
philanthropy were as busy as bees during all their waking hours and the
spirit of helpful charity so strongly possessed them that all their
thoughts were centered on their work. No two cases were exactly alike
and it was interesting, to the verge of fascination, to watch the
results of various treatments of divers wounds and afflictions.

The girls often congratulated themselves on having secured so efficient
a surgeon as Doctor Gys, who gloried in his work, and whose judgment,
based on practical experience, was comprehensive and unfailing. The
man's horribly contorted features had now become so familiar to the
girls that they seldom noticed them--unless a cry of fear from some
newly arrived and unnerved patient reminded them that the doctor was
exceedingly repulsive to strangers.

No one recognized this grotesque hideousness more than Doctor Gys
himself. When one poor Frenchman died under the operating knife, staring
with horror into the uncanny face the surgeon bent over him, Beth was
almost sure the fright had hastened his end. She said to Gys that
evening, when they met on deck, "Wouldn't it be wise for you to wear a
mask in the operating room?"

He considered the suggestion a moment, a deep flush spreading over his
face; then he nodded gravely.

"It may be an excellent idea," he agreed. "Once, a couple of years ago,
I proposed wearing a mask wherever I went, but my friends assured me the
effect would be so marked that it would attract to me an embarrassing
amount of attention. I have trained myself to bear the repulsion
involuntarily exhibited by all I meet and have taught myself to take a
philosophic, if somewhat cynical, view of my facial blemishes; yet in
this work I can see how a mask might be merciful to my patients. I will
experiment a bit along this line, if you will help me, and we'll see
what we can accomplish."

"You must not think," she said quietly, for she detected a little
bitterness in his tone, "that you are in any way repulsive to those who
know you well. We all admire you as a man and are grieved at the
misfortunes that marred your features. After all, Doctor, people of
intelligence seldom judge one by appearances."

"However they may judge me," said he, "I'm a failure. You say you admire
me as a man, but you don't. It's just a bit of diplomatic flattery. I'm
a good doctor and surgeon, I'll admit, but my face is no more repellent
than my cowardly nature. Miss Beth, I hate myself for my cowardice far
more than I detest my ghastly countenance. Yet I am powerless to remedy
either defect."

"I believe that what you term your cowardice is merely a physical
weakness," declared the girl. "It must have been caused by the suffering
you endured at the time of your various injuries. I have noticed that
suffering frequently unnerves one, and that a person who has once been
badly hurt lives in nervous terror of being hurt again."

"You are very kind to try to excuse my fault," said he, "but the truth
is I have always been a coward--from boyhood up."

"Yet you embarked on all those dangerous expeditions."

"Yes, just to have fun with myself; to sneer at the coward flesh, so to
speak. I used to long for dangers, and when they came upon me I would
jeer at and revile the quaking I could not repress. I pushed my
shrinking body into peril and exulted in the punishment it received."

Beth looked at him wonderingly.

"You are a strange man, indeed," said she. "Really, I cannot understand
your mental attitude at all."

He chuckled and rubbed his hands together gleefully.

"I can," he returned, "for I know what causes it." And then he went away
and left her, still seeming highly amused at her bewilderment.

In the operating room the next day Gys appeared with a rubber mask drawn
across his features. The girls decided that it certainly improved his
appearance, odd as the masked face might appear to strangers. It hid the
dreadful nose and the scars and to an extent evened the size of the
eyes, for the holes through which he peered were made alike. Gys was
himself pleased with the device, for after that he wore the mask almost
constantly, only laying it aside during the evenings when he sat on
deck.

It was three days after the arrival of Mrs. Denton and her mother--whose
advent had accomplished much toward promoting the young Belgian's
convalescence--when little Maurie suddenly reappeared on the deck of the
_Arabella_.

"Oh," said Patsy, finding him there when she came up from breakfast,
"where is Clarette?"

He shook his head sadly.

"We do not live together, just now," said he. "Clarette is by nature
temperamental, you know; she is highly sensitive, and I, alas! do not
always please her."

"Did she find you in Dunkirk?" asked the girl.

"Almost, mamselle, but not quite. It was this way: I knew if I permitted
her to follow me she would finally succeed in her quest, for she and the
dear children have six eyes among them, while I have but two; so I
reposed within an ash-barrel until they had passed on, and then I
followed them, keeping well out of their sight. In that way I managed to
escape. But it proved a hard task, for my Clarette is very persistent,
as you may have noticed. So I decided I would be more safe upon the ship
than upon the shore. She is not likely to seek me here, and in any event
she floats better than she swims."

Patsy regarded the little man curiously.

"Did you not tell us, when first we met you, that you were heart-broken
over the separation from your wife and children?" she inquired in severe
tones.

"Yes, of course, mamselle; it was a good way to arouse your sympathy,"
he admitted with an air of pride. "I needed sympathy at that time, and
my only fear was that you would find Clarette, as you threatened to do.
Well," with a deep sigh, "you did find her. It was an unfriendly act,
mamselle."

"They told us in Ostend that the husband of Clarette is a condemned spy,
one who served both sides and proved false to each. The husband of
Clarette is doomed to suffer death at the hands of the Germans or the
Belgians, if either is able to discover him."

Maurie removed his cap and scratched the hair over his left ear
reflectively.

"Ah, yes, the blacksmith!" said he. "I suspected that blacksmith fellow
was not reliable."

"How many husbands has Clarette?"

"With the blacksmith, there are two of us," answered Maurie, brightly.
"Doubtless there would be more if anything happened to me, for Clarette
is very fascinating. When she divorced the blacksmith he was
disconsolate, and threatened vengeance; so her life is quite occupied in
avoiding her first husband and keeping track of her second, who is too
kind-hearted to threaten her as the blacksmith did. I really admire
Clarette--at a distance. She is positively charming when her mind is
free from worry--and the children are asleep."

"Then you think," said Ajo, who was standing by and listening to
Maurie's labored explanations, "that it is the blacksmith who is
condemned as a spy, and not yourself?"

"I am quite sure of it. Am I not here, driving your ambulance and going
boldly among the officers? If it is Jakob Maurie they wish, he is at
hand to be arrested."

"But you are not Jakob Maurie."

The Belgian gave a start, but instantly recovering he answered with a
smile:

"Then I must have mistaken my identity, monsieur. Perhaps you will tell
me who I am?"

"Your wife called you 'Henri,'" said Patsy.

"Ah, yes; a pet name. I believe the blacksmith is named Henri, and poor
Clarette is so accustomed to it that she calls me Henri when she wishes
to be affectionate."

Patsy realized the folly of arguing with him.

"Maurie," said she, "or whatever your name may be, you have been
faithful in your duty to us and we have no cause for complaint. But I
believe you do not speak the truth, and that you are shifty and artful.
I fear you will come to a bad end."

"Sometimes, mamselle," he replied, "I fear so myself. But, _peste_! why
should we care? If it is the end, what matter whether it is good or
bad?"

Watching their faces closely, he saw frank disapproval of his sentiments
written thereon. It disturbed him somewhat that they did not choose to
continue the conversation, so he said meekly:

"With your kind permission, I will now go below for a cup of coffee,"
and left them with a bow and a flourish of his cap. When he had gone
Patsy said to Ajo:

"I don't believe there is any such person as the blacksmith."

"Nor I," was the boy's reply. "Both those children are living images of
Maurie, who claims the blacksmith was their father. He's a crafty little
fellow, that chauffeur of ours, and we must look out for him."

"If he is really a spy," continued the girl, after a brief period of
thought, "I am amazed that he dared join our party and go directly to
the front, where he is at any time likely to be recognized."

"Yes, that is certainly puzzling," returned Ajo. "And he's a brave
little man, too, fearless of danger and reckless in exposing himself to
shot and shell. Indeed, our Maurie is something of a mystery and the
only thing I fully understand is his objection to Clarette's society."

At "le revue matin," as the girls called the first inspection of the
morning, eight of their patients were found sufficiently recovered to be
discharged. Some of these returned to their regiments and others were
sent to their homes to await complete recovery. The hospital ship could
accommodate ten more patients, so it was decided to make a trip to
Dixmude, where an artillery engagement was raging, with the larger
ambulance.

"I think I shall go to-day," announced Gys, who was wearing his mask.
"Dr. Kelsey can look after the patients and it will do me good to get
off the ship."

Uncle John looked at the doctor seriously.

"There is hard fighting, they say, in the Dixmude district. The Germans
carried the British trenches yesterday, and to-day the Allies will try
to retake them."

"I don't mind," returned the doctor, but he shuddered, nevertheless.

"Why don't you avoid the--the danger line?" suggested Mr. Merrick.

"A man can't run away from himself, sir; and perhaps you can understand
the fascination I find in taunting the craven spirit within me."

"No, I can't understand it. But suit yourself."

"I shall drive," announced Maurie.

"You may be recognized," said Patsy warningly.

"Clarette will not be at the front, and on the way I shall be driving.
Have you noticed how people scatter at the sound of our gong?"

"The authorities are watching for spies," asserted Ajo.

Maurie's face became solemn.

"Yes; of course. But--the blacksmith is not here, and," he added with
assurance, "the badge of the Red Cross protects us from false
accusations."

When they had gone Uncle John said thoughtfully to the girls:

"That remark about the Red Cross impressed me. If that fellow Maurie is
really in danger of being arrested and shot, he has cleverly placed
himself in the safest service in the world. He knows that none of our
party is liable to be suspected of evil."




CHAPTER XVIII

A QUESTION OF LOYALTY


During the morning they were visited by a French official who came
aboard in a government boat and asked to see Mr. Merrick.

The ship had been inspected several times by the commander of the port
and the civil authorities, and its fame as a model hospital had spread
over all Flanders. Some attempt had been made to place with the
Americans the most important of the wounded--officers of high rank or
those of social prominence and wealth--but Mr. Merrick and his aids were
determined to show no partiality. They received the lowly and humble as
well as the high and mighty and the only requisite for admission was an
injury that demanded the care of good nurses and the skill of competent
surgeons.

Uncle John knew the French general and greeted him warmly, for he
appreciated his generous co-operation. But Beth had to be called in to
interpret because her uncle knew so little of the native language.

First they paid a visit to the hospital section, where the patients were
inspected. Then the register and records were carefully gone over and
notes taken by the general's secretary. Finally they returned to the
after-deck to review the convalescents who were lounging there in their
cushioned deck-chairs.

"Where is the German, Lieutenant Elbl?" inquired the general, looking
around with sudden suspicion.

"In the captain's room," replied Beth. "Would you like to see him?"

"If you please."

The group moved forward to the room occupied by Captain Carg. The door
and windows stood open and reclining upon a couch inside was the maimed
German, with Carg sitting beside him. Both were solemnly smoking their
pipes.

The captain rose as the general entered, while Elbl gave his visitor a
military salute.

"So you are better?" asked the Frenchman.

Beth repeated this in English to Carg, who repeated it in German to
Elbl. Yes, the wounded man was doing very well.

"Will you keep him here much longer?" was the next question, directed to
Mr. Merrick.

"I think so," was the reply. "He is still quite weak, although the wound
is healing nicely. Being a military prisoner, there is no other place
open to him where the man can be as comfortable as here."

"You will be responsible for his person? You will guarantee that he will
not escape?"

Mr. Merrick hesitated.

"Must we promise that?" he inquired.

"Otherwise I shall be obliged to remove him to a government hospital."

"I don't like that. Not that your hospitals are not good enough for a
prisoner, but Elbl happens to be a cousin of our captain, which puts a
different face on the matter. What do you say, Captain Carg? Shall we
guarantee that your cousin will not try to escape?"

"Why should he, sir? He can never rejoin the army, that's certain,"
replied Carg.

"True," said the general, when this was conveyed to him by Beth.
"Nevertheless, he is a prisoner of war, and must not be allowed to
escape to his own people."

Beth answered the Frenchman herself, looking him straight in the face.

"That strikes me as unfair, sir," said she. "The German must henceforth
be a noncombatant. He has been unable, since he was wounded and brought
here, to learn any of your military secrets and at the best he will lie
a helpless invalid for weeks to come. Therefore, instead of making him a
prisoner, it would be more humane to permit him to return to his home
and family in Germany."

The general smiled indulgently.

"It might be more humane, mademoiselle, but unfortunately it is against
the military code. Did I understand that your captain will guarantee the
German's safety?"

"Of course," said Carg. "If he escapes, I will surrender myself in his
place."

"Ah; but we moderns cannot accept Pythias if Damon runs away," laughed
the general. "But, there; it will be simpler to send a parole for him
to sign, when he may be left in your charge until he is sufficiently
recovered to bear the confinement of a prison. Is that satisfactory?"

"Certainly, sir," replied the captain.

Elbl had remained silent during this conversation, appearing not to
understand the French and English spoken. Indeed, since his arrival he
had only spoken the German language, and that mostly in his intercourse
with Carg. But after the French officer had gone away Beth began to
reflect upon this reticence.

"Isn't it queer," she remarked to Uncle John, "that an educated
German--one who has been through college, as Captain Carg says Elbl
has--should be unable to understand either French or English? I have
always been told the German colleges are very thorough and you know that
while at Ostend we found nearly all the German officers spoke good
English."

"It is rather strange, come to think of it," answered Uncle John. "I
believe the study of languages is a part of the German military
education. But I regret that the French are determined to keep the poor
fellow a prisoner. Such a precaution is absurd, to my mind."

"I think I can understand the French position," said the girl,
reflectively. "These Germans are very obstinate, and much as I admire
Lieutenant Elbl I feel sure that were he able he would fight the French
again to-morrow. After his recovery he might even get one of those
mechanical feet and be back on the firing line."

"He's a Uhlan."

"Then he could ride a horse. I believe, Uncle, the French are justified
in retaining him as a prisoner until the war is over."

Meantime, in the captain's room the two men were quietly conversing.

"He wants you to sign a parole," said Carg.

"Not I."

"You may as well. I'm responsible for your safety."

"I deny anyone's right to be responsible for me. If you have made a
promise to that effect, withdraw it," said the German.

"If I do, they'll put you in prison."

"Not at present. I am still an invalid. In reality. I am weak and
suffering. Yet I am already planning my escape, and that is why I insist
that you withdraw any promise you have made. Otherwise--"

"Otherwise?"

"Instead of escaping by water, as I had intended, to Ostend, I must go
to the prison and escape from there. It will be more difficult. The
water route is best."

"Of course," agreed the captain, smiling calmly.

"One of your launches would carry me to Ostend and return here between
dark and daylight."

"Easily enough," said Carg. It was five minutes before he resumed his
speech. Then he said with quiet deliberation: "Cousin, I am an American,
and Americans are neutral in this war."

"You are Sangoan."

"My ship is chartered by Americans, which obliges the captain of the
ship to be loyal to its masters. I will do nothing to conflict with the
interests of the Americans, not even to favor my cousin."

"Quite right," said Elbl.

"If you have any plan of escape in mind, do not tell me of it,"
continued the captain. "I shall order the launches guarded carefully. I
shall do all in my power to prevent your getting away from this ship."

"Thank you," said the German. "You have my respect, cousin. Pass the
tobacco."




CHAPTER XIX

THE CAPTURE


There was considerable excitement when the ambulance returned. Part of
the roof had been torn away, the doors were gone, the interior wrecked
and not a pane of glass remained in the sides; yet Ajo drove it to the
dock, the motor working as smoothly as ever, and half a dozen wounded
were helped out and put into the launch to be taken aboard the hospital
ship.

When all were on deck, young Jones briefly explained what had happened.
A shell had struck the ambulance, which had been left in the rear, but
without injuring the motor in any way. Fortunately no one was near at
the time. When they returned they cleared away the rubbish to make room
for a few wounded men and then started back to the city.

Doctor Gys, hatless and coatless, his hair awry and the mask making him
look more hideous than ever, returned with the party and came creeping
up the ship's ladder in so nervous a condition that his trembling knees
fairly knocked together.

The group around Ajo watched him silently.

"What do you think that fool did?" asked the boy, as Gys slunk away to
his room.

"Tell us," pleaded Patsy, who was one of the curious group surrounding
him.

"We had gone near to where a machine gun was planted, to pick up a
fallen soldier, when without warning the Germans charged the gun. Maurie
and I made a run for life, but Gys stood stock still, facing the enemy.
A man at the gun reeled and fell, just then, and with a hail of bullets
flying around him the doctor coolly walked up and bent over him. The
sight so amazed the Germans that they actually stopped fighting and
waited for him. Perhaps it was the Red Cross on the doctor's arm that
influenced them, but imagine a body of soldiers in the heat of a charge
suddenly stopping because of one man!"

"Well, what happened?" asked Mr. Merrick.

"I couldn't see very well, for a battery that supported the charge was
shelling the retreating Allies and just then our ambulance was hit. But
Maurie says he watched the scene and that when Gys attempted to lift the
wounded man up he suddenly turned weak as water. The Germans had
captured the gun, by this time, and their officer himself hoisted the
injured man upon the doctor's shoulders and attended him to our
ambulance. When I saw the fight was over I hastened to help Gys, who
staggered so weakly that he would have dropped his man a dozen times on
the way had not the Germans held him up. They were laughing, as if the
whole thing was a joke, when crack! came a volley of bullets and with a
great shout back rushed the French and Belgians in a counter-charge. I
admit I ducked, crawling under the ambulance, and the Germans were so
surprised that they beat a quick retreat.

"And now it was that Gys made a fool of himself. He tore off his cap and
coat, which bore the Red Cross emblem, and leaped right between the two
lines. Here were the Germans, firing as they retreated, and the Allies
firing as they charged, and right in the center of the fray stood Gys.
The man ought to have been shot to pieces, but nothing touched him
until a Frenchman knocked him over because he was in the way of the
rush. It was the most reckless, suicidal act I ever heard of!"

Uncle John looked worried. He had never told any of them of Dr. Gys'
strange remark during their first interview, but he had not forgotten
it. "I'll be happier when I can shake off this horrible envelope of
disfigurement," the doctor had declared, and in view of this the report
of that day's adventure gave the kind-hearted gentleman a severe shock.

He walked the deck thoughtfully while the girls hurried below to look
after the new patients who had been brought, not too comfortably, in the
damaged ambulance. "It was a bad fight," Ajo had reported, "and the
wounded were thick, but we could only bring a few of them. Before we
left the field, however, an English ambulance and two French ones
arrived, and that gave us an opportunity to get away. Indeed, I was so
unnerved by the dangers we had miraculously escaped that I was glad to
be out of it."

Uncle John tried hard to understand Doctor Gys, but the man's strange,
abnormal nature was incomprehensible. When, half an hour later, Mr.
Merrick went below, he found the doctor in the operating room, cool and
steady of nerve and dressing wounds in his best professional manner.

Upon examination the next morning the large ambulance was found to be so
badly damaged that it had to be taken to a repair shop in the city to
undergo reconstruction. It would take several weeks to put it in shape,
declared the French mechanics, so the Americans would be forced to get
along with the smaller vehicle. Jones and Dr. Kelsey made regular trips
with this, but the fighting had suddenly lulled and for several days no
new patients were brought to the ship, although many were given first
aid in the trenches for slight wounds.

So the colony aboard the _Arabella_ grew gradually less, until on the
twenty-sixth of November the girls found they had but two patients to
care for--Elbl and Andrew Denton. Neither required much nursing, and
Denton's young wife insisted on taking full charge of him. But while the
hospital ship was not in demand at this time there were casualties day
by day in the trenches, where the armies faced each other doggedly and
watchfully and shots were frequently interchanged when a soldier
carelessly exposed his person to the enemy. So the girls took turns
going with the ambulance, and Uncle John made no protest because so
little danger attended these journeys.

Each day, while one of the American girls rode to the front, the other
two would visit the city hospitals and render whatever assistance they
could to the regular nurses. Gys sometimes accompanied them and
sometimes went to the front with the ambulance; but he never caused his
friends anxiety on these trips, because he could not endanger his life,
owing to the cessation of fighting.

The only incident that enlivened this period of stagnation was the
capture of Maurie. No; the authorities didn't get him, but Clarette did.
Ajo and Patsy had gone into the city one afternoon and on their return
to the docks, where their launch was moored, they found a street urchin
awaiting them with a soiled scrap of paper clenched fast in his fist.
He surrendered it for a coin and Patsy found the following words
scrawled in English:

"She has me fast. Help! Be quick. I cannot save myself so you must save
me. It is your Maurie who is in distress."

They laughed a little at first and then began to realize that the loss
of their chauffeur would prove a hardship when fighting was resumed.
Maurie might not be a good husband, and he might be afraid of a woman,
but was valuable when bullets were flying. Patsy asked the boy:

"Can you lead us to the man who gave you this paper?"

"Oui, mamselle."

"Then hurry, and you shall have five centimes more."

The injunction was unnecessary, for the urchin made them hasten to keep
up with him. He made many turns and twists through narrow alleys and
back streets until finally he brought them to a row of cheap, plastered
huts built against the old city wall. There was no mistaking the place,
for in the doorway of one of the poorest dwellings stood Clarette, her
ample figure fairly filling the opening, her hands planted firmly on her
broad hips.

"Good evening," said Patsy pleasantly. "Is Maurie within?"

"Henri is within," answered Clarette with a fierce scowl, "and he is
going to stay within."

"But we have need of his services," said Ajo sternly, "and the man is in
our employ and under contract to obey us."

"I also need his services," retorted Clarette, "and I made a contract
with him before you did, as my marriage papers will prove."

The little boy and girl had now crowded into the doorway on either side
of their mother, clinging to her skirts while they "made faces" at the
Americans. Clarette turned to drive the children away and in the act
allowed Patsy and Ajo to glance past her into the hut.

There stood little Maurie, sleeves rolled above his elbows, bending over
a battered dishpan where he was washing a mess of cracked and broken
pottery. He met their gaze with a despairing countenance and a gesture
of appeal that scattered a spray of suds from big wet fingers. Next
moment Clarette had filled the doorway again.

"You may as well go away," said the woman harshly.

Patsy stood irresolute.

"Have you money to pay the rent and to provide food and clothing?" she
presently asked.

"I have found a few francs in Henri's pockets," was the surly reply.

"And when they are gone?"

Clarette gave a shrug.

"When they are gone we shall not starve," she said. "There is plenty of
charity for the Belgians these days. One has but to ask, and someone
gives."

"Then you will not let us have Maurie?"

"No, mademoiselle." Then she unbent a little and added: "If my husband
goes to you, they will be sure to catch him some day, and when they
catch him they will shoot him."

"Why?"

"Don't you know?"

"No."

Clarette smiled grimly.

"When Henri escapes me, he always gets himself into trouble. He is not
so very bad, but he is careless--and foolish. He tries to help the
Germans and the French at the same time, to be accommodating, and so
both have conceived a desire to shoot him. Well; when they shoot him he
can no longer earn money to support me and his children."

"Are they really his children?" inquired young Jones.

"Who else may claim them, monsieur?"

"I thought they were the children of your first husband, the
blacksmith."

Clarette glared at him, with lowering brow.

"Blacksmith? Pah! I have no husband but Henri, and heaven forsook me
when I married him."

"Come, Patsy," said Ajo to his companion, "our errand here is hopeless.
And--perhaps Clarette is right."

They made their way back to the launch in silence. Patsy was quite
disappointed in Maurie. He had so many admirable qualities that it was a
shame he could be so untruthful and unreliable.

As time passed on the monotony that followed their first exciting
experiences grew upon them and became oppressive. December weather in
Flanders brought cutting winds from off the North Sea and often there
were flurries of snow in the air. They had steam heat inside the ship
but the deck was no longer a practical lounging place.

Toward the last of the month Lieutenant Elbl was so fully recovered that
he was able to hobble about on crutches. The friendship between the two
cousins continued and Elbl was often found in the captain's room. No
more had been said about a parole, but the French officials were
evidently keeping an eye on the German, for one morning an order came to
Mr. Merrick to deliver Elbl to the warden of the military prison at
Dunkirk on or before ten o'clock the following day.

While the German received this notification with his accustomed stolid
air of indifference, his American friends were all grieved at his
transfer. They knew the prison would be very uncomfortable for the
invalid and feared he was not yet sufficiently recovered to be able to
bear the new conditions imposed upon him. There was no thought of
protesting the order, however, for they appreciated the fact that the
commandant had been especially lenient in leaving the prisoner so long
in their care.

The Americans were all sitting together in the cabin that evening after
dinner, when to their astonishment little Maurie came aboard in a skiff,
bearing an order from the French commandant to Captain Carg, requesting
him to appear at once at military headquarters.

Not only was Carg puzzled by this strange summons but none of the others
could understand it. The Belgian, when questioned, merely shook his
head. He was not the general's confidant, but his fee as messenger would
enable him to buy bread for his family and he had been chosen because he
knew the way to the hospital ship.

As there was nothing to do but obey, the captain went ashore in one of
the launches, which towed the skiff in which Maurie had come.

When he had gone, Lieutenant Elbl, who had been sitting in the cabin,
bade the others good night and retired to his room. Most of the others
retired early, but Patsy, Uncle John and Doctor Gys decided to sit up
and await the return of the captain. It was an exceptionally cool
evening and the warmth of the forward cabin was very agreeable.

Midnight had arrived when the captain's launch finally drew up to the
side and Carg came hastening into the cabin. His agitated manner was so
unusual that the three watchers with one accord sprang to their feet
with inquiring looks.

"Where's Elbl?" asked the captain sharply.

"Gone to bed," said Uncle John.

"When?"

"Hours ago. I think he missed your society and was rather broken up over
the necessity of leaving us to-morrow."

Without hesitation Carg turned on his heel and hastened aft. They
followed him in a wondering group. Reaching the German's stateroom the
captain threw open the door and found it vacant.

"Humph!" he exclaimed. "I suspected the truth when I found our launch
was gone."

"Which launch?" asked Uncle John, bewildered.

"The one I left with the ship. On my return, just now, I discovered it
was not at its moorings. Someone has stolen it."

They stared at him in amazement.

"Wasn't the deck patrolled?" asked Patsy, the first to recover.

"We don't set a watch till ten-thirty. It wasn't considered necessary.
But I had no suspicion of the trick Elbl has played on me to-night," he
added with a groan. Their voices had aroused others. Ajo came out of his
room, enveloped in a heavy bathrobe, and soon after Maud and Beth joined
them.

"What's up?" demanded the boy.

"The German has tricked us and made his escape," quietly answered Dr.
Gys. "For my part, I'm glad of it."

"It was a conspiracy," growled the captain. "That rascal, Maurie--"

"Oh, was Maurie in it?"

"Of course. He was the decoy; perhaps he arranged the whole thing."

"Didn't the general want you, then?"

Carg was so enraged that he fairly snorted.

"Want me? Of course he didn't want me! That treacherous little Belgian
led me into the waiting room and said the general would see me in a
minute. Then he walked away and I sat there like a bump on a log and
waited. Finally I began to wonder how Maurie, who was always shy of
facing the authorities, had happened to be the general's messenger. It
looked queer. Officers and civilians were passing back and forth but no
one paid any attention to me; so after an hour or so I asked an officer
who entered from an inner room, when I could see the general. He said
the general was not there evenings but would be in his office to-morrow
morning. Then I showed him my order and he glanced at it and said it was
forged; wasn't the general's signature and wasn't in proper form,
anyhow. When I started to go he wouldn't let me; said the affair was
suspicious and needed investigation. So he took me to a room full of
officers and they asked me a thousand fool questions. Said they had no
record of a Belgian named Maurie and had never heard of him before. I
couldn't figure the thing out, and they couldn't; so finally they let me
come back to the ship."

"Strange," mused Uncle John; "very strange!"

"I was so stupid," continued Carg, "that I never thought of Elbl being
at the bottom of the affair until I got back and found our launch
missing. Then I remembered that Elbl was to have been turned over to the
prison authorities to-morrow and like a flash I saw through the whole
thing."

"I'm blamed if _I_ do," declared Mr. Merrick.

The others likewise shook their heads.

"He got me out of the way, stole the launch, and is half way to Ostend
by this time."

"Alone? And wounded--still an invalid?"

"Doubtless Maurie is with him. The rascal can run an automobile; so I
suppose he can run a launch."

"What puzzles me," remarked Patsy, "is how Lieutenant Elbl ever got hold
of Maurie, and induced him to assist him, without our knowing anything
about it."

"I used to notice them talking together a good bit," said Jones.

"But Clarette has kept Maurie a prisoner. She wouldn't let him come back
to the ship."

"He was certainly at liberty to-night," answered Beth. "Isn't this
escape liable to be rather embarrassing to us, Uncle John?"

"I'm afraid so," was the reply. "We agreed to keep him safely until the
authorities demanded we give him up; and now, at the last minute, we've
allowed him to get away."

Anxiety was written on every countenance as they considered the serious
nature of this affair. Only Gys seemed composed and unworried.

"Is it too late to go in chase of the launch?" asked Ajo, breaking a
long pause. "They're headed for Ostend, without a doubt, and there's a
chance that they may run into a sand-bank in the dark, or break down, or
meet with some other accident to delay them."

"I believe it's worth our while, sir," answered Carg. "The launch we
have is the faster, and the trip will show our good faith, if nothing
more."

"Then make ready to start at once," said Ajo, "and I'll dress and go
along."

Carg hurried away to give orders and the boy ran to his stateroom. Five
minutes later they were away, with four sailors to assist in the capture
of the fugitives in case they were overtaken.

It was a fruitless journey, however. At daybreak, as they neared Ostend,
they met their stolen launch coming back, in charge of a sleepy Belgian
who had been hired to return it. The man frankly stated that he had
undertaken the task in order to get to Dunkirk, where he had friends,
and he had been liberally paid by a German on crutches, who had one foot
missing, and a little Belgian whom he had never seen before, but who,
from the description given, could be none other than Maurie.

They carried the man back with them to the _Arabella_, where further
questioning added nothing to their information. They now had proof,
however, that Elbl was safe with his countrymen at Ostend and that
Maurie had been his accomplice.

"I would not believe," said Patsy, when she heard the story, "that a
Belgian could be so disloyal to his country."

"Every nation has its quota of black sheep," replied Uncle John, "and
from what we have learned of Maurie's character he is not at all
particular which side he serves."




CHAPTER XX

THE DUNES


The escape of a prisoner of war from the American hospital ship was made
the subject of a rigid inquiry by the officials and proved extremely
humiliating to all on board the _Arabella_. The commandant showed his
irritation by severely reprimanding Mr. Merrick for carelessness, while
Captain Carg had to endure a personal examination before a board of
inquiry. He was able to prove that he had been at headquarters during
the evening of the escape, but that did not wholly satisfy his
inquisitors. Finally an order was issued forbidding the Americans to
take any more wounded Germans or Austrians aboard their ship, and that
seemed to end the unpleasant affair.

However, a certain friction was engendered that was later evidenced on
both sides. The American ambulance was no longer favored on its trips
to the front, pointed preference being given the English and French Red
Cross Emergency Corps. This resulted in few wounded being taken to the
_Arabella_, as the Americans confined their work largely to assisting
the injured on the field of battle. The girls were not to be daunted in
their determined efforts to aid the unfortunate and every day one of
them visited the trenches to assist the two doctors in rendering first
aid to the wounded.

The work was no longer arduous, for often entire days would pass without
a single casualty demanding their attention. The cold weather resulted
in much sickness among the soldiers, however, and Gys found during this
period of military inactivity that his medicine chest was more in demand
than his case of surgical instruments.

A slight diversion was created by Clarette, who came to the ship to
demand her husband from the Americans. It seemed almost impossible to
convince her that Maurie was not hidden somewhere aboard, but at last
they made the woman understand he had escaped with the German to
Ostend. They learned from her that Maurie--or Henri, as she insisted he
was named--had several times escaped from her house at night, while she
was asleep, and returned at daybreak in the morning, and this
information led them to suspect he had managed to have several secret
conferences with Lieutenant Elbl previous to their flight. Clarette
announced her determination to follow her husband to Ostend, and perhaps
she did so, as they did not see her again.

It was on Sunday, the twentieth of December, that the Battle of the
Dunes began and the flames of war burst out afresh. The dunes lay
between the North Sea and the Yser River in West Flanders and consisted
of a stretch of sandy hillocks reaching from Coxyde to Nieuport les
Bains. The Belgians had entrenched these dunes in an elaborate and
clever manner, shoveling the sand into a series of high lateral ridges,
with alternate hollows, which reached for miles along the coast. The
hollows were from six to eight feet deep, affording protection to the
soldiers, who could nevertheless fire upon the enemy by creeping up the
sloping embankments until their heads projected sufficiently to allow
them to aim, when they could drop back to safety.

In order to connect the hollows one with another, that an advance or
retreat might be made under cover, narrow trenches had been cut at
intervals diagonally through the raised mounds of sand. Military experts
considered this series of novel fortifications to be practically
impregnable, for should the enemy defile through one of the cross
passages into a hollow where the Allies were gathered, they could be
picked off one by one, as they appeared, and be absolutely annihilated.

Realizing this, the Germans had not risked an attack, but after long
study of the defences had decided that by means of artillery they might
shell the Belgians, who held the dunes, and destroy them as they lay in
the hollows. So a heavy battery had been planted along the German lines
for this work, while in defence the Belgians confronted them with their
own famous dog artillery, consisting of the deadly machine guns. The
battle of December twentieth therefore began with an artillery duel,
resulting in so many casualties that the Red Cross workers found
themselves fully occupied.

Beth went with the ambulance the first day, worked in the hollows of the
dunes, and returned to the ship at night completely worn out by the
demands upon her services. It was Patsy's turn next, and she took with
her the second day one of the French girls as assistant.

When the ambulance reached the edge of the dunes, where it was driven by
Ajo, the battle was raging with even more vigor than the previous day.
The Germans were dropping shells promiscuously into the various hollows,
hoping to locate the hidden Belgian infantry, while the Belgian
artillery strove to destroy the German gunners. Both succeeded at times,
and both sides were equally persistent.

As it was impossible to take the ambulance into the dunes, it was left
in the rear in charge of Jones, while the others threaded their way in
and out the devious passages toward the front. They had covered fully a
mile in this laborious fashion before they came upon a detachment of
Belgian infantry which was lying in wait for a call to action. Beyond
this trench the doctors and nurses were forbidden to go, and the officer
in command warned the Americans to beware of stray shells.

Under these circumstances they contented themselves by occupying some of
the rear hollows, to which the wounded would retreat to secure their
services. Dr. Kelsey and Nanette, the French girl, established
themselves in one hollow at the right, while Dr. Gys and Patsy took
their position in another hollow further to the left. There they opened
their cases of lint, plaster and bandages, spreading them out upon the
sand, and were soon engaged in administering aid to an occasional victim
of the battle.

One man who came to Patsy with a slight wound on his shoulder told her
that a shell had exploded in a forward hollow and killed outright
fifteen of his comrades. His own escape from death was miraculous and
the poor fellow was so unnerved that he cried like a baby.

They directed him to the rear, where he would find the ambulance, and
awaited the appearance of more patients. Gys crawled up the mound of
sand in front of them and cautiously raised his head above the ridge.
Next instant he ducked to escape a rain of bullets that scattered the
sand about them like a mist.

"That was foolish," said Patsy reprovingly. "You might have been
killed."

"No such luck," he muttered in reply, but the girl could see that he
trembled slightly with nervousness. Neither realized at the time the
fatal folly of the act, for they were unaware that the Germans were
seeking just such a clew to direct them where to drop their shells.

"It's getting rather lonely here, and there are a couple of vacant
hollows in front of us," remarked the doctor. "Suppose we move over to
one of those, a little nearer the soldiers?"

Patsy approved the proposition, so they gathered up their supplies and
moved along the hollow to where a passage had been cut through. They had
gone barely a hundred yards when a screech, like a buzz-saw when it
strikes a nail, sounded overhead. Looking up they saw a black disk
hurtling through the air, to drop almost where they had been standing a
moment before. There was a terrific explosion that sent debris to their
very feet.

"After this we'll be careful how we expose ourselves," said the doctor
gravely. "They have got our range in a hurry. Here comes another; we'd
better get away quickly."

They progressed perhaps half a mile, without coming upon any soldiers,
when at the brow of a hill slightly higher than the rest, they became
aware of unwonted activity. A trench had been dug along the ridge, with
great pits here and there to serve as bomb-proof shelters. Every time a
head projected above the ridge, a storm of bullets showed that the enemy
was well within rifle range. In fact, it was to dislodge the Germans
that the present intrenchments were being made; machine guns would be
mounted as soon as positions had been prepared.

The German bullets had already taken their toll. In the little valley a
poor Belgian pressed his hand against a bad wound in his side, while
another was nursing an arm roughly bandaged by his fellows in the
trenches. First aid made the two comfortable for the time being at least
and the men were directed toward the ambulance. As they left, the man
with the wounded arm pointed down the narrow valley to where a deep
ravine cut through. "We were driven from there," he said. "The big guns
dropped shells on us and killed many; there are many wounded beyond--but
you cannot cross the ravine. We lost ten in doing it."

Nevertheless, the doctor and Patsy strode off. Just within the shelter
of the ridge they found another Belgian, desperately wounded, and the
doctor stopped to ease his pain with the hypodermic needle. Patsy looked
across the narrow defile; it was a bare fifty feet, and seemed safe
enough. Her Red Cross uniform would protect her, she reasoned, and
boldly enough she stepped out into the open. A cry from a wounded
soldier ahead hastened her footsteps. Without heeding the warning shout
of Doctor Gys she calmly stooped over the man who had called to her.

And then there was a sudden rending, blinding, terrifying crash that
sent the world into a thousand shrieking echoes. A huge shell had fallen
not fifty feet away, plowing its way through the earthworks above. Its
explosion sent timbers, abandoned gun-carriages, everything, flying
through the air. And one great piece of wood caught Patsy a glancing
blow on the back of her head as she crouched over the wounded Belgian.
With a weak cry she toppled over, not unconscious, but unable to raise
herself.

Another shell crashed down a hundred yards away, and then one closer
that sent the sand spouting high in a blinding cloud. She raised herself
slowly and glanced back toward Doctor Gys. He stood, his face ashen with
fear, hiding behind the shelter of the other hill. He looked up as she
stirred; a cry of relief came to his lips.

"Wait!" he called, bracing up suddenly. "Wait and I will get you."

Bending his head low he sprang across the unprotected space. He stopped
with a sudden jerk and then came on.

"You were hit!" cried Patsy as he bent over her.

"It is nothing," he answered brusquely. "Hold tight around my neck."
"Now--" another shell scattered sand over them--"we must get away from
here."

Breathing thickly, he staggered across the open, dropping her with a
great groan behind the protection of the ridge.

"The man you were helping," he gasped. "I must bring him in."

"But you are wounded--" Patsy cried.

He straightened up--his hand clutched his side--there came across his
disfigured features a queer twisted smile--he sighed softly and slowly
sank in a crumpled heap. A clean little puncture in the breast of his
coat told the whole story. Patsy felt herself slipping.... All grew
dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Ajo who found her and carried her back to the ambulance, where
Dr. Kelsey and Nanette were presently able to restore her to
consciousness. Then they returned to the _Arabella_, grave and silent,
and Patsy was put to bed. Before morning Beth and Maud were anxiously
nursing her, for she had developed a high fever and was delirious.

The days that succeed were anxious ones, for Patsy's nerves had given
away completely. It was many weeks later that the rest of them met on
deck.

"It's the first of February," said Uncle John. "Don't you suppose Patsy
could start for home pretty soon?"

"Perhaps so," answered Maud. "She is sitting up to-day, and seems
brighter and more like herself. Have we decided, then, to return to
America?"

"I believe so," was the reply. "We can't keep Ajo's ship forever, you
know, and without Doctor Gys we could never make it useful as a hospital
ship again."

"That is true," said the girl, thoughtfully. "Now that Andrew Denton,
with his wife and the countess, have gone to Charleroi, our ship seems
quite lonely."

"You see," said Ajo, taking part in the discussion, "we've never been
able to overcome the suspicious coldness of these Frenchmen, caused by
Elbl's unfortunate escape. We are not trusted fully, and never will be
again, so I'm convinced our career of usefulness here is ended."

"Aside from that," returned Uncle John, "you three girls have endured a
long period of hard work and nervous strain, and you need a rest. I'm
awfully proud of you all; proud of your noble determination and courage
as well as the ability you have demonstrated as nurses. You have
unselfishly devoted your lives for three strenuous months to the injured
soldiers of a foreign war, and I hope you're satisfied that you've done
your full duty."

"Well," returned Maud with a smile, "I wouldn't think of retreating if I
felt that our services were really needed, but there are so many women
coming here for Red Cross work--English, French, Swiss, Dutch and
Italian--that they seem able to cover the field thoroughly."

"True," said Beth, joining the group. "Let's go home, Uncle. The voyage
will put our Patsy in fine shape again. When can we start, Ajo?"

"Ask Uncle John."

"Ask Captain Carg."

"If you really mean it," said the captain, "I'll hoist anchor to-morrow
morning."





                           AUNT JANES NIECES
                              ON THE RANCH

                                   BY

                             EDITH VAN DYNE

                  AUTHOR OF AUNT JANES NIECES SERIES
                   THE FLYING GIRL SERIES, ETC., ETC.

                          The Reilly & Lee Co.
                                Chicago




                           _Copyright_, 1913
                                  _BY_
                       _The Reilly & Britton Co._

                    AUNT JANES NIECES ON THE RANCH






CONTENTS


   CHAPTER IUNCLE JOHN DECIDES

   CHAPTER IIEL CAJON RANCH

   CHAPTER IIITHAT BLESSED BABY!



CHAPTER IUNCLE JOHN DECIDES


And now, said Major Doyle, rubbing his hands together as he half
reclined in his big chair in a corner of the sitting room, now we shall
enjoy a nice cosy winter in dear New York.

Cosy? said his young daughter, Miss Patricia Doyle, raising her head
from her sewing to cast a glance through the window at the whirling
snowflakes.

Ab-so-lute-ly cosy, Patsy, my dear, responded the major. Here we are
in our own steam-heated flatseven rooms and a bath, not counting the
closetshot water any time you turn the faucet; a telephone call brings
the butcher, the baker, the candlestick-maker; latest editions of the
papers chucked into the passage! What more do you want?

Tcha!

This scornful ejaculation came from a little bald-headed man seated in
the opposite corner, who had been calmly smoking his pipe and dreamily
eyeing the flickering gas-log in the grate. The major gave a start and
turned to stare fixedly at the little man. Patsy, scenting mischief,
indulged in a little laugh as she threaded her needle.

Sir! what am I to understand from that brutal interruption? demanded
Major Doyle sternly.

Youre talking nonsense, was the reply, uttered in a tone of cheery
indifference. New York in winter is a nightmare. Blizzards, thaws,
hurricanes, ice, la grippe, shiversgrouches.

Drumsticks! cried the major indignantly. Its the finest climate in
the worldbar none. Weve the finest restaurants, the best theatres, the
biggest stores andand the stock exchange. And then, theres Broadway!
What more can mortal desire, John Merrick?

The little man laughed, but filled his pipe without reply.

Uncle John is getting uneasy, observed Patsy. Ive noticed it for
some time. This is the first snowstorm that has caught him in New York
for several years.

The blizzard came unusually early, said Mr. Merrick apologetically.
It took me by surprise. But I imagine there will be a few days more of
decent weather before winter finally sets in. By that time

Well, what then? asked the major in defiant accents, as his
brother-in-law hesitated.

By that time we shall be out of it, of course, was the quiet reply.

Patsy looked at her uncle reflectively, while the major grunted and
shifted uneasily in his chair. Father and daughter were alike devoted to
John Merrick, whose generosity and kindliness had rescued them from
poverty and thrust upon them all the comforts they now enjoyed. Even
this pretty flat building in Willing Square, close to the fashionable
New York residence district, belonged in fee to Miss Doyle, it having
been a gift from her wealthy uncle. And Uncle John made his home with
them, quite content in a seven-room-flat when his millions might have
purchased the handsomest establishment in the metropolis. Down in Wall
Street and throughout the financial districts the name of the great John
Merrick was mentioned with awe; here in Willing Square he smoked a pipe
in his corner of the modest sitting room and cheerfully argued with his
irascible brother-in-law, Major Doyle, whose business it was to look
after Mr. Merricks investments and so allow the democratic little
millionaire the opportunity to come and go as he pleased.

The majors greatest objection to Uncle Johns frequent absences from
New Yorkespecially during the winter monthswas due to the fact that
his beloved Patsy, whom he worshiped with a species of idolatry, usually
accompanied her uncle. It was quite natural for the major to resent
being left alone, and equally natural for Patsy to enjoy these travel
experiences, which in Uncle Johns company were always delightful.

Patsy Doyle was an unprepossessing little thing, at first sight. She was
short of stature and a bit plump; freckled and red-haired; neat and
wholesome in appearance but lacking style in either form or apparel.
But to her friends Patricia was beautiful. Her big blue eyes,
mischievous and laughing, won hearts without effort, and the girl was so
genuineso natural and unaffectedthat she attracted old and young alike
and boasted a host of admiring friends.

This girl was Uncle Johns favorite niece, but not the only one. Beth De
Graf, a year younger than her cousin Patsy, was a ward of Mr. Merrick
and lived with the others in the little flat at Willing Square. Beth was
not an orphan, but her father and mother, residents of an Ohio town, had
treated the girl so selfishly and inconsiderately that she had passed a
very unhappy life until Uncle John took her under his wing and removed
Beth from her depressing environment. This niece was as beautiful in
form and feature as Patsy Doyle was plain, but she did not possess
Patsys cheerful and uniform temperament and was by nature reserved and
diffident in the presence of strangers.

Yet Beth had many good qualities, among them a heart-felt sympathy for
young girls who were not so fortunate as herself. On this disagreeable
winters day she had set out to visit a settlement school where she had
long since proved herself the good angel of a score of struggling girls.
The blizzard had developed since she left home, but no one worried about
her, for Beth was very resourceful.

There was another niece, likewise dear to John Merricks heart, who had
been Louise Merrick before she married a youth named Arthur Weldon, some
two years before this story begins. A few months ago Arthur had taken
his young wife to California, where he had purchased a fruit ranch, and
there a baby was born to them which they named Jane Merrick Weldona
rather big name for what was admitted to be a very small person.

This baby, now five months old and reported to be thriving, had been
from its birth of tremendous interest to every inhabitant of the Willing
Square flat. It had been discussed morning, noon and night by Uncle John
and the girls, while even the grizzled major was not ashamed to admit
that that Weldon infant was an important addition to the family.
Perhaps little Jane acquired an added interest by being so far away from
all her relatives, as well as from the fact that Louise wrote such
glowing accounts of the babys beauty and witcheries that to believe a
tithe of what she asserted was to establish the child as an infantile
marvel.

Now, Patsy Doyle knew in her heart that Uncle John was eager to see
Louises baby, and long ago she had confided to Beth her belief that the
winter would find Mr. Merrick at Arthur Weldons California ranch, with
all his three nieces gathered around him and the infantile marvel in his
arms. The same suspicion had crept into Major Doyles mind, and that is
why he so promptly resented the suggestion that New York was not an
ideal winter resort. Somehow, the old major felt in his bones that his
beloved Patsy would be whisked away to California, leaving her father to
face the tedious winter without her; for he believed his business duties
would not allow him to get away to accompany her.

Yet so far Uncle John, in planning for the winter, had not mentioned
California as even a remote possibility. It was understood he would go
somewhere, but up to the moment when he declared we will be out of it,
of course, when the bad weather sets in, he had kept his own counsel
and forborne to express a preference or a decision.

But now the major, being aroused, decided to have it out with his
elusive brother-in-law.

Where will ye go to find a better place? he demanded.

Were going to Bermuda, said Uncle John.

For onions? asked the major sarcastically.

They have other things in Bermuda besides onions. A delightful climate,
Im told, is one of them.

The major sniffed. He was surprised, it is true, and rather pleased,
because Bermuda is so much nearer New York than is California; but it
was his custom to object.

Patsy cant go, he declared, as if that settled the question for good
and all. The sea voyage would kill her. Im told by truthful persons
that the voyage to Bermuda is the most terrible experience known to
mortals. Those who dont die on the way over positively refuse ever to
come back again, and so remain forever exiled from their homes and
familiesuntil they have the good luck to die from continually eating
onions.

Mr. Merrick smiled as he glanced at the majors severe countenance.

It cant be as bad as that, said he. I know a man who has taken his
family to Bermuda for five winters, in succession.

And brought em back alive each time?

Certainly. Otherwise, you will admit he couldnt take them again.

That family, asserted the major seriously, must be made of cast-iron,
with clockwork stomachs.

Patsy gave one of her low, musical laughs.

I think I would like Bermuda, she said. Anyhow, whatever pleases
Uncle John will please me, so long as we get away from New York.

Why, ye female traitor! cried the major; and added, for Uncle Johns
benefit: New York is admitted by men of discretion to be the modern
Garden of Eden. Its the one desideratum of

Here the door opened abruptly and Beth came in. Her cheeks were glowing
red from contact with the wind and her dark tailor-suit glistened with
tiny drops left by the melted snow. In her mittened hand she waved a
letter.

From Louise, Patsy! she exclaimed, tossing it toward her cousin; but
dont you dare read it till Ive changed my things.

Then she disappeared into an inner room and Patsy, disregarding the
injunction, caught up the epistle and tore open the envelope.

Uncle John refilled his pipe and looked at Patsys tense face
inquiringly. The major stiffened, but could not wholly repress his
curiosity. After a moment he said:

All well, Patsy?

Hows the baby? asked Uncle John.

Dear me! cried Patsy, with a distressed face; and no doctor nearer
than five miles!

Both men leaped from their chairs.

Why dont they keep a doctor in the house? roared the major.

Suppose we send Dr. Lawson, right away! suggested Uncle John.

Patsy, still holding up the letter, turned her eyes upon them
reproachfully.

Its all over, she said with a sigh.

The major dropped into a chair, limp and inert. Uncle John paled.

Thethe baby isntdead! he gasped.

No, indeed, returned Patsy, again reading. But it had colic most
dreadfully, and Louise was in despair. But the nurse, a dark-skinned
Mexican creature, gave it a dose of some horrid hot stuff

Chile con carne, most likely! ejaculated the major.

Horrible! cried Uncle John.

And that cured the colic but almost burned poor little Janes insides
out.

Insides out!

However, Louise says the dear baby is now quite well again, continued
the girl.

Perhaps so, when she wrote, commented the major, wiping his forehead
with a handkerchief; but thats a week ago, at least. A thousand things
might have happened to that child since then. Why was Arthur Weldon such
a fool as to settle in a desert place, far away from all civilization?
He ought to be prosecuted for cruelty.

The babys all right, said Patsy, soothingly. If anything serious
happened, Louise would telegraph.

I doubt it, said the major, walking the floor. I doubt if theres
such a thing as a telegraph in all that forsaken country.

Uncle John frowned.

You are getting imbecile, Major. Theyve a lot more comforts and
conveniences on that ranch than we have here in New York.

Name em! shouted the Major. I challenge ye to mention one thing we
havent right here in this flat.

Chickens! said Beth, re-entering the room in time to hear this
challenge. Hows the baby, Patsy?

Growing like a weed, dear, and getting more lovely and cunning every
second. Hereread the letter yourself.

While Beth devoured the news from California Uncle John replied to the
major.

At El Cajon Ranch, said he, theres a fine big house where the
sunshine peeps in and floods the rooms every day in the year. Hear that
blizzard howl outside, and think of the roses blooming this instant on
the trellis of Louises window. Arthur has two automobiles and can get
to town in twenty minutes. Theyve a long-distance telephone and Ive
talked with em over the line several times.

You have! This in a surprised chorus.

I have. Only last week I called Louise up.

An expensive amusement, John, said the major grimly.

Yes; but I figured I could afford it. I own some telephone stock, you
know, so I may get part of that investment back. They have their own
cows, and chickensas Beth truly saysand any morning they can pick
oranges and grapefruit from their own trees for breakfast.

Id like to see that precious baby, remarked Beth, laying the letter
on her lap to glance pleadingly at her uncle.

Uncle John is going to take us to Bermuda, said Patsy in a serious
voice.

The little man flushed and sat down abruptly. The major, noting his
attitude, became disturbed.

Youve all made the California trip, said he. It doesnt pay to see
any country twice.

But we havent seen Arthurs ranch, Beth reminded him.

Nor the baby, added Patsy, regarding the back of Uncle Johns head
somewhat wistfully.

The silence that followed was broken only by the majors low growls. The
poor man already knew his fate.

That chile-con-carne nurse ought to be discharged, mumbled Uncle John,
half audibly. Mexicans are stupid creatures to have around. I think we
ought to take with us an experienced nurse, who is intelligent and
up-to-date.

Oh, I know the very one! exclaimed Beth. Mildred Travers. Shes
perfectly splendid. Ive watched her with that poor girl who was hurt at
the school, and shes as gentle and skillful as she is refined. Mildred
would bring up that baby to be as hearty and healthful as a young
savage.

How soon could she go? asked Uncle John.

At an hours notice, Im sure. Trained nurses are used to sudden calls,
you know. Ill see her to-morrowif its better weather.

Do, said Uncle John. I suppose you girls can get ready by Saturday?

Of course! cried Patsy and Beth in one voice.

Then Ill make the reservations. Major Doyle, you will arrange your
business to accompany us.

I wont!

You will, or Ill discharge you. Youre working for me, arent you?

I am, sir.

Then obey orders.




CHAPTER IIEL CAJON RANCH


Uncle John always traveled comfortably and even luxuriously, but without
ostentation. Such conveniences as were offered the general public he
indulged in, but no one would suspect him of being a multi-millionaire
who might have ordered a special train of private cars had the
inclination seized him. A modest little man, who had made an enormous
fortune in the far Northwestalmost before he realized itJohn Merrick
had never allowed the possession of money to deprive him of his simple
tastes or to alter his kindly nature. He loved to be of the people and
to mingle with his fellows on an equal footing, and nothing distressed
him more than to be recognized by some one as the great New York
financier. It is true that he had practically retired from business, but
his huge fortune was invested in so many channels that his name remained
prominent among men of affairs and this notoriety he was unable wholly
to escape.

The trip to California was a delight because none of his fellow
passengers knew his identity. During the three days jaunt from Chicago
to Los Angeles he was recognized only as an engaging little man who was
conducting a party of three charming girls, as well as a sedate,
soldierly old gentleman, into the sunny Southland for a winters
recreation.

Of these three girls we already know Patsy Doyle and Beth DeGraf, but
Mildred Travers remains to be introduced. The trained nurse whom Beth
had secured was tall and slight, with a sweet face, a gentle expression
and eyes so calm and deep that a stranger found it disconcerting to gaze
within them. Beth herself had similar eyesbig and fathomlessyet they
were so expressive as to allure and bewitch the beholder, while Mildred
Travers eyes repelled one as being maskedas concealing some well
guarded secret. Both the major and Uncle John had felt this and it made
the latter somewhat uneasy when he reflected that he was taking this
girl to be the trusted nurse of Louises precious baby. He questioned
Beth closely concerning Mildred and his niece declared that no kindlier,
more sympathetic or more skillful nurse was ever granted a diploma. Of
Mildreds history she was ignorant, except that the girl had confided to
her the story of her struggles to obtain recognition and to get
remunerative work after graduating from the training school.

Once, you know, explained Beth, trained nurses were in such demand
that none were ever idle; but the training schools have been turning
them out in such vast numbers that only those with family influence are
now sure of work. Mildred is by instinct helpful and sympathetica
natural born nurse, Uncle Johnbut because she was practically a
stranger in New York she was forced to do charity and hospital work, and
that is how I became acquainted with her.

She seems to bear out your endorsement, except for her eyes, said
Uncle John. II dont likeher eyes. Theyre hard. At times they seem
vengeful and cruel, like tigers eyes.

Oh, you wrong Mildred, Im sure! exclaimed Beth, and Uncle John
reluctantly accepted her verdict. On the journey Miss Travers appeared
well bred and cultured, conversing easily and intelligently on a variety
of subjects, yet always exhibiting a reserve, as if she held herself to
be one apart from the others. Indeed, the girl proved so agreeable a
companion that Mr. Merricks misgivings gradually subsided. Even the
major, still suspicious and doubtful, admitted that Mildred was quite a
superior person.

Louise had been notified by telegraph of the coming of her relatives,
but they had withheld from her the fact that they were bringing a
proper nurse to care for the Weldon baby. The party rested a day in
Los Angeles and then journeyed on to Escondido, near which town the
Weldon ranch was located.

Louise and Arthur were both at the station with their big
seven-passenger touring car. The young mother was promptly smothered in
embraces by Patsy and Beth, but when she emerged from this ordeal to be
hugged and kissed by Uncle John, that observing little gentleman decided
that she looked exactly as girlish and lovely as on her wedding day.

This eldest niece was, in fact, only twenty years of agequite too young
to be a wife and mother. She was of that feminine type which matures
slowly and seems to bear the mark of perpetual youth. Mrs. Weldons
slight, willowy form was still almost childlike in its lines, and the
sunny, happy smile upon her face seemed that of a school-maid.

That tall, boyish figure beside her, now heartily welcoming the guests,
would scarcely be recognized as belonging to a husband and father. These
two were more like children playing at keeping house than sedate
married people. Mildred Travers observed the couple with evident
surprise; but the others, familiar with the love story of Arthur and
Louise, were merely glad to find them unchanged and enjoying their
former health and good spirits.

The baby!

That was naturally the first inquiry, voiced in concert by the late
arrivals; and Louise, blushing prettily and with a delightful air of
proprietorship, laughingly assured them that Toodlums was very well.

This is such a glorious country, she added as the big car started off
with its load, to be followed by a wagon with the baggage, that every
living thing flourishes here like the green bay treesand baby is no
exception. Oh, youll love our quaint old home, Uncle John! And, Patsy,
weve got such a flock of white chickens! And theres a new baby calf,
Beth! And the major shall sleep in the Haunted Room, and

Haunted? asked the major, his eyes twinkling.

Im sure theyre rats, said the little wife, but the Mexicans claim
its the old miser himself. And the oranges are just in their prime and
the roses are simply magnificent!

So she rambled on, enthusiastic over her ranch home one moment and the
next asking eager questions about New York and her old friends there.
Louise had a mother, who was just now living in Paris, much to Arthur
Weldons satisfaction. Even Louise did not miss the worldly-minded,
self-centered mother with whom she had so little in common, and perhaps
Uncle John and his nieces would never have ventured on this visit had
Mrs. Merrick been at the ranch.

The California country roads are all boulevards, although they are
nothing more than native earth, rolled smooth and saturated with heavy
oil until they resemble asphalt. The automobile was a fast one and it
swept through the beautiful country, all fresh and green in spite of the
fact that it was December, and fragrant with the scent of roses and
carnations, which bloomed on every side, until a twenty-minute run
brought them to an avenue of gigantic palms which led from the road up
to the ranch house of El Cajon.

Originally El Cajon had been a Spanish grant of several thousand acres,
and three generations of Spanish dons had resided there. The last of
these Cristovals had erected the present mansiona splendid, rambling
dwelling built around an open court where a fountain splashed and tall
palms shot their swaying crowns far above the housetop. The South Wing
was the old dwelling which the builder had incorporated into the present
scheme, but the newer part was the more imposing.

The walls were of great thickness and composed of adobe blocks of huge
size. These were not sun-baked, as is usual in adobe dwellings, but had
been burned like brick in a furnace constructed for the purpose by the
first proprietor, and were therefore much stronger and harder than
ordinary brick. In this climate there is no dampness clinging to such a
structure and the rooms were extraordinarily cool in summer and warm in
the chill winter season. Surrounding the house were many magnificent
trees of tropical and semi-tropical nature, all of which had now
attained their full prime. On the south and east sides were extensive
rose gardens and beds of flowers in wonderful variety.

It was here that the last Seor Cristoval had brought his young bride, a
lady of Madrid who was reputed to have possessed great beauty; but
seclusion in this retired spot, then much isolated, rendered her so
unhappy that she became mentally unbalanced and in a fit of depression
took her own life. Cristoval, until then a generous and noble man, was
completely changed by this catastrophe. During the remainder of his life
he was noted for parsimony and greed for money, not unmixed with
cruelty. He worked his ignorant Indian and Mexican servants mercilessly,
denying them proper food or wage, and his death was a relief to all.
Afterward the big estate was cut up and passed into various hands. Three
hundred acres of fine orange and olive groves, including the spacious
mansion, were finally sold to young Arthur Weldon.

Its an awfully big place, said Louise, as the party alighted and
stood upon the broad stone veranda, but it is so quaint and charming
that I love every stick and stone of it.

The baby! shrieked Patsy.

Wheres that blessed baby? cried Beth.

Then came from the house a dusky maid bearing in her arms a soft, fluffy
bundle that was instantly pounced upon by the two girls, to Uncle Johns
horror and dismay.

Be careful, there! he called. Youll smother the poor thing. But
Louise laughed and regarded the scene delightedly. And little Jane
seemed to appreciate the importance of the occasion, for she waved her
tiny hands and cooed a welcome to her two new aunties.




CHAPTER IIITHAT BLESSED BABY!


Oh, you darling!

Its my turn, Patsy! Dont be selfish. Let me kiss her again.

Thats enough, Beth. Heregive me my niece!

Shes mine, too.

Give me that baby! There; youve made her cry.

I havent; shes laughing because I kissed her wee nose.

Isnt she a dear, though?

Now, girls, suggested Louise, suppose we give Uncle John and the
major a peep at her.

Reluctantly the bundle was abandoned to its mother, who carried it to
where Mr. Merrick was nervously standing. Yes, yes, he said, touching
one cheek gently with the tip of his finger. Itits a fine child,
Louise; really aacreditable child. Butehisnt it rathersoft?

Of course, Uncle John. All babies are soft. Arent you going to kiss
little Jane?

Itwonthurt it?

Not a bit. Havent Beth and Patsy nearly kissed its skin off?

Babies, asserted Major Doyle, stiffly, were made to be kissed.
Anyhow, thats the penalty they pay for being born helpless. And with
this he kissed little Jane on both cheeks with evident satisfaction.

This bravado encouraged Uncle John to do likewise, but after the
operation he looked sheepish and awkward, as if he felt that he had
taken an unfair advantage of the wee lady.

She seems very red, Louise, he remarked, to cover his embarrassment.

Oh, no, Uncle! Everyone says shes the whitest baby of her age they
ever saw. Shes only five months old, remember.

Dear me; how very young.

But shes getting older every day, said Arthur, coming in from the
garage. What do you folks think of her, anyhow?

The rhapsodies were fairly bewildering, yet very pleasant to the young
father and mother. While they continued, Mildred Travers quietly took
the child from Louise and tenderly bent over it. Only the major noted
the little scene that ensued.

The eyes of the dark-skinned Mexican girl flashed sudden fire. She
pulled Mildreds sleeve and then fell back discomfited as the cold,
fathomless eyes of the trained nurse met her own. For an instant the
girl stood irresolute; then with a quick, unexpected motion she tore the
infant from Mildreds arms and rushed into the house with it.

Arthur, noticing this last action, laughed lightly. The major frowned.
Mildred folded her arms and stood in the background unmoved and
unobtrusive. Louise was chatting volubly with her two cousins.

Was that the same Mexican girl who fed the baby chile con carne?
inquired Uncle John anxiously.

Mercy, no! cried Arthur. What ever put such an idea into your head?

I believe the major suggested it, replied the little man. Anyhow, it
was something hot, so Louise wrote.

Oh, yes; when Toodlums had the colic. It was some queer Mexican remedy,
but Im confident it saved the childs life. The girl is a treasure.

Uncle John coughed and glanced uneasily at Miss Travers, who pretended
not to have overheard this conversation. But the major was highly amused
and decided it was a good joke on Mr. Merrick. It was so good a joke
that it might serve as a basis for many cutting remarks in future
discussions. His brother-in-law was so seldom guilty of an error in
judgment that Major Doyle, who loved to oppose him because he was so
fond of him, hailed Uncle Johns present predicament with pure joy.

Louise created a welcome diversion by ushering them all into the house
and through the stately rooms to the open court, where a luncheon table
was set beneath the shade of the palms.

Here was the baby again, with the Mexican girl, Inez, hugging it
defiantly to her bosom as she sat upon a stone bench.

Between the infant, the excitement of arrival and admiration for the
Weldon establishment, so far surpassing their most ardent anticipations,
Beth and Patsy had little desire for food. Uncle John and the major,
however, did ample justice to an excellent repast, which was served by
two more Mexican maids.

Do you employ only Mexicans for servants? inquired Uncle John, when
finally the men were left alone to smoke while the girls, under Louises
guidance, explored the house.

Only Mexicans, except for the Chinese cook, replied Arthur. It is
impossible to get American help and the Japs I wont have. Some of the
ranch hands have been on the place for years, but the house servants I
hired after I come here.

A lazy lot, eh? suggested the major.

Quite right, sir. But I find them faithful and easy to manage. You will
notice that I keep two or three times as many house servants as a
similar establishment would require in the east; but they are content
with much smaller wages. Its the same way on the ranch. Yet without the
Mexicans the help problem would be a serious one out here.

Does the ranch pay? asked Mr. Merrick.

I havent been here long enough to find out, answered Arthur, with a
smile. So far, Ive done all the paying. We shall harvest a big orange
crop next month, and in time the olives will mature; but Ive an idea
the expenses will eat up the receipts, by the end of the year.

No money in a California ranch, eh?

Why, some of my neighbors are making fortunes, I hear; but they are
experienced ranchers. On the other hand, my next neighbor at the north
is nearly bankrupt, because hes a greenhorn from the east. Some time,
when Ive learned the game, I hope to make this place something more
than a plaything.

Youll stay here, then? asked the major, with astonishment. Its the
most delightful country on earth, for a residence. Youll admit that,
sir, when you know it better.

Meantime the baggage wagon arrived and Patsy and Beth, having picked out
their rooms, began to unpack and settle in their new quarters.




CHAPTER IVLITTLE JANES TWO NURSES


Louise had been considerably puzzled to account for the presence of the
strange girl in Uncle Johns party. At first she did not know whether to
receive Mildred Travers as an equal or a dependent. Not until the three
nieces were seated together in Louises own room, exchanging girlish
confidences, was Mildreds status clearly defined to the young mother.

You see, explained Patsy, Uncle John was dreadfully worried over the
baby. When you wrote of that terrible time the dear little one had with
the colic, and how you were dependent on a Mexican girl who fed the
innocent lamb some horrid hot stuff, Uncle declared it was a shame to
imperil such a precious life, and that you must have a thoroughly
competent nurse.

But, said Louise, quite bewildered, Im afraid you dont understand
that

And so, broke in Beth, I told him I knew of a perfect jewel of a
trained nurse, who knows as much as most doctors and could guard the
baby from a thousand dangers. Id watched her care for one of our poor
girls who was knocked down by an automobile and badly injured, and
Mildred was so skillful and sympathetic that she quite won my heart. I
wasnt sure, at first, shed come way out to California, to stay, but
when I broached the subject she cried out: Thank heaven! in such a
heart-felt, joyous tone that I was greatly relieved. So we brought her
along, and

Really, Beth, I dont need her, protested Louise. The Mexicans are
considered the best nurses in the world, and Inez is perfectly devoted
to baby and worships her most sinfully. I got her from a woman who
formerly employed her as a nurse and she gave Inez a splendid
recommendation. Both Arthur and I believe she saved babys life by her
prompt action when the colic caught her.

But the hot stuff! cried Patsy.

It might have ruined babys stomach for life, asserted Beth.

No; its a simple Mexican remedy that is very efficient. Perhaps, in my
anxiety, I wrote more forcibly than the occasion justified, admitted
Louise; but I have every confidence in Inez.

The girls were really dismayed and frankly displayed their chagrin.
Louise laughed at them.

Never mind, she said; its just one of dear Uncle Johns blunders in
trying to be good to me; so lets endeavor to wiggle out of the hole as
gracefully as possible.

I dont see how youll do it, confessed Patsy. Heres Mildred,
permanently engaged and all expenses paid.

She is really a superior person, as youll presently discover, added
Beth. Ive never dared question her as to her family history, but I
venture to say she is well born and with just as good antecedents as we
haveperhaps better.

Shes very quiet and undemonstrative, said Patsy musingly.

Naturally, being a trained nurse. I liked her face, said Louise, but
her eyes puzzle me.

They are her one unfortunate feature, Beth agreed.

Theyre cold, said Patsy; thats the trouble. You never get _into_
her eyes, somehow. They repel you.

I never look at them, said Beth. Her mouth is sweet and sensitive and
her facial expression pleasant. She moves as gracefully and silently
asas

As a cat, suggested Patsy.

And she is acquainted with all the modern methods of nursing, although
shes done a lot of hospital work, too.

Well, said Louise, reflectively, Ill talk it over with Arthur and
see what we can do. Perhaps baby needs two nurses. We cant discharge
Inez, for Toodlums is even more contented with her than with me; but I
admit it will be a satisfaction to have so thoroughly competent a nurse
as Miss Travers at hand in case of emergency. And, above all else, I
dont want to hurt dear Uncle Johns feelings.

She did talk it over with Arthur, an hour later, and her boy husband
declared he had sized up the situation the moment he laid eyes on
Mildred at the depot. They owed a lot to Uncle John, he added, and the
most graceful thing they could do, under the circumstances, was to
instal Miss Travers as head nurse and retain Inez as her assistant.

The chances are, said Arthur laughingly, that the Mexican girl will
have most of the care of Toodlums, as she does now, while the superior
will remain content to advise Inez and keep a general supervision over
the nursery. So fix it up that way, Louise, and everybody will be
happy.

Uncle John was thanked so heartily for his thoughtfulness by the young
couple that his kindly face glowed with satisfaction, and then Louise
began the task of reconciling the two nurses to the proposed arrangement
and defining the duties of each. Mildred Travers inclined her head
graciously and said it was an admirable arrangement and quite
satisfactory to her. But Inez listened sullenly and her dark eyes glowed
with resentment.

You not trust me more, then? she added.

Oh, yes, Inez; we trust you as much as ever, Louise assured her.

Then why you hire this strange woman?

She is a present to us, from my Uncle John, who came this morning. He
didnt know you were here, you see, or he would not have brought her.

Inez remained unmollified.

Miss Travers is a very skillful baby doctor, continued Louise, and
she can mend broken bones, cure diseases and make the sick well.

Inez nodded.

I know. A witch-woman, she said in a whisper. You can trust me
seora, but you cannot trust her. No witch-woman can be trusted.

Louise smiled but thought best not to argue the point farther. Inez went
back to the nursery hugging Toodlums as jealously as if she feared some
one would snatch the little one from her arms.

Next morning Mildred said to Beth, in whom she confided most:

The Mexican girl does not like me. She is devotedly attached to the
baby and fears I will supplant her.

That is true, admitted Beth, who had conceived the same idea; but you
mustnt mind her, Mildred. The poor things only half civilized and
doesnt understand our ways very well. What do you think of little
Jane?

I never knew a sweeter, healthier or more contented baby. She smiles
and sleeps perpetually and seems thoroughly wholesome. Were she to
remain in her present robust condition there would be little need of my
services, I assure you. But

But what? asked Beth anxiously, as the nurse hesitated.

All babies have their ills, and little Jane cannot escape them. The
rainy season is approaching and dampness is trying to infants. There
will be months of moisture, and thenI shall be needed.

Have you been in California before? asked Beth, impressed by Mildreds
positive assertion.

The girl hesitated a moment, looking down.

I was born here, she said in low, tense tones.

Indeed! Why, I thought all the white people in California came from the
east. I had no idea there could be such a thing as a white native.

Mildred smiled with her lips. Her imperturbable eyes never smiled.

I am only nineteen, in spite of my years of training and hard work,
she said, a touch of bitterness in her voice. My father came here
nearly thirty years ago.

To Southern California?

Yes.

Did you live near here, then?

Mildred looked around her.

I have been in this house often, as a girl, she said slowly. Seor
Cristoval wasan acquaintance of my father.

Beth stared at her, greatly interested.

How strange! she exclaimed. You cannot be far from your own family,
then, she added.

Mildred shivered a little, twisting her fingers nervously together. She
was indeed sensitive, despite that calm, repellent look in her eyes.

I hope, she said, evading Beths remark, to be of real use to this
dear baby, whom I already love. The Mexican girl, Inez, is well enough
as a caretaker, but her judgment could not be trusted in emergencies.
These Mexicans lose their heads easily and in crises are liable to do
more harm than good. Mrs. Weldons arrangement is an admirable one and I
confess it relieves me of much drudgery and confinement. I shall keep a
watchful supervision over my charge and be prepared to meet any
emergency.

Beth was not wholly satisfied with this interview. Mildred had told her
just enough to render her curious, but had withheld any information as
to how a California girl happened to be in New York working as a trained
nurse. She remembered the girls fervent exclamation: Thank heaven!
when asked if she would go to Southern California, to a ranch called El
Cajon, to take care of a new baby. Beth judged from this that Mildred
was eager to get back home again; yet she had evaded any reference to
her family or former friends, and since her arrival had expressed no
wish to visit them.

There was something strange and unaccountable about the affair, and for
this reason Beth refrained from mentioning to her cousins that Mildred
Travers was a Californian by birth and was familiar with the scenes
around El Cajon ranch and even with the old house itself. Perhaps some
day the girl would tell her more, when she would be able to relate the
whole story to Patsy and Louise.

Of course the new arrivals were eager to inspect the orange and olive
groves, so on the day following that of their arrival the entire party
prepared to join Arthur Weldon in a tramp over the three hundred acre
ranch.

A little way back of the grounds devoted to the residence and gardens
began the orange groves, the dark green foliage just now hung thick with
fruit, some green, some pale yellow and others of that deep orange hue
which denotes full maturity. They consider five acres of oranges a
pretty fair ranch, out here, said the young proprietor; but I have a
hundred and ten acres of bearing trees. It will take a good many freight
cars to carry my oranges to the eastern markets.

And what a job to pick them all! exclaimed Patsy.

We dont pick them, said Arthur. I sell the crop on the trees and the
purchaser sends a crew of men who gather the fruit in quick order. They
are taken to big warehouses and sorted into sizes, wrapped and packed
and loaded onto cars. That is a separate branch of the business with
which we growers have nothing to do.

Between the orange and the olive groves, and facing a little lane, they
came upon a group of adobe hutsa little village in itself. Many
children were playing about the yards, while several stalwart Mexicans
lounged in the shade quietly smoking their eternal cigarettes. Women
appeared in the doorways, shading their eyes with their hands as they
curiously examined the approaching strangers.

Only one man, a small, wiry fellow with plump brown cheeks and hair and
beard of snowy whiteness, detached himself from the group and advanced
to meet his master. Removing his wide sombrero he made a sweeping bow, a
gesture so comical that Patsy nearly laughed aloud.

This is Miguel Zaloa, the ranchero, who has charge of all my men, said
Arthur. Then, addressing the man, he asked: Any news, Miguel?

Everthing all right, Meest Weld, replied the ranchero, his bright
eyes earnestly fixed upon his employers face. Some pardon, seor;
butMees Jane is well?

Quite well, thank you, Miguel.

Mees Jane, said the man, shyly twirling his hat in his hands as he
cast an upward glance at the young ladies, ees cherub young lade; much
love an beautful. Ees not?

Shes a dear, replied Patsy, with ready sympathy for the sentiment and
greatly pleased to find the man so ardent an admirer of the baby.

Everbod love Mees Jane, continued old Miguel, simply. Since she
have came, sun ees more bright, air ees more good, tamale ees more
sweet. Will Inez bring Mees Jane to see us to-day, Meest Weld?

Perhaps so, laughed Arthur; and then, as he turned to lead them to the
olive trees, Louise, blushing prettily at the praise bestowed upon her
darling, pressed a piece of shining silver into old Miguels handwhich
he grasped with alacrity and another low bow.

No doubt hes right about little Jane, remarked the major, when they
had passed beyond earshot, but Ive a faint suspicion the old bandit
praised her in order to get the money.

Oh, no! cried Louise; hes really sincere. It is quite wonderful how
completely all our Mexicans are wrapped up in baby. If Inez doesnt
wheel the baby-cab over to the quarters every day, they come to the
house in droves to inquire if Mees Jane is well. Their love for her is
almost pathetic.

Dont the fellows ever work? inquired Uncle John.

Yes, indeed, said Arthur. Have you any fault to find with the
condition of this ranch? As compared with many others it is a model of
perfection. At daybreak the mules are cultivating the earth around the
trees; when the sun gets low the irrigating begins. We keep the harrows
and the pumps busy every day. But during the hours when the sun shines
brightest the Mexicans do not love to work, and it is policyso long as
they accomplish their tasksto allow them to choose their own hours for
labor.

They seem a shiftless lot, said the major.

Theyre as good as their average type. But someold Miguel, for
instanceare better than the ordinary. Miguel is really a clever and
industrious fellow. He has lived here practically all his life and knows
intimately every tree on the place.

Did he serve the old Spanish donCristoval? asked Beth.

Yes; and his father before him. Ive often wondered how old Miguel is.
According to his own story he must be nearly a hundred; but thats
absurd. Anyhow, hes a faithful, capable fellow, and rules the others
with the rigor of an autocrat. I dont know what I should do without
him.

You seem to have purchased a lot of things with this ranch, observed
Uncle John. A capital old mansion, a band of trained servants, anda
ghost.

Oh, yes! exclaimed Louise. Major, did the ghost bother you last
night?

Not to my knowledge, said the old soldier. I was too tired to keep
awake, you know; therefore his ghostship could not have disturbed me
without being unusually energetic.

Have you ever seen the ghost, Louise? inquired Patsy.

No, dear, nor even heard it. But Arthur has. Its in the blue room, you
know, near Arthurs studyone of the prettiest rooms in the house.

Thats why we gave it to the major, added Arthur. Once or twice, when
Ive been sitting in the study, at about midnight, reading and smoking
my pipe, Ive heard some queer noises coming from the blue room; but I
attribute them to rats. These old houses are full of the pests and we
cant manage to get rid of them.

I imagine the walls are not all solid, explained Louise, for some of
those on the outside are from six to eight feet in thickness, and it
would be folly to make them of solid adobe.

As for that, adobe costs nothing, said Arthur, and it would be far
cheaper to make a solid wall than a hollow one. But between the blocks
are a lot of spaces favored as residences by our enemies the rats, and
there they are safe from our reach.

But the ghost? demanded Patsy.

Oh, the ghost exists merely in the minds of the simple Mexicans, over
there at the quarters. Most of them were here when that rascally old
Cristoval died, and no money would hire one of them to sleep in the
house. You see, they feared and hated the old fellow, who doubtless
treated them cruelly. That is why we had to get our house servants from
a distance, and even then we had some difficulty in quieting their fears
when they heard the ghost tales. Little Inez, added Louise, is
especially superstitious, and Im sure if she were not so devoted to
baby she would have left us weeks ago.

Inez told me this morning, said Beth, that the major must be a very
brave man and possessed some charm that protected him from ghosts, or he
would never dare sleep in the blue room.

I have a charm, declared the major, gravely, and its just common
sense.

But now they were among the graceful, broad-spreading olives, at this
season barren of fruit but very attractive in their gray-green foliage.
Arthur had to explain all about olive culture to the ignorant Easterners
and he did this with much satisfaction because he had so recently
acquired the knowledge himself.

I can see, said Uncle John, that your ranch is to be a great gamble.
In good years, you win; a crop failure will cost you a fortune.

True, admitted the young man; but an absolute crop failure is unknown
in this section. Some years are better than others, but all are good
years.

It was quite a long tramp, but a very pleasant one, and by the time they
returned to the house everyone was ready for luncheon, which awaited
them in the shady court, beside the splashing fountain. Patsy and Beth
demanded the baby, so presently Inez came with little Jane, and Mildred
Travers followed after. The two nurses did not seem on very friendly
terms, for the Mexican girl glared fiercely at her rival and Mildred
returned a basilisk stare that would have confounded anyone less
defiant.

This evident hostility amused Patsy, annoyed Beth and worried Louise;
but the baby was impartial. From her seat on Inez lap little Jane
stretched out her tiny hands to Mildred, smiling divinely, and the nurse
took the child in spite of Inez weak resistance, fondling the little
one lovingly. There was a sharp contrast between Mildreds expert and
adroit handling of the child and Inez tender awkwardness, and this was
so evident that all present noticed it.

Perhaps Inez herself felt this difference as, sullen and jealous, she
eyed the other intently. Then little Jane transferred her favors to her
former nurse and held out her hands to Inez. With a cry that was half a
sob the girl caught the baby in her arms and held it so closely that
Patsy had hard work to make her give it up.

By the time Uncle John had finished his lunch both Patsy and Beth had
taken turns holding the fascinating Toodlums, and now the latter
plunged Jane into Mr. Merricks lap and warned him to be very careful.

Uncle John was embarrassed but greatly delighted. He cooed and clucked
to the baby until it fairly laughed aloud with glee, and then he made
faces until the infant became startled and regarded him with grave
suspicion.

If youve done making an old fool of yourself, sir, said the major
severely, youll oblige me by handing over my niece.

_Your_ niece! was the indignant reply; shes nothing of the sort.
Jane is _my_ niece.

No more than mine, insisted the major; and youre worrying her. Will
you hand her over, you selfish man, or must I take her by force?

Uncle John reluctantly submitted to the divorce and the major handled
the baby as if she had been glass.

Ye see, he remarked, lapsing slightly into his Irish brogue, as he was
apt to do when much interested, Ive raised a daughter meself, which
John Merrick hasnt, and I know the ways of the wee women. They know
very well when a friend has em, andOuch! Leg-go, I say!

Little Jane had his grizzly moustache fast in two chubby fists and the
majors howls aroused peals of laughter.

Uncle John nearly rolled from his chair in an ecstacy of delight and he
could have shaken Mildred Travers for releasing the grip of the baby
fingers and rescuing the major from torture.

Laugh, ye satyr! growled the major, wiping the tears from his own
eyes. Its lucky you have no hair nor whiskersany more than an eggor
youd be writhing in agony before now. He turned to look wonderingly at
the crowing baby in Mildreds arms. Its a female Sandow! he averred.
The grip of her hands is something marvelous!




CHAPTER VINEZ THREATENS


Yes, said Louise, a week later, we all make fools of ourselves over
Toodlums, Really, girls, Jane is a very winning baby. I dont say that
because Im her mother, understand. If she were anyone elses baby, Id
say the same thing.

Of course, agreed Patsy. I dont believe such a baby was ever before
born. Shes so happy, and sweet, andand

And comfortable, said Beth. Indeed, Jane is a born sorceress; she
bewitches everyone who beholds her dear dimpled face. This is an
impartial opinion, you know; Id say the same thing if I were not her
adoring auntie.

Its true, Patsy declared. Even the Mexicans worship her. And Mildred
Traversthe sphinxwhose blood I am sure is ice-water, displays a
devotion for baby that is absolutely amazing. I dont blame her, you
know, for it must be a real delight to care for such a fairy. Im
surprised, Louise, that you can bear to have baby out of your sight so
much of the time.

Louise laughed lightly.

Im not such an unfeeling mother as you think, she answered. I know
just where baby is every minute and she is never out of my thoughts.
However, with two nurses, both very competent, to care for Toodlums, I
do not think it necessary to hold her in my lap every moment.

Here Uncle John and the major approached the palm, under which the three
nieces were sitting, and Mr. Merrick exclaimed:

Ill bet a cookie you were talking of baby Jane.

Youd win, then, replied Patsy. Theres no other topic of
conversation half so delightful.

Jane, observed the major, musingly, as he seated himself in a rustic
chair. A queer name for a baby, Louise. Whatever possessed you to
burden the poor infant with it?

Burden? Nonsense, Major! Its a charming name, cried Patsy.

She is named after poor Aunt Jane, said Louise.

A silence somewhat awkward followed.

My sister Jane, remarked Uncle John gravely, was in some respects an
admirable woman.

And in many others detestable, said Beth in frank protest. The only
good thing I can remember about Aunt Jane, she added, is that she
brought us three girls together, when we had previously been almost
unaware of one anothers existence. And she made us acquainted with
Uncle John.

Then she did us another favor, added Patsy. She died.

Poor Aunt Jane! sighed Louise. I wish I could say something to prove
that I revere her memory. Had the baby been a boy, its name would have
been John; but being a girl I named her for Uncle Johns sisterthe
highest compliment I could conceive.

Uncle John nodded gratefully. I wasnt especially fond of Jane,
myself, said he, but its a family name and Im glad you gave it to
baby.

Jane Merrick, said the major, was very cruel to Patsy and to me, and
so Im sorry you gave her name to baby.

Always contrary, eh? returned Uncle John, with a tolerant smile, for
he was in no wise disturbed by this adverse criticism of his defunct
sistera criticism that in fact admitted little argument. But it occurs
to me that the most peculiar thing about this name is that you three
girls, who were once Aunt Janes nieces, are now Niece Janes aunts!

Except me, smiled Louise. Im happy to claim a closer relationship.
But returning to our discussion of Aunt Jane. She was really
instrumental in making our fortunes as well as in promoting our
happiness, so I have no regret because I made baby her namesake.

The name of Jane, said Patsy, is in itself beautiful, because it is
simple and old-fashioned. Now that it is connected with my chubby niece
it will derive a new and added luster.

Quite true, declared Uncle John.

Where is Arthur? inquired the major.

Writing his weekly batch of letters, replied Arthurs wife. When they
are ready he is to drive us all over to town in the big car, and we have
planned to have lunch there and to return home in the cool of the
evening. Will that program please our guests?

All voiced their approval and presently Arthur appeared with his letters
and bade them get ready for the ride, while he brought out the car. He
always drove the machine himself, as no one on the place was competent
to act as chauffeur; but he managed it admirably and enjoyed driving.

Louise went to the nursery to kiss little Jane. The baby lay in her
crib, fast asleep. Near her sat Mildred Travers, reading a book.
Crouched in the window-seat was Inez, hugging her knees and gazing
moodily out into the garden.

The nursery was in the East Wing, facing the courtyard but also looking
upon the rose garden, its one deep-set window being near a corner of the
room. On one side it connected with a small chamber used by Inez, which
occupied half the depth of the wing and faced the garden. The other half
of the space was taken by a small sewing-room letting out upon the
court.

At the opposite side of little Janes nursery was a roomy chamber which
had been given up to Mildred, and still beyond this were the rooms
occupied by Arthur and Louise, all upon the ground floor. By this
arrangement the baby had a nurse on either side and was only one room
removed from its parents.

This wing was said to be the oldest part of the mansion, a fact attested
by the great thickness of the walls. Just above was the famous blue room
occupied by the major, where ghosts were supposed at times to hold their
revels. Yet, despite its clumsy construction, the East Wing was cheery
and pleasant in all its rooms and sunlight flooded it the year round.

After the master and mistress had driven away to town with their guests,
Inez sat for a time by the window, still motionless save for an
occasional wicked glance over her shoulder at Mildred, who read placidly
as she rocked to and fro in her chair. The presence of the American
nurse seemed to oppress the girl, for not a semblance of friendship had
yet developed between the two; so presently Inez rose and glided softly
out into the court, leaving Mildred to watch the sleeping baby.

She took the path that led to the Mexican quarters and ten minutes later
entered the hut where Bella, the skinny old hag who was the wife to
Miguel Zaloa, was busy with her work.

Ah, Inez. But where ees Mees Jane? was the eager inquiry.

Inez glanced around to find several moustached faces in the doorway.
Every dark, earnest eye repeated the old womans question. The girl
shrugged her shoulders.

She is care for by the new nurse, Meeldred. I left her sleeping.

Who sleeps, Inez? demanded the aged Miguel. Ees it the new nurse, or
Mees Jane?

Both, perhap. She laughed scornfully and went out to the shed that
connected two of the adobe dwellings and served as a shady lounging
place. Here a group quickly formed around her, including those who
followed from the hut.

I shall kill her, some day, declared the girl, showing her gleaming
teeth. What right have she to come an take our baby?

Miguel stroked his white moustache reflectively.

Ees this Meeldred good to Mees Jane? he asked.

When anyone looks, yes, replied Inez reluctantly. She fool even baby,
some time, who laugh at her. But poor baby do not know. I know. This
Meeldred ees a devil! she hissed.

The listening group displayed no emotion at this avowal. They eyed the
girl attentively, as if expecting to hear more. But Inez, having vented
her spite, now sulked.

Where she came from? asked Miguel, the recognized spokesman.

Back there. New York, tossing her head in an easterly direction.

Why she come? continued the old man.

The little mans with no hairMeest Merrickhe think I not know about
babies. He think this girl who learns babies in school, an from books,
know more than me who has care for many babybut for none like our Mees
Jane. Mees Jane ees angel!

They all nodded in unison, approving her assertion.

Eet ees not bad thought, that, remarked old Bella. Books an schools
ees good to teach wisdom.

Pah! Not for babies, objected her husband, shaking his head. Book an
school can not grow orange, either. To do a thing many time ees to know
it better than a book can know.

Besides, said Inez, this Meeldred ees witch-woman.

Yes?

I know it. She come from New York. But yesterday she say to me: Let us
wheel leetle Jane to the live oak at Burneys. How can she know there
is live oak at Burneys? Then, the first day she come, she say: Take
babys milk into vault under your room an put on stone shelf to keep
cool. I, who live here, do not know of such a vault. She show me some
stone steps in one corner, an she push against stone wall. Then wall
open like door, an I find vault. But how she know it, unless she is
witch-woman?

There was a murmur of astonishment. Old Miguel scratched his head as if
puzzled.

I, too, know about thees vault, said he; but then, eet ees I know all
of the old house, as no one else know. Once I live there with Seor
Cristoval. But how can thees New York girl know?

There was no answer. Merely puzzled looks.

What name has she, Inez? suddenly asked Miguel.

Travers. Meeldred Travers.

The old man thought deeply and then shook his head with a sigh.

In seexty year there be no Travers near El Cajon, he asserted. I
thought maybe she have been here before. But no. Even in old days there
ees no Travers come here.

There ees a Travers Ranch over at the north, asserted Bella.

Eet ees a name; there be no Travers live there, declared Miguel, still
with that puzzled look upon his plump features.

Inez laughed at him.

She is witch-woman, I tell you. I know it! Look in her eyes, an see.

The group of Mexicans moved uneasily. Old Miguel deliberately rolled a
cigarette and lighted it.

Thees woman I have not yet see, he announced, after due reflection.
But, if she ees witch-woman, eet ees bad for Mees Jane to be near her.

That is what _I_ say! cried Inez eagerly. She spoke better English
than the others. She will bewitch my baby; she will make it sickly, so
it will die! And she wrung her hands in piteous misery.

The Mexicans exchanged frightened looks. Old Bella alone seemed
unaffected.

Mees Weld own her babynot us, suggested Miguels wife. If Mees Weld
theenk thees girl is safe nurse, what have we to sayeh?

I say she shall not kill my baby! cried Inez fiercely. That is what
_I_ say, Bella. Before she do that, I kill thees Meeldred Travers.

Miguel examined the girls face intently.

You are fool, Inez, he asserted. It ees bad to keel anythingeven
thees New York witch-woman. Be compose an keep watch. Nothing harm Mees
Jane if you watch. Where are your folks, girl?

Live in San Diego, replied Inez, again sullen.

Once I know your father. He ees good man, but drink too much. If you
make quarrel about thees new nurse, you get sent home. Then you lose
Mees Jane. So keep compose, an watch. If you see anything wrong, come
to me an tell it. That ees best.

Inez glanced around the group defiantly, but all nodded approval of old
Miguels advice. She rose from the bench where she was seated, shrugged
her shoulders disdainfully and walked away without a word.




CHAPTER VIA DINNER WITH THE NEIGHBORS


Escondido, the nearest town and post office to El Cajon Ranch, is a
quaint little place with a decided Mexican atmosphere. Those California
inhabitants whom we call, for convenience, Mexicans, are not all
natives of Mexico, by any means. Most of them are a mixed breed derived
from the early Spanish settlers and the native Indian tribesboth alike
practically extinct in this localityand have never stepped foot in
Mexican territory, although the boundary line is not far distant.
Because the true Mexican is generally a similar admixture of Indian and
Spaniard, it is customary to call these Californians by the same
appellation. The early Spaniards left a strong impress upon this state,
and even in the newly settled districts the Spanish architecture
appropriately prevails, as typical of a semi-tropical country which owed
its first civilizing influences to old Spain.

The houses of Escondido are a queer mingling of modern bungalows and
antique adobe dwellings. Even the business street shows many adobe
structures. A quiet, dreamy little town, with a comfortable hotel and
excellent stores, it is much frequented by the wealthy ranchers in its
neighborhood.

After stopping at the post office, Arthur drove down a little side
street to a weather-beaten, unprepossessing building which bore the word
Restaurant painted in dim white letters upon its one window. Here he
halted the machine.

Oh, said Beth, drawing a long breath. Is this one of your little
jokes, Arthur?

A joke? Didnt we come for luncheon, then?

We did, and Im ravenous, said Patsy. But you informed us that there
is a good hotel here, on the main street.

So there is, admitted Arthur; but its like all hotels. Now, this
isdifferent. If youre hungry; if you want a treatsomething out of the
ordinaryjust follow me.

Louise was laughing at their doubting expressions and this care-free
levity led them to obey their hosts injunction. Then the dingy door
opened and out stepped a young fellow whom the girls decided must be
either a cowboy or a clever imitation of one.

He seemed very younga mere boyfor all his stout little form. He was
bareheaded and a shock of light, tow-colored hair was in picturesque
disarray. A blue flannel shirt, rolled up at the sleeves, a pair of drab
corduroy trousers and rough shoes completed his attire. Pausing
awkwardly in the doorway, he first flushed red and then advanced boldly
to shake Arthurs hand.

Why, Weldon, this is an unexpected pleasure, he exclaimed in a
pleasant voice that belied his rude costume, for its tones were well
modulated and cultured. Ive been trying to call you up for three days,
but something is wrong with the line. Hows baby?

This last question was addressed to Louise, who shook the youths hand
cordially.

Baby is thriving finely, she reported, and then introduced her friends
to Mr. Rudolph Hahn, who, she explained, was one of their nearest
neighbors.

We almost crowd the Weldons, he said, for our house is only five
miles distant from theirs; so weve been getting quite chummy since they
moved to El Cajon. Helenthats my wife, you knowis an humble worshiper
at the shrine of Miss Jane Weldon, as we all are, in fact.

Your wife! cried Patsy in surprise.

He laughed.

You think Im an infant, only fit to play with Jane, said he; but I
assure you I could vote, if I wanted towhich I dont. I think, sir,
turning to Uncle John, that my father knows you quite well.

Why, surely youre not the son of Andy Hahn, the steel king?

I believe they do give him that royal title; but Dad is only a monarch
in finance, and when he visits my ranch hes as much a boy as his son.

It scarcely seems possible, declared Mr. Merrick, eyeing the rough
costume wonderingly but also with approval. How long have you lived out
here?

Six years, sir. Im an old inhabitant. Weldon, here, has only been
alive for six months.

Alive?

Of course. One breathes, back east, but only lives in California.

During the laughter that followed this enthusiastic epigram Arthur
ushered the party into the quaint Spanish restaurant. The room was clean
and neat, despite the fact that the floor was strewn with sawdust and
the tables covered with white oilcloth. An anxious-eyed, dapper little
man with a foreign face and manner greeted them effusively and asked in
broken English their commands.

Arthur ordered the specialties of the house. These friends, Castro, are
from the far East, and Ive told them of your famous cuisine. Dont
disappoint them.

May I join you? asked Rudolph Hahn. I wish Id brought Nell over
to-day; shed have been delighted with this meeting. But we didnt know
you were coming. That confounded telephone doesnt reach you at all.

Im going over to the office to see about that telephone, said Arthur.
I believe Ill do the errand while Castro is preparing his compounds.
Im always uneasy when the telephone is out of order.

You ought to be, said Rudolph, with that blessed baby in the house.
It might save you thirty precious minutes in getting a doctor.

Does your line work? asked Louise.

Yes; it seems to get all connections but yours. So I imagine something
is wrong with your phone, or near the house.

Ill have them send a repair man out at once, said Arthur, and
departed for the telephone office, accompanied by his fellow rancher.

While they were gone Louise told them something of young Hahns history.
He had eloped, at seventeen years of age, with his fathers
stenographer, a charming girl of eighteen who belonged to one of the
best families in Washington. Old Hahn was at first furious and
threatened to disinherit the boy, but when he found the young brides
family still more furious and preparing to annul the marriage on the
grounds of the grooms youth, the great financiers mood changed and he
whisked the pair off to California and bought for them a
half-million-dollar ranch, where they had lived for six years a life of
unalloyed bliss. Having no children of their own, the Hahns were devoted
to little Jane and it was Rudolph who had given the baby the sobriquet
of Toodlums. At almost any time, night or day, the Hahn automobile was
liable to arrive at El Cajon for a sight of the baby.

Rudolphwe call him Dolph, you knowhas not a particle of business
instinct, said Louise, so he will never be able to take his fathers
place in the financial world. And he runs his ranch so extravagantly
that it costs the pater a small fortune every year. Yet they are
agreeable neighbors, artless and unconventional as children, and surely
the great Hahn fortune wont suffer much through their inroads.

When Arthur returned he brought with him still another neighboring
ranchman, an enormous individual fully six feet tall and broad in
proportion, who fairly filled the doorway as he entered. This man was
about thirty years of age, stern of feature and with shaggy brows that
overhung a pair of peaceful blue eyes which ought to have been set in
the face of some child. This gave him a whimsical look that almost
invariably evoked a smile when anyone observed him for the first time.
He walked with a vigorous, aggressive stride and handled his big body
with consummate grace and ease. His bow, when Arthur introduced him, was
that of an old world cavalier.

Here is another of our good friends for you to know. Hes our neighbor
at the north and is considered the most enterprising orange grower in
all California, announced Weldon, with a chuckle that indicated he had
said something funny.

Lemon, said the man, speaking in such a shrill, high-pitched tenor
voice that the sound was positively startling, coming from so massive a
chest.

I meant lemon, Arthur hastened to say. Permit me to introduce Mr.
Bulwer Runyon, formerly of New York but now the pride of the Pacific
coast, where his superb oranges

Lemons, piped the high, childish voice.

Whose lemons are the sourest andandjuiciest ever grown.

What there are of them, added the man in a wailing tenor.

We are highly honored to meet Mr. Bulwer Runyon, said the major,
noticing that the girls were for once really embarrassed how to greet
this new acquaintance.

Out here, remarked Dolph Hahn, with a grin, we drop the handle to his
name and call him Bul Run for short. Sounds sort of patriotic, you
know, and its not inappropriate.

You wrong me, said the big rancher, squeaking the words cheerfully but
at the same time frowning in a way that might well have terrified a
pirate. Im not a bull and I dont run. Its enough exertion to walk.
Therefore I ride. My new car is equipped with one of those remarkable

Pardon me; we will not discuss your new car, if you please, said
Arthur. We wish to talk of agreeable things. The marvelous Castro is
concocting some of his mysterious dishes and we wish you to assist us in
judging their merits.

I shall be glad to, for Im pitifully hungry, said the tenor voice. I
had breakfast at seven, you knowlike a working manand the ride over
here in my new six-cylinder machine, which has a wonderful

Never mind the machine, please. Forget it, and try to be sociable,
begged Dolph.

How is the baby, Mrs. Weldon?

Well and hearty, Bulwer, replied Louise. Why havent you been to see
little Jane lately?

I heard you had company, said Mr. Runyon; and the last time I came I
stayed three days and forgot all about my ranch. Ive made a will, Mrs.
Weldon.

A will! Youre not going to die, I hope?

I join you in that hope, most fervently, for Id hate to leave the new
machine and its

Go on, Bulwer.

But life is fleeting, and no one knows just when itll get to the end
of its fleet. Therefore, as I love the baby better than any other object
on earthanimate or inanimateexcept

Never mind your new car.

He sighed.

Therefore, Mrs. Weldon, Ive made Jane my heiress.

Oh, Bul! Arent you dreadfully in debt?

Yesm.

Is the place worth the mortgage? inquired Arthur.

Just about, although the money sharks dont think so. But all property
out here is rapidly increasing in value, declared Runyon, earnestly,
so, if I can manage to hold on a while longer, Toodlums will inherit
aaseveral fine lemon trees, at least.

Uncle John was delighted with the big fellow with the small voice. Even
the major clapped Bul Run on the shoulder and said the sentiment did him
credit, however big the mortgage might be.

By the time Castro brought in his first surprisea delicious soupa
jovial and friendly party was gathered around the oilcloth board. Even
the paper napkins could not dampen the joy of the occasion, or detract
from the exquisite flavor of the broth.

The boyish Dolph bewailed anon the absence of his Nell, who loved
Castros cookery above everything else, while every endeavor of Mr.
Runyon to explain the self-starter on his new car was so adroitly headed
off by his fellow ranchers that the poor fellow was in despair. The
lunch turned out to be a seven course dinner and each course
introduced such an enticing and unusual dish that every member of the
party became an audacious gormandizer. None of the girlsexcept
Louisehad ever tasted such concoctions before, or might even guess what
many of them were composed of; but all agreed with Patsy when she
energetically asserted that Castro out-cheffed both Rector and Sherry.

If only he would have tablecloths and napkins, and decent rugs upon the
floor, added dainty Louise.

Oh, that would ruin the charm of the place, protested Uncle John.
Dont suggest such a horror to Castro, Louise; at least until after we
have returned to New York.

Ill take you riding in my car, piped Runyon to Beth, who sat beside
him. I dont have to crank it, you know; I just

Have you sold your orange crop yet? asked Arthur.

Lemons, sir! said the other reproachfully. And the laugh that followed
again prevented his explaining the self-starter.

The porch was shady and cool when they emerged from the feast room and
Arthur Weldon, as host, proposed they sit on the benches with their
coffee and cigars and have a social chat. But both Runyon and Hahn
protested this delay. They suggested, instead, that all ride back to El
Cajon and play with the baby, and so earnest were they in this desire
that the proud young father and mother had not the grace to refuse.

Both men had their cars at the village garage and an hour later the
procession started. Beth riding beside Bul Run and Patsy accompanying
the jolly Dolph.

We must stop and pick up Nell, said the latter, for shed be mad as
hops if I went to see Toodlums without her.

I dont wonder, replied Patsy. Isnt my niece a dear baby?

Never was one born like her. Shes the only woman I ever knew who
refuses to talk.

She crows, though.

To signify she agrees with everyone on every question; and her angelic
smile is so genuine and constant that it gets to your heart in spite of
all resistance.

And shes so soft and mushy, as it were, continued Patsy
enthusiastically; but I suppose shell outgrow that, in time.

Mrs. Helen Hahn, when the three automobiles drew up before her young
husbands handsome residence, promptly agreed to join Rudolph in a visit
to the baby. She proved to be a retiring and rather shy young woman, but
she was very beautiful and her personality was most attractive. Both
Patsy and Beth were delighted to find that Louise had so charming a
neighbor, of nearly her own age.

Rudolph would not permit the party to proceed further until all had
partaken of a refreshing glass of lemonade, and as this entailed more or
less delay the sun was getting low as they traversed the five miles to
El Cajon, traveling slowly that they might enjoy the exquisite tintings
of the sky. Runyon, who was a bachelor, lived a few miles the other side
of Arthurs ranch. All three ranches had at one time been part of the
Spanish grant to the Cristovals, and while Arthur now possessed the old
mansion, the greatest number of acres had been acquired by Rudolph Hahn,
who had preferred to build for himself and his bride a more modern
residence.




CHAPTER VIIGONE!


The Weldons and their guests were greeted at their door by a maid, for
there were no men among the house servants, and as Louise ushered the
party into the living room she said to the girl:

Ask Miss Travers to bring the baby here.

The maid departed and was gone so long that Louise started out to see
why her order was not obeyed. She met the woman coming back with a
puzzled face.

Mees Traver not here, seora, she said.

Then tell Inez to fetch the baby.

Inez not here, seora, returned the woman.

Indeed! Then where is baby?

Mees Jane not here, seora.

Louise rushed to the nursery, followed by Arthur, whose quick ears had
overheard the statement. The young mother bent over the crib, the covers
of which were thrown back as if the infant had been quickly caught
upperhaps from a sound sleep.

Good gracious! cried Louise, despairingly; shes gonemy babys
gone!

Gone? echoed Arthur, in a distracted tone. What does it mean, Louise?
Where can she be?

A gentle hand was laid on his shoulder and Uncle John, who had followed
them to the room, said soothingly:

Dont get excited, my boy; theres nothing to worry about. Your two
nurses have probably taken little Jane out for a ride.

At this time of night? exclaimed Louise. Impossible!

It is merely twilight; they may have been delayed, replied Mr.
Merrick.

But the air grows chill at this hour, and

And there is the baby-cab! added Arthur, pointing to a corner.

Louise and her husband looked into one anothers eyes and their faces
grew rigid and white. Uncle John, noting their terror, spoke again.

This is absurd, said he. Two competent nurses, both devoted to little
Jane, would not allow the baby to come to harm, I assure you.

Where is she, then? demanded Arthur.

Hello; whats up? called Patsy Doyle, entering the room with Beth to
see what was keeping them from their guests.

Babys gone! wailed Louise, falling into a chair promptly to indulge
in a flood of tears.

Gone? Nonsense, said Beth, gazing into the empty cradle. Then she put
down her hand and felt of the bedding. It had no warmth. Evidently the
child had been removed long ago.

Before we give way to hysterics, advised Uncle John, striving to
appear calm, let us investigate this matter sensibly. Babies dont
disappear mysteriously, in these days, I assure you.

Question the servants, suggested Patsy.

Thats the idea, squeaked a high tenor voice, and there in the dim
light stood big Bulwer Runyon, and with him little Rudolph and his wife
Helen, all exhibiting astonished and disturbed countenances.

II cant see any reason for worry, Louise, dear, remarked Mrs. Hahn,
in a voice that trembled with agitation. Not a soul on earth would harm
that precious Jane.

Arthur turned to the maid.

Send all the servants here, he commanded. Every one of them, mind
you!

Presently they congregated in the roomy nursery, which had now been
brilliantly lighted. There were five womensome old and some young, but
all Mexicansand a little withered Chinaman named Sing Fing, whose age
was uncertain and whose yellow face seemed incapable of expression.

Uncle John, assisted at times by Rudolph and Arthur, did the
questioning. Marcia had seen Miss Travers leave the house, alone, at
about two oclock, as if for a walk. She did not notice which way the
nurse went nor whether she returned. Perhaps she wore a cloak; Marcia
could not tell. The day was warm; doubtless Miss Travers had no wraps at
all. A hat? Oh, no. She would have noticed a hat.

The only one who recollected seeing Inez was Eulalia, a chambermaid. She
had observed Inez sitting in the court, in a despondent attitude, at
about half past two. Yes; it might have been a little earlier; it was
hard to remember. None of the house servants paid much attention to the
nurses. They had their own duties to perform.

But the baby had not been seen at all; not since Inez had brought her in
from her ride at noon. Then it was Miss Travers who had taken the child
from the cab and with her disappeared into the nursery.

This report did not prove reassuring. Sing Fing announced that Miss
Travers had prepared the babys liquid food in the kitchen at half past
twelve, but that neither she nor Inez had joined the other servants at
luncheon. This last was not an unusual occurrence, it seemed, but taken
in connection with the other circumstances it impressed the questioners
as suspicious.

Perhaps they are all at the Mexican quarters, exclaimed Patsy, with
sudden inspiration.

Arthur and Rudolph immediately volunteered to investigate the quarters
and started off on a run.

Its all right, you know, consolingly panted Dolph, on the way. The
baby and her nurses cant be lost, strayed or stolen, so dont worry.

Common sense urges me to agree with you, returned Arthur, but theres
certainly something mysterious about the disappearance.

It wont be mysterious when we discover the reason, you know.

The men were all at work in the olive groves, but some of the women were
in the huts and old Bella listened to Arthurs frantic questions with
blank amazement, as did the others who hastily congregated.

Thees morn, said Bella, Inez bring Mees Jane here for little timenot
long time. Then she takes her way again.

While Inez here, said another woman, I see that otherthe American
nursebehind hedge, yonder, watching us.

How you know that? demanded Bella sharply, as she turned to the
speaker.

I know because she is stranger, was the calm reply. Inez see her,
too, an that ees why Inez hurry away.

Which way did she go? asked Arthur, and they all pointed to the path
that led to the house.

It doesnt matter, suggested Dolph. We know that both the nurses were
in the house afterward. The main point is that the baby is not here.

As they started to return they came face to face with old Miguel. The
shadow was deep beneath the trees but there was no mistaking the
Mexicans snow-white hair.

Have you seen baby? demanded Weldon eagerly.

Miguel stared at them. He came nearer, putting his face close to his
masters, and stared harder.

Mees Jane? You ask for Mees Jane?

Yes. Tell me, quick, do you know where she is?

Mees Jane mus be at house, said Miguel, passing a hand over his eyes
as if bewildered.

She is not, said Rudolph. She is gone, and both her nurses are gone.

Inez gone? repeated the old man, stupidly. Ah; then she have carried
away Mees Jane! I was fraid of that.

Carried her away! Why should she do that? asked Arthur impatiently.

She jealous of New York girlMees Travers. Inez say she kill Mees
Travers; but I tell her no. I say better not. But Inez hate thees girl
for taking Mees Jane away from her. Inez love baby, Meest Weld; too much
to be safe nurse.

While Arthur tried to comprehend this strange information Rudolph said
to Miguel:

Then you havent seen the baby? You dont know where she is?

The old Mexican gave him a keen look.

No, Meest Hahn.

You dont know where Inez has gone?

No, Meest Hahn.

Nor the other nursethe American girl?

No, Meest Hahn.

They hurried back to the house, leaving the old Mexican standing
motionless beside the path.




CHAPTER VIIIVERY MYSTERIOUS


Arthur found Louise developing hysteria, while Beth, Patsy and Helen
Hahn were working over her and striving to comfort her. Uncle John, the
major and big Runyon stood gazing helplessly at the dolorous scene.

Well? Well? cried Mr. Merrick, as Weldon and young Hahn entered. Any
news?

Arthur shook his head and went to his wife, bending over to kiss her
forehead.

Be brave, dear! he whispered.

It needed but this tender admonition to send the young mother into new
paroxysms.

See here; were wasting time, protested Runyon, his voice reaching
high C in his excitement. Something must be done!

Of course, cried Patsy, turning from Louise. Were a lot of ninnies.
Let us think what is best to do and map out a logical program.

The others looked at her appealingly, glad to have some one assume
command but feeling themselves personally unequal to the task of
thinking logically.

First, said the girl, firmly, let us face the facts. Baby Jane has
mysteriously disappeared, and with her the two nurses.

Not necessarily with her, objected Rudolph. Let us say the two nurses
have also disappeared. Now, the question is, why?

A shriek from Louise emphasised the query.

Dont lets bother with the why? retorted Patsy. We dont care why.
The vital question is where? All we want, just now, is to find baby
and get her back home again to her loving friends. She cant have been
gone more than four hoursor five, at the most. Therefore she isnt so
far away that an automobile cant overtake her.

But she cant walk, you know, squeaked Runyon. Baby didnt go alone;
some one took her.

True enough, observed Uncle John. Youre wrong, Patsy. We must try to
decide who took baby, and why. Then we might undertake the search with a
chance of success.

Whoever took baby went on foot, persisted Miss Doyle. The only four
automobiles in the neighborhood are now standing in our driveway and in
the garage. This is a country of great distances, and no matter in what
direction the baby has been taken an auto is sure to overhaul her, if we
dont waste valuable time in getting started.

Thats right! cried Arthur, turning from Louise. The theory agrees
with old Miguels suspicion about Inez, and

What suspicion? cried half a dozen.

Never mind that, said Rudolph, with a hasty glance toward Louise;
lets be off, and talk afterward.

We men must decide on our routes and all take the road at once,
proposed Rudolph.

Its pitch dark, said Runyon.

Would you like to wait until morning? demanded Rudolph, sarcastically.

No; I want to rescue that baby, said the big fellow.

Then take the north road, as far as Tungars ranch. Stop at every house
to inquire. When you get to Tungars, come back by the McMillan road.
Thats a sixty mile jaunt, and it will cover the north and northwest.
Take Mr. Merrick with you. Now, then, off you go!

Runyon nodded and left the room, followed gladly by Uncle John, who
longed to be doing something that would count. The others soon heard the
roar of the motor car as it started away on its quest.

Then it was arranged for Arthur to drive back to Escondido to make
inquiries and to watch the departure of the evening train, the only one
to pass the station since baby had been missing. He was to carry Major
Doyle with him and return by another route. Hahn promised to cover with
his own car the only other two roads that remained to be searched, and
he figured that they would all return to the house within two or three
hours, whenif still there was no newsthey might plan a further pursuit
of the fugitive baby.

Helen Hahn had promised not to leave Louise until baby was found, and
before starting Arthur assisted his wife to her room, where he left her
weeping dismally one moment and screaming for little Jane the next.

Sing Fing had sent a maid to announce dinner, but no one paid any
attention to the summons.

After the three automobiles had departed, Patsy and Beth remained in the
nursery and left Helen and a maid with Louise. Once alone, Miss Doyle
said to her cousin:

Having started them upon the search, Beth, you and I must take up that
pertinent suggestion made by Mr. Hahn and face the important question:
Why?

Im dying to be of some use, dear, responded Beth in a disconsolate
tone, but I fear we two girls are quite helpless. How can _we_ tell why
the baby has been stolen?

Has she been stolen? inquired Patsy. We mustnt take even that for
granted. Let us be sensible and try to marshal our wits. Heres the
fact: babys gone. Heres the problem: why?

We dont know, said Beth. No one knows.

Of course some one knows. Little Jane, as our friend Bul Run reminded
us, cant walk. If she went away, she was carried. By whom? And why? And
where?

Dear me! cried Beth, despairingly; if we knew all that, we could find
baby.

Exactly. So lets try to acquire the knowledge.

She went into Mildreds room and made an examination of its contents.
The place seemed in its usual order, but many of Mildreds trinkets and
personal possessions were scattered around.

Her absence wasnt premeditated, decided Patsy. Her white sweater is
gone, but that is all. This fact, however, may prove that she expected
to be out after dark. It is always chilly in this country after sundown
and doubtless Mildred knew that.

Why, she used to live here! cried Beth. Of course she knew.

Patsy sat down and looked at her cousin attentively.

That is news to me, she said in a tone that indicated she had made a
discovery. Do you mean that Mildred once lived in this neighborhood?

Yes; very near here. She told me she had known this old house well
years ago, when she was a girl. She used to visit it in company with her
father, a friend of old Seor Cristoval.

Huh! exclaimed Patsy. Thats queer, Why didnt she tell us this, when
we first proposed bringing her out here?

I dont know. I remember she was overjoyed when I first suggested her
coming, but I supposed that was because she had at last found a paying
job.

When did she tell you of this?

Just lately.

What else did she say?

Nothing more. I asked if she had any relatives or friends living here
now, but she did not reply.

Beth, Im astonished! asserted Patsy, with a grave face. This
complicates matters.

I dont see why.

Because, if Mildred knows this neighborhood, and wanted to steal baby
and secrete her, she could take little Jane to her unknown friends and
we could never discover her hiding-place.

Why should Mildred Travers wish to steal baby? asked Beth.

For a rewarda ransom. She knows that Arthur Weldon is rich, and that
Uncle John is richer, and she also knows that dear little Toodlums is
the pride of all our hearts. If she demands a fortune for the return of
baby, we will pay it at once.

And prosecute her abductor, Mildred, afterward, said Beth. No, Patsy;
I dont believe shes that sort of a girl, at all.

We know nothing of her history. She is secretive and reserved.
Mildreds cold, hard eyes condemn her as one liable to do anything. And
this was such an easy way for her to make a fortune.

Beth was about to protest this severe judgment, but on second thought
remained silent. Appearances were certainly against Mildred Travers and
Beth saw no reason to champion her, although she confessed to herself
that she had liked the girl and been interested in helping her.

We have still Inez to consider, said she. What has become of the
Mexican girl?

We are coming to her presently, replied Patsy. Let us finish with
Mildred first. A girl who has evidently had a past, which she guards
jealously. A poor girl, whose profession scarcely earned her
bread-and-butter before we engaged her. A girl whose eyes repel
friendship; who has little to lose by kidnapping Jane in the attempt to
secure a fortune. She was fond of baby; I could see that myself; so she
wont injure our darling but will take good care of her until we pay the
money, when Toodlums will be restored to us, smiling and crowing as
usual. Beth, if this reasoning is correct, we neednt worry. By
to-morrow morning Arthur will receive the demand for ransom, and he will
lose no time in satisfying Mildreds cupidity.

Very good reasoning, said Beth; but I dont believe a word of it.

I hope it is true, said Patsy, for otherwise we are facing a still
worse proposition.

Inez?

Yes. Inez isnt clever; she doesnt care for money; she would not steal
Jane for a ransom. But the Mexican girl worships baby in every fibre of
her being. She would die for baby; she lowering her voice to a
whisper, she would _kill_ anyone for baby.

Beth shivered involuntarily as Patsy uttered this horrible assertion.

You mean

Now, let us look at this matter calmly. Inez has, from the first,
resented the employment of Mildred as chief nurse. She has hated Mildred
with a deadly hatred and brooded over her fancied wrongs until she has
lost all sense of reason. She feared that in the end baby Jane would be
taken away from her, and this thought she could not bear. Therefore she
has stolen baby and carried her away, so as to have the precious one
always in her keeping.

And Mildred? asked Beth.

Well, in regard to Mildred, there are two conjectures to consider. She
may have discovered that Inez had stolen baby and is now following in
pursuit. Or

Or what, dear? as imaginative Patsy hesitated, appalled by her own
mental suggestion.

Or in a fit of anger Inez murdered Mildred and hid her body. Then, to
escape the penalty of her crime, she ran away and took baby with her.
Either one of these suppositions would account for the absence of both
nurses.

Beth looked at her cousin in amazement.

I think, said she, youd better go and get something to eat; or a cup
of tea, at least. This excitement isismaking you daffy, Patsy dear.

Pah! Food would disgust me. And Im not crazy, Beth. Dreadful things
happen in this world, at times, and Louise has a queer lot of people
around her. Think a moment. Our baby has disappeared. Her two nurses,
neither of whom are especially trustworthy, have also disappeared.
Theres a reason, Beth, and you may be sure its not any common,
ordinary reason, either. Im trying to be logical in my deductions and
to face the facts sensibly.

Inez would be as careful of babys welfare as would Mildred.

I realize that. If I thought for a moment that baby was in any peril I
would go distracted, and scream louder than poor Louise is doing. Do you
hear her? Isnt it awful?

Let us tell Louise these things, said Beth, rising from her chair.
What you call your deductions are terribly tragic, Patsy, but they
reassure us about baby. Shall we go to Louise?

I think it will be better, decided Patsy, and they left the nursery
and stepped out into the court. At the far end of the open space stood
huddled a group of men, all of whom bore lanterns. Patsy advanced to the
group and discovered them to be the Mexican laborers from the quarters.
Old Miguel advanced a pace and bowed.

We search for babyfor Mees Janeeh? he said, questioningly, as if
desiring instructions.

That is a happy thought, Miguel, replied the girl. The others are
scouring the roads in their motor cars, but the country needs searching,
tooaway from the roads, in the fields and orchards. Send your men out
at once, and scatter them in all directions.

Miguel turned and rapidly harangued his followers in the Spanish patois.
One by one they turned and vanished into the night. Only the old man
remained.

Everbod love Mees Jane, he said simply. They all want to find her,
an ask me to let em go. Good. They will search well.

In spite of the words there was a tone of indifference in Miguels voice
that attracted the girls notice. He did not seem in the least worried
or agitated, nor did he appear to attach much importance to the search.
Yet Patsy knew the aged foreman was one of Mees Janes most devoted
admirers.

Where do you think baby is? she asked abruptly.

Quien sabe? he answered, and then in English, who knows?

Be sensible, Miguel! No one would hurt the dear child, Im sure.

His dark features wrinkled in an engaging smile.

No one would hurt Mees Jane. I believe it.

But some one has carried her away.

He shrugged his shoulders.

Some time she come back, said he.

Now, see here, Miguel; you know more than anyone else about this
affair. Tell me the truth.

He raised his brows, shaking his head.

I know nothing, said he. I not worry much; but I know nothing.

Then you suspect.

The old man regarded her curiously; almost suspiciously, Patsy thought.

What ees suspec? he asked. It ees nothing. To suspec ees not to
know. Not to know eesnothing at all.

The girl stamped her foot impatiently, for she caught Beth smiling at
her.

What is Inez to you, Miguel? she demanded.

Again he smiled the childlike, engaging smile.

She ees to me nothing, said he. Inez is Mexican, but her family ees
not my family. Not all Mexicans eesrespecble. Once I know Inez
father. He drink too much wheesky, an the wheesky make heem bad.

But you like Inez?

She ees good to Mees Jane; butshe have bad tempers.

Patsy thought a moment.

Did you know Mildred Travers when she used to live near here? she
asked.

Old Miguel started and took a step forward.

Where she leeve, when she ees here? he asked eagerly.

I dont know. Have you ever seen her?

No. She do not come to our quarters.

Wait a minute, said Patsy, and ran up to her room, leaving Beth to
confront the ranchero and to study him with her dark, clear eyes. But
she said nothing until her cousin returned and thrust a small kodak
print into Miguels hand.

That is Mildred Travers, said Patsy.

Miguel held up his lantern while he examined the picture and both girls
observed that his hand trembled. For a long time he remained bent over
the printan unnecessarily long time, indeedbut when he raised his head
his face was impassive as a mask.

I do not know Mees Travers, was all he said as he handed back the
picture. Now I go an hunt for Mees Jane, he quickly added.

They watched him turn and noticed that his steps, as he left the court,
were tottering and feeble.

He lied, said Beth, softly.

I am sure of it, agreed Patsy; but that does not enlighten the
mystery any. Im sorry we brought Mildred to this place. Theres just
one thing you can bank on, Beth: that in some way or other Mildred is
responsible for the disappearance of our precious Toodlums.




CHAPTER IXA FRUITLESS SEARCH


Meantime, Uncle John and big Runyon were bowling along the north road,
the lights gleaming from the powerful lanterns of the car and
illuminating every object on either side of the way. The road seemed
deserted and it was fully twenty minutes before they came to the first
ranch house beyond that owned by Runyon himself. Here Mr. Merrick got
out to make inquiries.

A tall, slovenly dressed woman answered his ring. She carried an oil
lamp in her hand and eyed her late visitor severely.

Have you seen a woman with a baby pass this way to-daythis afternoon?
asked the little man.

Yes, was the reply; she stopped here for supper.

Uncle Johns heart gave a great bound.

Have they gone on? he inquired.

Yes; an hour ago.

Which way, maam?

She nodded toward the north and Mr. Merrick hastily turned away. Then,
pausing as a thought occurred to him, he asked:

Was thethe babyquite well, maam?

Seemed so, was the gruff answer and she slammed the door.

Of course she was provoked, mused Uncle John, as he hurried back to
the car. I forgot to thank her. Never mind; well stop on our way
back.

Well? demanded Runyon.

Weve got em! was the joyful response. They stopped here for supper
and went on an hour ago. Drive ahead, and keep a sharp lookout.

Who stopped here? asked the other, as he started the car.

Why the woman with the baby, of course.

Which woman?

Which one? Oh, I didnt bother to ask. It doesnt matter, does it,
whether its Mildred or Inez. Its the baby we want.

Runyon drove on a while in silence.

Did she describe little Jane accurately? he asked, in his high, piping
tenor.

She didnt describe her at all, said Uncle John, provoked by such
insistence. There isnt likely to be more than one baby missing, in
this lonely section of the country.

The big rancher made no reply. Both were keenly eyeing every object that
fell under the light of the lamps. Presently they caught sight of a
small white house half hidden by a grove of tall eucalyptus. There was
no driveway, but the car was stopped at the nearest point and Uncle John
got out. To his surprise Runyon followed him, saying:

Two heads are better than one, sir.

What do you mean by that, sir? asked Mr. Merrick, sternly. Dont you
think Im competent to ask a question?

You dont ask enough questions, returned Runyon frankly. Im not sure
were on the right trail.

Well, I am, declared Uncle John, stiffly.

It took then some time to arouse the inhabitants of the house, who
seemed to have retired for the night, although it was still early.
Finally a woman thrust her head from an upper window.

Whats wanted? she inquired in querulous tones.

Have you seen a woman with a baby pass by here? called Uncle John.

No.

Thank you, maam; sorry to have troubled you, said the little man, but
in a very disappointed voice.

Hold on a minute! cried Runyon, as the woman was closing the window.
They told us at the last house that a woman with a baby stopped there
for supper.

Oh; they did, eh?

Yes; and she came in this direction; so we thought you might have seen
her.

Well, I might, if Id looked in the glass, she said with grim humor.
Im the woman.

Oh, indeed! cried Uncle John, feeling bewildered. And the baby?

Safe asleep, if your yellin dont wake him.

Thenits_your_ baby!

Ill swear to that. What do you want, anyhow?

Were looking for a lost baby, piped Bul Run.

Then youll hev to look somewhere else. Ive walked all the way to
town, an back to-day, an Im dead tired. Are you goin away, or not?

They went away. Neither spoke as they again entered the car and started
it upon the quest. Five minutes passed; ten; fifteen. Then Mr. Runyon
said in a higher key than usual:

Theres nothing on a car as handy as a self-starter. All you have to do
is

Oh, shut up! growled Uncle John.

They drove more slowly, after this, and maintained a sharp watch; but
both men had abandoned all hope of discovering the missing baby on this
route. When they reached Tungars Ranch they crossed over to a less
frequented road known as McMillans which would lead them back to El
Cajon, but by a roundabout, devious route.

The nearer they drew to the ranch the greater vigilance they displayed,
but the road was deserted and no one at any of the ranch houses had seen
or heard anything of a stray baby. As they turned into Arthurs driveway
they overtook Rudolph Hahn, just returning from a quest as fruitless as
their own. It was now half past nine oclock.

Arthur Weldon and Major Doyle had both realized that the route awarded
them was the most promising of all. It was scarcely conceivable that
anyone who had stolen baby Jane would carry her farther into the
unsettled districts. Far more likely that Toodlums abductor would make
for the nearest town or the railway station.

If we know which one of the girls had taken baby, said Arthur, we
could figure better on what she would likely do. Inez would try to reach
some Mexican settlement where she had friends, while Mildred might
attempt to get into Los Angeles or San Diego, where she could safely
hide.

I cant believe either of them would steal little Jane, declared the
major. They are too fond of her for that.

But the baby has been stolen, nevertheless, returned Arthur; we cant
get around that fact. And one of the nurses did it

Why?

Because the nurses disappeared with the baby.

Then perhaps theyve entered into a conspiracy, and both are equally
guilty in the abduction, suggested the major.

No; their hatred of one another would prevent any conspiracy between
them. Only one stole the baby away, Im quite sure.

Then wheres the other nurse?

Arthur made no reply, but the major expected none. It was one of those
mysteries that baffle the imagination. By and by Major Doyle made an
attempt to answer his question himself, unconsciously using the same
argument that his daughter Patsy had during her conversation with Beth.

For the sake of argument, and to try to get somewhere near the truth,
said he, let us concede that, after we had gone to town, the two nurses
quarreled. That would not be surprising; Ive been expecting an open
rupture between them. Following the quarrel, what happened? In view of
the results, as we find them, two deductions are open to us. One girl
may have made away with the other, in a fit of unreasoning rage, and
then taken baby and run away to escape the consequences of her crime. If
that conclusion is true, Inez is the more likely to be the criminal and
it is Mildreds dead body we shall find in a clump of bushes or hidden
in the cellar. That Mexican girl has a fierce temper; Ive seen her eyes
gleam like those of a wildcat as she watched Mildred kiss and cuddle
little Jane. And she was so madly devoted to baby that shed sooner die
than part with her. Mildred is different; shes more civilized.

To me, her eyes seem more treacherous than those of Inez, declared
Arthur, who had liked the little Mexican nurse because she had been so
fond of Toodlums. They never meet your gaze frankly, those eyes, but
seem always trying to cover some dark secret of which the girl is
ashamed.

Nevertheless, I maintain that she is the more civilized of the two,
insisted the major. She has a calmer, more deliberate nature. She
wouldnt be likely to hurt Inez, while Inez would enjoy murdering
Mildred.

Whats the other hypothesis? asked Arthur.

The more sensible one, by odds. After the quarrel, Inez grabs up baby
and runs away, determined to escape from her hated rival and carry Jane
beyond her influence. Soon after, Mildred discovers the flight of the
Mexican and, impelled by her duty to you and her desire to circumvent
Inez, rushes away in full chase, forgetting to leave any word. Perhaps
she thought she would be able to return with baby before we arrived back
from town; but Inez has led her a merry chase, which Mildred stubbornly
refuses to abandon. Im an old man, Arthur, and have seen a good deal of
life, so mark my words: when the truth of this affair is known, it will
be something like the story Ive just outlined. I believe Ive hit the
nail on the head, and Ill admit its bad enough, even that way.

Then, said Arthur, more hopefully, we may find Mildred and baby at
home, when we return.

Yes; and we may not. If they are home, Arthur, there are plenty there
to look after the wee darling, and Louise will be comforted. On the
other hand, if they dont return, it must be our business to find them.
I can imagine Mildred, fagged out, in some far-away corner, resolving to
stay the night and return to the ranch in the morning.

They remembered to have passed along this road before, that afternoon,
on their way home from town. At that time they had seen no sign of the
nurses or the baby. But to make assurance doubly sure Arthur stopped at
every house to make inquiries and the road was inspected carefully. When
they reached town they first visited the local police station and then
the telephone office. Here they arranged to have every ranch house
within a wide radius called and questioned in regard to the missing
baby. Arthur also tried to get his own house, but the wire was still out
of service.

Then to the telegraph office, where messages were sent to all the
neighboring towns, giving descriptions of the missing baby and the
nurses and offering a liberal reward for any news of their whereabouts.

By this time it was necessary to go to the depot, as the evening train
was soon due. While they awaited its arrival Arthur and the major
closely scanned every member of the group gathered at the station.
Weldon even managed to have the train held, on its arrival, until he had
passed through all the cars and assured himself that neither Mildred,
Inez or baby Jane was aboard.

That automobile would have carried two despairing men away from the
little town had it not been for the ray of hope suggested by the major
that they would find baby safe at home on their arrival. However, that
no chance might be neglected, they took another route, as originally
arranged, and patiently continued their vain inquiries all the way back
to the ranch. As they entered the driveway at El Cajon the clock in the
brilliantly lighted hall of the mansion was striking ten.

Arthur rushed in and was met by Patsy.

Any news? they both cried eagerly; and then their expectant faces
fell.

How is Louise? faltered Arthur.

More quiet, now, answered the girl. She became so violent, after you
left, that we were all frightened; so Mrs. Hahn jumped into your little
car and drove home, where she telephoned for the doctor. He happened to
be at the Wilson place, so she caught him there and he came directly
here. He is upstairs yet, but he gave Louise a quieting potion and I
think she is now asleep.

Arthur started to mount the stairs; then hesitated.

Are the boys back yet? he asked.

Yes; they are now out in the grounds, helping the Mexicans search the
shrubbery.

The young man shuddered.

II think Ill join them, he decided, and the major merely gave his
daughter a solemn kiss and followed the bereaved father.

At the back of the mansion the lights of the lanterns were twinkling
like fireflies, although the stars shone so brilliantly that all near-by
objects were easily distinguished. Arthur and the major joined the men
and for two hours longer the search was continuedmore because they all
felt they must be doing something, than through any hope of success.

Finally, at midnight, the chief searchers met in a group near the house,
and Rudolph said: Lets go in and rest a bit, and have a smoke. Im
about fagged out and, as a matter of fact, weve covered every inch of
these grounds several times over.

Arthur silently turned and led the way into the house, where Patsy, Beth
and Helen Hahn, all three worn and haggard, met them in the hall.

Louise? asked Arthur.

Sleeping quietly, replied Beth. Marcia is sitting beside her.

Has Dr. Knox gone?

No; hes in the library, smoking. Eulalia is getting him something to
eat, for it seems he missed his dinner.

Why, so did I! trilled big Runyon, in his clearest tenor. Ive just
remembered it.

You must all eat something, declared Patsy, else you wont be fit to
continue the search. Go to the libraryall of youand Beth and I will
see what we can find in the kitchen.




CHAPTER XCONJECTURES AND ABSURDITIES


In somber procession the men trailed up the stairs to the big library,
where a dapper little man sat reading a book and puffing at a huge
cigar. He looked up, as they entered, and nodded a head as guiltless of
hair as was that of Uncle John. But his face was fresh and chubby,
despite his fifty years, and the merry twinkle in his gray eyes seemed
out of place, at first thought, in this house of anxiety and distress.

Ah, Weldon; what news of little Jane? he cheerfully inquired.

None, Doctor.

No trace at all?

None, whatever.

Thats good, declared the doctor, removing the ash from his cigar.

Good!

Of course. No news is good news. Ill wager my new touring-car that our
Jane is sound asleep and dreaming of the angels, this very minute.

Has your new car a self-starter? inquired Runyon anxiously, as if
about to accept the wager.

I wish I might share your belief, Doctor, said Arthur with a deep
sigh. It all seems a terrible mystery and I can think of no logical
explanation to assure me of babys safety.

Yes, its a mystery, agreed Dr. Knox. But Ive just thought of a
solution.

What is it? cried half a dozen voices.

Sit down and light up. I hope you all smoke? And you need refreshment,
for youve been working under a strain.

Refreshments are coming presently, said Rudolph. Whats your
solution, Doc?

The young ladies have been telling me every detail of the
disappearance, as well as the events leading up to it. Now, it seems
Mildred Travers is an old resident of this section of California. Was
born here, in fact.

This was news to them all and the suggestion it conveyed caused them to
regard Dr. Knox attentively.

The old Travers Ranch is near San Felizabout thirty miles south of
here. I know that ranch by reputation, but Ive never been there. Now
for my solution. The Travers family, hearing that Mildred is at El
Cajon, drive over here in their automobile and induce the girl to go
home with them. She cant leave baby, so she takes little Jane along,
and also Inez to help care for her. Theres the fact, in a nutshell.
See? Its all as plain as a pikestaff.

For a moment there was silence. Then big Runyon voiced the sentiment of
the party in his high treble.

You may be a good doctor, said he, but youre a thunderin bad
detective.

If I could telephone to the Travers Ranch, Id convince you, asserted
the doctor, unmoved by adverse criticism; but your blamed old telephone
is out of order.

As for that, remarked Rudolph, taking a cigar from a box, Ive been a
visitor at the Travers Ranch many times. Charlie Benton lives there.
There hasnt been a Travers on the place since they sold it, ten or
twelve years ago.

Well, said the doctor, Im sorry to hear that. It was such a simple
solution that I thought it must be right.

It was, indeed, simple, admitted Runyon. Ah! here comes food at
last.

Patsy, Beth and Helen bore huge trays containing the principal dishes of
the untasted dinner, supplemented with sandwiches and steaming coffee.
This last the thoughtful Sing Fing had kept in readiness all the
evening, knowing it would be required sooner or later.

Neither Uncle John nor the major was loth to partake of the much-needed
refreshment. They even persuaded Arthur to take a cup of coffee. It was
noticeable that now, whenever baby Jane was mentioned, they spoke her
name in hushed whispers; yet no one could get away, for long, from the
one enthralling subject of the little ones mysterious disappearance.

What can we do now? asked Arthur pleadingly. I feel guilty to be
sitting here in comfort while my darling may be suffering privations,
oror

Really, there is nothing more to be done, just now, said Patsy,
interrupting him before he could mention any other harrowing fears. You
have all done everything that mortals could do, for to-night, and in the
morning we will resume the search along other lines. In my opinion you
all ought to get to bed and try to rest, for to-morrow there will be a
lot for you to do.

What? asked Arthur helplessly.

Well, I think you ought to telegraph for detectives. If ever a mystery
existed, here is one, and only a clever detective could know how to
tackle such a problem.

Also, added Beth, you ought to telegraph to every place in
California, ordering the arrest of the fugitives.

Ive done that already.

Cant anyone think of a _reason_ for the disappearance of these three
personsthe baby and her two nurses? inquired Mrs. Hahn earnestly. It
seems to me that if we knew what object they could have in disappearing,
we would be able to guess where theyve gone. Then the pretty little
woman blushed at her temerity in making such a long speech. But the
doctor supported her.

Now that, said he, strikes me as a sensible proposition. Give us the
reason, some of you who know.

But no one knew a reason.

Here are some facts, though, said Patsy. Inez was babys first nurse,
and resented Mildreds coming. Somehow, I always get back to that fact
when I begin to conjecture. The two nurses hated each othereverybody
admits that. Mildred hated mildly; Inez venomously.

Miguel told me that Inez has threatened to kill Mildred, said Arthur.
And there is another thing: one of the women said Inez brought the baby
to the quarters, at about noon, and while there they discovered Mildred
watching them from the shelter of a hedge. This incensed Inez and she
hurried away to the house, followed stealthily by Mildred.

That, said Dolph, was perhaps the beginning of the quarrel. We dont
know what happened afterward, except that both were seen in the court
with baby at about two oclock.

Afterward, said Patsy, one of the housemaids saw Inez go outas if
for a walk. She may have returned. I think she did, for otherwise it was
Mildred who carried the baby away. I can see no reason for her doing
that.

Of course Inez returned, declared Arthur, for nothing would induce
her to run away from us and leave her beloved baby. I believe the poor
girl would rather die than be separated for good from little Jane.
Youve no idea how passionately she worshiped the child.

All of which, the doctor stated, indicates a tragedy rather than some
feminine whimwhich last I much prefer as a solution. But if both nurses
were fond of little Janewho is the finest baby I ever knew, by the
wayno quarrel or other escapade would permit them to injure the dear
infant. Let us worry about the two girls, but not about little Jane.

Such advice was impossible to follow, and doubtless the shrewd doctor
knew it; but it was a comforting thought, nevertheless, and had already
done much to sustain the despairing father.

No one seemed willing to adopt Patsys suggestion that they go to bed
and get some much needed rest, in preparation for the morrow. Arthur
left them for a time to visit Louise, but soon returned with word that
she was quietly sleeping under the influence of the potion the doctor
had administered. The three girlsfor Mrs. Hahn was only a girlsat
huddled in one corner, whispering at times and trying to cheer one
another. The doctor read in his book. Rudolph smoked and lay back in his
chair, gazing reflectively at the ceiling. Bul Run had his feet on a
second chair and soon fell into a doze, when he snored in such a high
falsetto that Arthur kicked his shins to abate the nuisance. The major
sat stiffly, gazing straight ahead, and Uncle John tramped up and down
the room untiringly. The baby had grown very dear to the hearts of these
last two men in the few days they had known her and her sudden loss
rendered them inconsolable.

The suspense was dreadful. Had it been day, they could have done
something to further the search, but the night held them impotent and
they knew they must wear out the dreary hours as best they might.

At one oclock Patsy drew her father aside and prevailed upon him to go
to his room and lie down.

This tedious waiting is merely wearing you out, she said, and for
dear babys sake you should be fresh and vigorous in the morning.

That seemed to the major to be very sensible, especially as he felt the
need of rest, so he slipped away and went to the blue room, which was
located in the old wing and just above the nursery.

Then the girl approached Uncle John, but he would not listen to her. He
was too nervous to rest, he insisted, and she realized that he spoke
truly. Just as she abandoned the argument they were all startled by the
sound of wheels rolling up the driveway and Arthur rushed to an open
window and looked out.

An automobile had just arrived.

Who is it? he called.

Ids me, Meisteh Veldonids Peters, de constable, called a rich voice
in strong German dialect. I got your baby here, und der Mexico girls to
boots!

What! they all shrieked, springing up to crowd around the window.

Bring her in, Peters! yelled Arthur, a great gladness in his voice,
and now he was half running, half tumbling down the stairs in his haste
to reach the door, while the others trailed after him like the tail of a
comet.

As the door was thrown open Petersa stout Germanentered with a bundle
in his arms, followed by a weeping, angry Mexican woman who was fat and
forty and as unlike Inez as was possible.

Even as Arthurs eyes fell on this poor creature his heart sank, and the
revulsion of feeling was so severe that he tottered and almost fell.
Runyon grabbed his arm and supported him while Peters fumbled with the
wrappings of the baby.

Do I gets me dot rewardsheh? asked the constable, holding up a fat
little Mexican baby, whose full black eyes regarded the group
wonderingly.

The father turned away, heartsick.

Give him some money and get rid of him, he moaned.

Dolph took the constable in hand.

You blooming idiot! he exclaimed. Why did you drag that poor woman
here?

Id iss a rewards for der Mexico girl unt a baby; dot iss what efrybody
say. How do I know id iss not Herr Veldons baby? demanded the
indignant German. Do his baby gots a sign on id, to say id iss de right
baby, vot iss lost unt must be foundt? No, py jimminy! He yust say he
hass a lost baby, unt a Mexico girl hass runned avay mit id. * * * So I
finds me a Mexico girl unt a babyunt here id iss!

Patsy took the baby, a good little thing, and placed it in its mothers
arms.

Who are you, and where did this man find you? the girl asked
sympathetically.

The woman first shook her head and then burst into a voluble stream of
Spanish, not a word of which could be understood.

She cannot speak de Ingliss, like me, so I cannod tell if she iss de
right Mexico vomans or nod, explained the constable. Bud I brings her
mit me, yust de same, unt id costs me four dollars to rendt me an
automobubbles.

Take her back, said Hahn, giving him a ten-dollar note; and then he
gave the woman some money and kissed the baby, which smiled at him
approvingly.

Beth ran to get some of the sandwiches for the woman, while Patsy
brought milk for the baby and Uncle John offered the constable a cigar.
Then the three were sent away and the automobile rolled back to town.




CHAPTER XITHE MAJOR ENCOUNTERS THE GHOST


Ascending once more to the library the weary watchers resumed their
former attitudes of waiting, as patiently as they might, for the coming
of the day. Uncle John looked at his watch and found it was only a
little after two oclock. The minutes seemed hours to-night.

Suddenly a tremendous shriek rent the night, a shriek so wild and
blood-curdling in its intensity that they sprang up and clung to each
other in horror. While they stood motionless and terror-stricken there
came a thump!thump!as of some heavy object tumbling down the three or
four steps leading from the hall to the corridor of the old South Wing,
and then the door burst open and Major Doyleclothed in red-and-white
striped pajamasfairly fell into the library, rolled twice over and came
to a stop in a sitting position, from whence he let out another yell
that would have shamed a Cherokee Indian and which so startled big
Runyon that he held a tenor note at high C for fully a minutemuch like
the whistle of a peanut roasterthe which was intended for an expression
of unqualified terror.

Patsy was the first to recover and kneel beside the poor major, whose
eyes were literally bulging from their sockets.

Oh, Daddear Dad!what is it? she cried.

The major shuddered and clapped his hands to his eyes. Then he rocked
back and forth, moaning dismally, while Patsy clung to his neck, sobbing
and nearly distracted.

Speak, Major! commanded Arthur.

Aa ghost! was the wailing reply.

A ghost! echoed the amazed spectators.

Did you _see_ it? questioned Uncle John in a trembling voice, as he
bent over his brother-in-law.

See it? shouted the major, removing his hands to glare angrily at Mr.
Merrick. How could I see anything in the dark? The room was black as
pitch.

But you said a ghost.

Of course I said a ghost, retorted the major, querulously, as he
rubbed his bare ankle with one hand to soothe a bump. You dont have to
_see_ a ghost to know its there, do you? And this ghostOh, Patsy,
darling, I cant say it!its too horrible.

Again a fit of shuddering seized him and he covered his eyes anew and
rocked his body back and forth while he maintained his seat upon the
floor. His legs were spread wide apart and he wiggled his big toes
convulsively.

Beth asked with bated breath:

Did you _hear_ the ghost, then, Major?

Um! I heard it, he moaned. And its the end of allthe destroyer of
our hopesthe harbinger of despair!

Look here, Major, said Uncle John desperately, be a man, and tell us
what you mean.

Itit was babybaby Jane!

Arthur sobbed and dropped his head upon the table. Rudolph groaned.
Runyon swore softly, but with an accent that did not seem very wicked.
Uncle John stared hard at the major.

Youre an ass, he said. Youve had a nightmare.

The major could not bear such an aspersion, even under the trying
circumstances. He scrambled to his feet, this time trembling with
indignant anger, and roared:

I tell you I heard babybaby Janeand she was crying! Dont I know?
Dont I know our babys voice?

Arthur leaped to his feet, a resolute expression upon his face.
Instantly they all turned and followed him from the room. Into the hall,
up the steps and through the corridor of the South Wing they passed, and
just inside the majors room Rudolph struck a match and lighted a lamp
that stood upon the table.

The place was in wild disorder, for when the major leaped from the bed
he had dragged the coverings with him and they lay scattered upon the
floor. The chair in which he had placed his clothing had been overturned
and there was no question that his flight had been a precipitous rout.
The casement of the window, set far back in the thick adobe wall, was
wide open and the night breeze that came through it made the flame of
the lamp flicker weirdly.

Beth proved her courage by bolding crossing the room and closing the
window, while the others stood huddled just inside the door. Back of
them all was the white face of Major Doyle, a brave soldier who had
faced the enemy unflinchingly in many a hard fought battle, but a
veritable poltroon in an imaginary ghostly presence.

Scarcely daring to breathe, they stood in tense attitudes listening for
a repetition of the babys cry. Only an awesome, sustained silence
rewarded them.

The majors open watch upon the table ticked out the
minutesfivetenfifteen. Then the doctor crept back to the library and
quietly resumed his book. Presently Runyon joined him.

Between you and me, Doc, said the big fellow, I dont take much stock
in ghosts.

Nor I, returned Dr. Knox. Major Doyle is overwrought. His imagination
has played him a trick.

Rudolph Hahn entered and lighted a fresh cigar.

Curious thing, wasnt it? he said.

No; mere hallucination, declared the doctor.

I dont know about that, answered the boy. Seems to me a ghost would
do about as a person in life did. The child criedpoor little baby
Jane!and the ghostly wail was heard in the one room in this house that
is hauntedthe blue room. Perhaps theres something about the atmosphere
of that room that enables those who have passed over to make themselves
heard by us who are still in the flesh.

He was so earnest that the doctor glanced at him thoughtfully over the
top of his book.

Its the dead of night, and youre agitated and unreasonable, Hahn. In
the morning youll be ashamed of your credulity.

Dolph sat down without reply. His wife came in and sat beside him,
taking his hand in hers. In another quarter of an hour back came Uncle
John, shivering with the chill of the corridor, and stood warming
himself before the grate fire.

If the major heard the baby, he said reflectively, it must be proof
thatthat somethinghas happened to the little dear, andand we must
face the worst.

Well, it was baby I heard, asserted the major, who, having hastily
donned his clothes, now made his reappearance in the library. I was
lying in a sort of dose when the cry first reached my ears. Then I sat
up and listened, and heard it again distinctly, as if little Jane were
only two feet away. Thenthen

Then you tested your lungs and made your escape, added the doctor
drily.

I admit it, sir! said Major Doyle, haughtily. Had it been anyone else
who encountered the experienceeven a pill peddlerhe would have
fainted.

In the blue room Patsy and Beth alone remained with Arthur Weldon. Not a
sound broke the stillness. When an hour had passed, Patsy said:

Wont you go away, Arthur? Beth and I will watch.

He shook his head.

You can do no good by staying in this awful place, pleaded the girl,
speaking in a whisper.

If sheif babyshould be heard again, IId like to be here, he said
pathetically.

Patsy knew he was suffering and the fact aroused her to action.

Father isnt a coward, she remarked, and either he heard the cry, or
he dreamed it. In the latter case it amounts to nothing; but if Jane
really cried out, that fact ought to give us an important clue.

He started at this suggestion, which the girl had uttered without
thought, merely to reassure him. Yet now she started herself, struck by
the peculiar significance of her random words.

In what way, Patsy? asked Beth, calmly.

That was the spur she needed. She glanced around the room a moment and
then asked:

Who built this wing, Arthur?

Cristoval, I suppose. Ive heard it was the original dwelling, he
replied. The rest of the house was built at a much later date. Perhaps
two generations labored in constructing the place. I do not know; but it
is not important.

Oh, yes it is! cried Patsy with increasing ardor. The rest of the
house is like many other houses, butthese walls are six or eight feet
in thickness.

Adobe, said Arthur carelessly. They built strongly in the mission
days.

Yet these cant be solid blocks, persisted the girl, rising to walk
nervously back and forth before the walls. There must be a space left
inside. And see! the majors bed stands close to the outer wall, which
is the thickest of all.

He stared at her in amazement and then, realizing the meaning of her
words, sprang to his feet. Beth was equally amazed and looked at her
cousin in wonder.

Oh, Patsy! she exclaimed, the baby hasnt been lost at all.

Of course not, declared Patsy, her great eyes brilliant with
inspiration. _Shes imprisoned!_




CHAPTER XIIANOTHER DISAPPEARANCE


For a time the three stood regarding one another with startled eyes.
Then Arthur gasped: Great heaven! what fools weve been.

Come! cried Patsy. The nursery.

They rushed down the corridors to the staircase and thence into the
court. The door of the nursery stood ajar and Arthur first entered and
lighted a lamp.

The light fell full upon the face of a man seated in a low rocking chair
and holding a half smoked cigarette in his mouth. He was fast asleep. It
was old Miguel, the ranchero.

Arthur shook his shoulder, savagely, and the man wakened and rubbed his
eyes. Then, seeing who had disturbed him, he quickly rose and made his
characteristic low, sweeping bow.

What are you doing here? demanded Weldon, angry and suspicious.

I am look for Mees Jane, returned the old man calmly.

In your sleep? Come, get out of here.

Wait a minute, Arthur, said Beth, reading Miguels face. He knows
something.

Arthur looked at the man critically, reflecting that there must be a
reason for his presence in the nursery. Miguel had been fond of baby
Jane. Was he merely disconsolate over her loss, ordid he really know
something?

Miguel once told me, said Patsy, speaking slowly, that he used to
live in this house, in Cristovals time, and knows it thoroughly.

The old man bowed.

I theenk, said he, perhaps we find Mees Jane herenot somewhere
else.

Why do you think that, Miguel?

It was Patsy who questioned him. He mused a bit before replying.

The old seorthe father of my Seor Cristovalwas strange mans, said
he. He make thees house a funny way. Come; I show you.

He led the way to the little room adjoining, the one Inez had occupied.
In one corner of the floor was a square hole, with steps leading down to
a sort of blind pocket. Holding a lamp in one hand Miguel descended the
steps and pushed against a block of adobe that formed part of the outer
wall. It swung inward, disclosing a cavity about four feet in width and
fully six feet high. The interior could be plainly seen from the room,
by stooping close to the floor. There were shelves in the cavity and
upon one of them stood a jar of milk.

Oh, cried Patsy, clasping her hands together. I told you the wall was
hollow!

Arthur followed Miguel down the steps. He took the lamp and examined the
little room. All the walls that formed it seemed solid.

Miguel was holding the block that served as a door. He released his
hold, when Arthur had again ascended, and the block swung back into
place.

As they returned to the nursery, Weldon asked:

Do you know of any other rooms in the wall, Miguel?

The man shook his head, uncertainly.

I know there be other rooms in thees wall, said he, for Seor
Cristoval have told me so. Hees father make the places to keep things
safe from robbersperhaps to hide from others, too. But where such
places are ees the secret of the Cristovals. The room I show you ees all
I know about. I thought that was secret, too; but no; the New York nurse
tell Inez of that room, an Inez she keep Mees Janes milk there, to be
cool.

Mildred told of the room! exclaimed Arthur in astonishment.

Yes, said Beth, she used to visit this house as a girl, when
Cristoval lived here, and she must have known some of the secret rooms.

Ah, that ees what I theenk, agreed old Miguel. There ees more room in
thees wall; that I know. If thees Mildreed know one room, she may know
more. So I theenk she and Inez have go into some room of the wall an
take Mees Jane with them. Some way, they cannot get out again.

Exactly! cried Patsy triumphantly. They are somewhere in that wall,
imprisoned, and the major really heard the baby cry.

ButMiguel, Miguel! pleaded Arthur, earnestly, cant you remember how
the wall opens? Think! Think carefully.

I do theenk, Meest Weld; I theenk till I go sleep, an you find me
here.

Now, lets do some thinking ourselves, suggested Beth. The opening
that leads into the wall must be from this very room. Miguel thinks so,
too, and thats why he came here. Let us examine the wall.

They undertook to do this, holding the lamps close to the adobe blocks
and inspecting every crack. The cement used in joining the blocks had
crumbled away at the outer edges in almost every instance, and it was
impossible to tell if any block was removable or not. Miguel or Arthur
pushed hard against every block in the room, from those nearest the
floor to those far above their heads; but not one yielded a hairs
breadth.

Suppose we go outside, said Patsy. Perhaps there is some window, or
grating, that will give us a clue.

So they took old Miguels lantern and went into the garden where they
could view the outer side of the wall. A tangle of climbing vines grew
against the wing, but there was no window or other opening on the first
floor. Above, on the second floor, were two windows, one of which
admitted light and air to the blue room.

How about the other window? asked Beth.

That, said Arthur, must be in an unused room at the end of the
corridor. We have never furnished it.

I think it might be well to examine that room, suggested Patsy.

So they reentered the house and, followed by Miguel, ascended to the
second floor. The door of the library was ajar and those seated there,
seeing Arthur and the girls pass, came trooping out to ask what they
were doing.

Patsy briefly explained the new theory they had conceived to account for
the disappearance of baby and the two nurses, and the idea was so
startling that all became eager to join in the investigation.

They invaded the vacant room in a body, several of the men carrying
lamps. It was in size and shape a duplicate of the blue room, with its
one window deeply embedded in the wall, the surface of the embrasure
being covered with heavy redwood planks.

From the fact that this room lay directly over the small one occupied by
Inez, in which was the wall cavity they had recently explored, they
conceived the idea that the wall here might also be hollow. Pounding
upon it, however, had no effect in determining this, for kiln-baked
adobe is not resonant and it was impossible to discover from any surface
indication whether there were eight feet of closely set blocks or less.
Careful search for any sign of an opening proved futile.

Finally old Miguel said:

Next room was room of Seor Cristoval. Eet was room hees father live
in, too; the old seor who build thees part of house. If there ees way
to get in wall, from upstairs, it ees there.

To be sure, said practical Beth, catching at the suggestion; it was
there that Major Doyle heard the baby cry.

So on they all trooped into the blue room, where the wall was likewise
carefully inspected. While this was being done Rudolph looked at his
watch and found it was after four oclock.

It will soon be daylight, said he to his wife. What a night it has
been! It seems a month since we arrived here and found Toodlums gone.

Old Miguel had been silent and unobtrusive in the vacant room, but here
he was as eager in testing the wall as any one of them.

You see, its this way, Patsy was saying; if the major could hear
baby cry, through this wall, those inside could hear us, if we called to
them. Who among us has the clearest, the most penetrating voice?

Suppose _I_ try? squeaked Runyon, earnestly; but those who considered
the remark at all merely gave him scornful looks.

Let Rudolph call, said Helen. I think his voice might penetrate the
pyramids of Egypt.

Rudolph went close to the wall and shouted:

Hello, there! Baby! I-nez!ehehwhats the other girls name?

Mildred, said Beth.

Mil-dred! shouted Dolph; Mil-dred!

He paused between each name, which he roared so loudly that he nearly
deafened those in the room, and everyone listened intently for a
response.

No answer.

Perhaps theyre asleepworn out, said Uncle John. No one now seemed to
doubt that the missing ones were imprisoned in the wall.

Let Beth try, suggested Patsy.

Beth had a clear, bell-like voice and from where she stood she called
out the names of Inez and Mildred. Then, in the stillness that followed,
came a muffled cry in returna cry that set all their nerves quivering
with excitement.

The mystery was solved at last.

Beth repeated the call and now the answer was clearer, though still
indistinguishable. It was a voice, indeed, but whose voice they could
not tell. But now, to their astonishment, came another sound, quite
clear and distinctthe wail of a baby voice.

That settles it! cried the major, triumphantly. Was I right, or
wrong? Was it a nightmare, or was I crazy?

Neither one, my dear sir, replied the doctor. You declared you heard
a ghost.

Arthur was capering about in frantic joy.

Shes alivemy baby is alive! he exclaimed.

And probably she was sound asleep until your infernal yelling awakened
her, added the major.

It wasnt _our_ yelling, said Uncle John, as delighted as even the
father could be; it was the yelling of whoever is inside, there, that
frightened the baby. Thank goodness the dear child could sleep during
all these weary hours, when we have been wearing our hearts out with
anxiety.

We have yet cause for anxiety, declared Patsy, for little Jane is not
rescued yet, by any means, and presently the poor thing will become very
hungry and suffer for lack of food. We now know where baby is, but we
cant get at her; nor can Mildred or Inez find a way to get her out, or
they would have done so long ago.

Very true, agreed Helen Hahn, gravely. Unless we can soon find a way
to get to them, all three will starve.

Why, we will pull down the wall! cried Arthur.

Dynamite it! piped Bul Run.

Be sensible! counseled Uncle John sternly. We are wasting precious
time. Miguel, turning to the ranchero, get some of your men, with
picks and crowbars, and fetch them here quickly.

The Mexican, who seemed bewildered by the discovery of the missing ones,
although he had himself been the first to suspect where they were,
started at once to obey this order. When he had gone, Patsy said:

Of course there is some easy way to get inside the wall, and to get out
again. Are we so stupid that none of us can penetrate the secret of the
cunning Spaniard who built this place?

The challenge merely led them to regard one another with perplexed
looks.

The fact that theyre alive, after all these hours, said young Hahn,
is proof that they are supplied with air, and plenty of it. Then there
is an opening, somewhere or other.

Also, added Arthur, reflectively, they are now opposite the second
story rooms, when they must have entered the hollow wall at the first
floorperhaps from the nursery. That proves there is a stairway, or at
least a ladder, inside.

At this moment a maid entered to say that Mrs. Weldon had awakened and
was calling hysterically for her baby. The doctor and Patsy at once
hurried to Louises bedside, where the girl said:

Dont worry, dear. Little Jane has been found and is now in this very
house. So try to be quiet and go to sleep again.

Bring her to me; bring my darling at once! begged Louise. But the
doctor now interfered.

I dont wish to disturb baby at present, he said positively. I think
the child is sleeping. You have been quite ill, Mrs. Weldon, and I must
insist on your remaining quiet. Here; drink this, if you please.

Louise, reassured, drank the potion and presently sank into another
doze. Dr. Knox remained beside her for a time but Patsy hurried back to
the blue room, eager to assist in the rescue of the prisoners.

Im afraid were a stupid lot, Uncle John was saying as she entered;
or else the Spanish don was remarkably clever. We know the wall is
hollow, and we know theres an opening, yet we cant solve the riddle.

But here came Miguel and two strong men laden with steel bars, cold
chisels and picks. For a time it was a quandary where to attack the
wall, but Arthur finally chose the place just back of the bed and bade
the men begin their work.

The adobe proved harder than the hardest brick. Old Miguel knew that it
must be broken away bit by bit, for he was not unacquainted with the
material, yet even under his skillful direction the work progressed with
aggravating slowness.

Daylight gradually crept into the room and rendered lamps unnecessary.
The morning discovered a very disheveled, heavy-eyed group, not a single
member of which was willing to retire from the fascinating scene of
rescue.

Patsy went away to arouse Sing Fing and the servants, some of whom she
found had remained awake all night. In half an hour steaming hot coffee
was brought to the blue room and gratefully consumed by the weary
watchers. Breakfast of a substantial character would soon be ready and
it was agreed that part of them should eat at one time while the others
remained to watch and to call them promptly if anything new developed.

Arthur, too nervous to stand idly by, insisted on attacking the wall in
another place and Runyon assisted him, the latters strength and muscle
winning the admiration of all observers. He worked fiercely for a time,
driving in the bar with stalwart blows and chipping off huge pieces of
adobe. Then, dripping with perspiration, he retired in favor of Arthur
and rested by taking a seat in the window, where the cool morning air
could fan him.

Patsy noticed Runyon in this position, his back against the redwood
planks and his legs stretched out on the window-seat; but the work on
the wall drew her attention, as it did that of everyone else.

Suddenly there was a crash and a loud reportfollowed by a shrill
cryand as every eye turned to the window they found that Runyons great
body had absolutely disappeared. A rush was made to the window, but he
did not seem to have fallen out. There was no sign of him at all. As if
by magic, he was gone.

While they stood amazed and half frightened by the marvel of the thing,
Patsy recovered sufficiently to say:

Quicklet us get below! He must be under those rose vines, perhaps
crushed and badly hurt.

So they made for the door and flocked downstairs and out into the
garden. The vines seemed undisturbed. When the men pushed them aside
there was no evidence of the big rancher to be seen. In fact, they were
all convinced that Runyon had not fallen out of the window.

Slowly they returned to the blue room, where the major exclaimed, with
positive emphasis:

This room is haunted. Dont talk to me! Theres no other explanation.
If we dont watch out, well all disappearand thatll be the end of
us!




CHAPTER XIIITHE WAY IT HAPPENED


Through consideration for the nerves and perhaps the credulity of the
reader, it may be advisable at this juncture to go a little back in our
story and relate the circumstances which led to the present perplexing
crisis. A great detective once said that every mystery has a simple
solutionmeaning, of course, that the solution is simple when once
discovered. Therefore, the puzzling mystery of the disappearance of baby
Jane and her two nurses, followed later by the vanishment of Mr. Bulwer
Runyon, was due to the one-time idiosyncracy of a certain Seor
Cristoval, happily deceased, rather than to any supernatural agency.

Until now we have only known Mildred Travers, as she called herself, in
a casual way. We know that she was considered a competent nurse and had
proved her capability in the care of baby Jane. Also we know that she
was silent and reserved and that her eyes bore an habitual expression
that was hard and repellent. Without being able to find any especial
fault with the girl, no one was attracted toward heralways excepting
the baby, who could not be expected to show discrimination at her tender
age.

A little of Mildreds former history had escaped her, but not enough to
judge her by. She had once lived in Southern California, near this very
place. She had visited this house frequently with her father, when a
small child, and old Seor Cristoval had confided to her some of the
secrets of the mansion. That was all. What had become of friends and
family, how she went to New York and studied nursing, or what might
account for that hard look in her eyes, no one now acquainted with her
knew.

The Mexican girl, Inez, was nearly as peculiar and unaccountable as
Mildred. There was no mystery about her, however, except that she was so
capable and intelligent, considering her antecedents. Inez people lived
in a small town in another part of the county and the girl was one of a
numerous brood of children whose parents were indolent, dissipated and
steeped in ignorance. When fourteen years old she had left home to work
for some of the neighboring ranchers, never staying in one place long
but generally liked by her employers. The woman who had recommended Inez
to Mrs. Weldon said she was bright and willing and more intelligent than
most Mexicans of her class, but that she possessed a violent temper.

Louise had seen little evidence of that temper, however, for Inez from
the first loved her new mistress and idolized the baby. It was only
after Mildred came to supplant her, as she thought, that the girl
developed an unreasoning, passionate hatred for the other nurse and was
jealous of every attention Mildred lavished upon the little one.

The baby was impartial. She laughed and held out her chubby fists to
either nurse, perhaps realizing that both were kind to her. It was this
that made Inez so furious and caused Mildred to disdain the Mexican
girl. The two were at swords points from the first, although after a
little Mildred made an attempt to conciliate Inez, knowing that the
untutored Mexican was by nature irresponsible and jealous, but withal
loving and generous.

Inez did not respond to these advances, but as the days passed she
became less sullen when in the presence of Mildred, and at times, when
busied over her duties, so far forgot her animosity as to converse with
her in her old careless, unaffected way. Only Mildred was able to note
this slight change, and it encouraged her to believe she might win Inez
confidence in the end. Inez herself did not realize that she had changed
toward the witch-woman, and when brooding over her fancied wrongs
hated Mildred as cordially as ever.

On the day when the Weldons and their guests rode into town, the two
nurses had indulged in a longer and more friendly conversation than
usual. It began by Mildreds chiding the Mexican for taking baby to the
quarters unknown to her, as she had been obliged to follow to see what
had become of the child. Inez retorted by accusing Mildred of spying
upon her. Their return to the house was anything but friendly, and Inez
flatly refused to obey such instructions as Mildred gave her for the
care of baby. She even walked out of the court in a temper and was gone
for an hour. Then she stole in, a little ashamed of her revolt, but
still defiant and rebellious.

They were in the nursery and Mildred pretended not to notice her
assistants mood.

I have prepared two bottles of babys food, said she. Please place
one in the hollow of the wall, in your room, to keep cool until we need
it.

I wont! said Inez.

Why not? asked Mildred quietly.

Because you are witch-woman, cried the Mexican; because you use bad
magic to make hollow in wall; because you try to make baby witch-woman,
like yourself, by keeping her milk in the witch-place; becausebecauseI
_hate_ you! she concluded with a passionate stamp of her foot.

Mildred looked upon the girl pityingly as she crossed herself again and
again as if in defiance of the supposed witchcraft. The poor girl sought
by this method to ward off any evil charm Mildred might attempt in
retaliation, and the action nettled the trained nurse because the unjust
accusation was so sincerely made.

She slowly rose and taking the bottle of milk carried it herself to the
hollow in the wall and placed it upon a shelf. Then, returning, she
stood before the petulant, crouching Mexican and said gently:

Were I truly a witch, Inez, I would not be working as a nursejust as
you are. Nor do I know any magic, more than you yourself know.

Then how you know about that hole in the wall? demanded Inez.

I wish you would let me explain that. Indeed, I think a good talk
together will do us both good. Take this chair beside me, and try to
believe in my good will. I do not hate you, Inez. I wish you did not
hate me.

Inez slowly rose from the floor and seated herself in the chair, turning
it so that she could eye Mildreds face as she spoke.

When I was a girl, continued Mildred, I often came to this house to
visit. Sometimes I stayed here for several days, while my father talked
with his old friend, old Seor Cristoval.

That is a lie, asserted Inez. I have ask Miguel, who is here forty
years, an was house servant for Seor Cristoval. Miguel say there is no
Seor Travers who is friend of Seor Cristoval. No Seor Travers did
ever come to this house for visit. What you say to that, Witch-Woman?

Mildred flushed and seemed embarrassed. Then she answered calmly:

I think Miguel speaks truly, for my father did not bear the name of
Travers. He was called by another name.

Then why do you call yourself Travers? retorted the other.

Mildred hesitated.

I did not like my old name, she said, and so I changed it. But this
is a secret I have told you, Inez, and you must not tell anyone of it.

Inez nodded, looking at the other curiously. This confession had aroused
her sympathy, for the first time, for her fellow nurse. The fact that
there was a secret between them dissolved to an extent her antipathy for
Mildred, and it might be a bond to eventually draw them nearer together.
With more tolerance than she had yet shown she asked:

Did Seor Cristoval show you the secrets of this house?

Yes. I was a little girl and he was good to me. I am not a witch-woman,
Inez. Oh, if I were, I would witch a little happiness into my life! she
added miserably.

This burst of rebellious longing interested Inez even more than the
secret. She could understand such a protest against fate.

At first, continued Mildred, reverting to her former cold speech,
while the hard look, which for an instant had given way to a flash of
sentiment, again crept into her eyes, I thought I had forgotten the
queer recesses and secret rooms built by the elder Cristoval; but now I
am beginning to remember them. In the days when this wing was built, the
country was wild and lawless. Robbers often visited a house in broad
daylight and took away all that was of value; so the first Cristovalthe
father of the one I knewmade the secret place to hide his treasure in,
and even to hide himself and his family if the thieves threatened them.

Is the treasure there now? asked Inez eagerly.

Mildred frowned, as if the question displeased her.

Of course not. That was long ago. When I was a girl they no longer
needed the rooms in the wall as a hiding-place from thieves; but they
kept them secret, just the same. I think I am the only person Seor
Cristoval ever told. He did it to please me, I suppose, because I was a
child.

Inez was much impressed. She began to regard Mildred more amicably. If
she were not a witch-woman, she reflected, there was no reason to fear
her. The Mexican girl thought deeply on what she had heard, during the
next half hour. She watched Mildred put the baby to sleep and then take
up a book to read as she sat beside the crib. Inez went out into the
deserted court and squatting beside the fountain pondered upon the
fascinating mysteries of the old house.

She crept back, presently, and reentered the nursery where Mildred was
sitting.

Tell me, she began, in a friendly and familiar way that was new in her
relations with the other girl, are there indeed rooms hidden in these
wallsbig enough for people to hide in?

Mildred smiled and laid down her book. Inez in this mood was worth
cultivating, if she hoped to win her confidence. It would be far easier
to get on in her new situation if Inez would learn to like her.

Another thing influenced her: a reflection that had not been absent from
her mind since the Weldons departed for the day and had left her
practically in charge of the house. She had come to this house for a
purpose. Could that purpose be best accomplished to-day, or at some
later period?

I believe, she answered musingly, that this wall back of us is hollow
and contains several rooms, which may be entered at various secret
placesif one knows where the places are.

They cannot be very big rooms, said Inez in a hushed, awed voice, as
she glanced at the wall.

No; they must be narrow. But they are quite long and highsome of
themand there are stairs leading from one floor to another, just like
the big stairs in the hall.

Inez stared at her.

How you know that? she inquired.

Why, Ive seen the rooms, was the reply. Let me think a moment.

During the pause she scrutinized the Mexican girl closely, wondering if
it would be advisable to take her into her confidence. Then she
continued, speaking slowly:

Im almost sure it was in this very room that one of the secret
entrances was built. It was not a nursery when I was here before, you
know; it was Seor Cristovals office, where he kept his books and his
money-boxes.

She rose, as she spoke, and looked uncertainly up and down the wall.
Then, with a nod of satisfaction, she quickly walked to the east corner
and counted four blocks of adobe, starting from the floor. The fourth
line of blocks she followed to the third one, and placed her hand upon
it.

I think I am right, so far, she said. This is the door to the secret
rooms, but the key that unlocks it is somewhere in the floor. Turn back
the rug, please, Inez.

The girl obeyed, her brown fingers trembling with excitement. The floor
was of adobe blocks similar to those which formed the wall, but smaller
in size. Mildred regarded them reflectively and then placed her foot on
the edge of the second block directly in a line with the place where her
hand rested. The pressure of her foot made the block tip slightly, and
observing this she pressed hard with her hand against the inner edge of
the upper block.

The result seemed magical. Three seemingly solid blocks of the wall
swung slowly outward, disclosing a dimly lighted recess beyond.

Mildred stepped in, stooping her head slightly because the opening was
so small. Inez followed her, nervously seizing the other girls hand for
support. The light seemed to come from some place far above and as their
eyes grew accustomed to it they could discern a passage about three feet
in width and fourteen feet long, which occupied the center of the wall.
At the right, a flight of steps led upward, and to their left the place
was occupied by some chairs and stools. Against the walls were several
narrow shelves, easily reached by one standing upright.

Why, they have left the place furnished, just as it was when Seor
Cristoval first showed it to me, said Mildred. The mattings and
upholstery must be ready to fall to pieces, by this time; but you see,
Inez, I was right about the secret rooms.

Just then little Jane wakened with a lusty cry.

See to the baby, said Mildred quickly, and the Mexican girl
reluctantly turned away to obey.

Mildred remained in the recess, thoughtfully eyeing the various antique
objects which had been allowed to remain there, some of which were of
real value. She reflected that the last Cristoval had doubtless passed
away without disclosing the secret of the wall to anyone, and his
executors, in selling the mansion, had been quite unaware that anything
was hidden in the adobe wall. Without doubt the property might now be
justly claimed by the new owner, Arthur Weldon, and this thought made
Mildred flush with eager resolve to take full advantage of her present
opportunity. For here was the consummation of her hopes; here was the
realization of the important plan which had brought her to Southern
California and to this house.

Inez had caught the baby from its cradle and, holding a bottle of fresh
milk-food to its lips to comfort it, again advanced through the opening.
Mildred had stepped a few paces along the passage and Inez, the baby in
her arms, started to join her.

At that moment she heard a sound in the court, as of some one
approaching, and to avoid letting others know of this fascinating secret
the girl thoughtlessly grasped the adobe door with her free hand and
swung it shut behind her.

It closed with a sharp click! and Mildred, hearing the sound, turned
with a low cry of fear.

Great heavens, what have you done? she exclaimed in tense tones and
brushing the Mexican aside she threw her whole weight against the wall.
It did not yield a hairs breadth.

Inez, with terror in her eyes, stared at her companion.

Is it lock? she whispered.

Mildred pushed again, straining every muscle. Then she bent and examined
the wall. It was easy to see, from this side, where the series of three
blocks were firmly joined together. Also the butts of three huge iron
hinges protruded slightly into the passage. There could be no mistake.
The closing of the door had made them prisoners.




CHAPTER XIVPRISONERS OF THE WALL


Mildred silently turned and regarded her companion. Her eyes were not
hard and cold now. They were glowing with anxiety and terror.

Cannot we get out? demanded Inez.

Mildred shook her head.

Not the way we came in, she replied. I remember now that Cristoval
warned me never to close the door behind me; but I forgot to tell you
that, so you are not to blame.

Inez looked down at baby, who had again fallen asleep, snuggled close to
her breast. Her fear at this time was not for herself. It was dreadful
to think of the danger she had placed the darling baby inthe child she
would have died rather than injure.

Mildred saw the look and read its anguish. Her own cheeks blanched for a
moment, but there was an inherent quality of courage in this girl that
forbade her to despair. Speaking as much to herself as to Inez she said:

We were able to open this adobe door only by pressing downward on a
block of the floor outside, which released a catch which is securely
hidden in the lower edge of the openingwhere I cannot reach it. So,
unless some one knew the secret and could press that block in the
nursery, the door cannot again be opened.

Inez staggered to a stool and sat down.

Must we stay here always? she pleaded piteously.

I think not. I am _sure_ not, Inez. They will find some way to break
through the wall and rescue us.

But no one knows we are here!

True. Well, I believe there are other ways to get out of this hollow
wall, besides the opening we came through. I am quite certain I was told
that Seor Cristoval could enter from his room, on the second floor; and
perhaps there are other entrances. Stay here and keep baby quiet and I
will make an examination of our prison.

As she started to ascend the stairs Inez arose to follow her.

Let me come, too, she begged. I am afraid to stay alone.

Very well; but try not to waken baby.

The stairs were built the full width of the space, completely blocking
it at that end. At the top they stepped into another narrow room, which
was not over the lower one but extended farther along the wall. It was,
indeed, extraordinary to note how comfortable the genius of that ancient
Cristoval who had planned the place, had made this originally
comfortless corridor-like room, for room it was despite its narrow
confines.

The ceiling was high, and light and air were admitted by gratings placed
at the top, letting onto the bastion of the roof, where they could not
be observed by those below. The gratings were covered by projections
that kept out the rain and dew. On the floor was a thick carpet,
somewhat musty and dusty now, and at the far end was placed a couch with
silken curtains. This was still piled high with bedding and pillows and
was boxed in, the full width of the passage, with elaborately carved
woods. Upholstered seats, rather narrow but long and quite comfortable,
were built against the wall and supported by richly carved frames of
ebony and panels of cherry. There were pictures upon the walls; oil
paintings of quite good quality. A sort of wall-cabinet and some small
brackets supported numerous hooks, ornaments, and several boxes of metal
and sandalwood, which last Mildred eyed expectantly but had now no
leisure to examine.

The girls were both awed by this discovery, for Mildred had never been
permitted to mount the stair to this room when Seor Cristoval had
allowed her to peep into the lower passage. The intense silence lent a
weirdness to the place that was at first quite disconcerting. A gray rat
scuttled along the carpet, causing them to jump and cry out, and then
disappeared somewhere beneath the couch. Inez, trembling with nervous
fear, hugged the baby with one arm and clutched Mildreds arm with the
other, and then they sat together on one of the cushioned seats and
tried to collect their thoughts.

Mildred reflected that no person had entered this place for at least
eight years, for it was eight years since the last Cristoval had passed
to his fathers. Yet, aside from the dust, everything seemed in an
excellent state of preservation. The secret room had been fitted up by
its builder more than fifty years before and much of the furnishings
must have been placed there then.

My first task, she said to Inez, must be to make a thorough
examination of this place. Since there is no one to help us, we must
help ourselves, and any weakness at this time would be fatal.

With this she rose and carefully began to inspect the walls. The heavy
carpet was merely laid flat on the adobe floor and she raised it here
and there and tested the blocks to see if any was movable. There was no
means of reaching the ceiling but an opening there was out of the
question.

Near the center of the room, on the inner wall and about two feet from
the floor, was a square of wood firmly embedded in the adobe. This, she
thought, might possibly be a means of egress or ingress, so she tested
it eagerly, pressing not only upon the wood but on all the blocks of
adobe near it, in the endeavor to discover a hidden spring or some other
clever mechanical contrivance which would prove the open sesame. But
the panel and the wall defied all her efforts and she finally concluded
it was solid planking placed there to support the wall or to allow
cupboards or shelves to be nailed against it.

Another similar place, where a huge panel of plank was set in the wall,
she found at the very end of the passage, beyond the couch, and was only
able to reach it by mounting the bed and climbing over the bedding. This
panel was also immovable and she decided it could not be an opening
because the wall beyond it was doubtless solid. This space beyond the
bed, where the room ended, contained a huge chest of quaintly carved
oak. As she saw the chest her heart gave a great bound and forgetting
for the moment her desire to escape she reached down and raised the lid.

Then her face fell. Despite the dim light in this corner, which she had
grown somewhat accustomed to in investigating the panel, she could see
that the chest contained merely papers, with which it was half filled.
This might be the accumulated correspondence of the Cristovals, of no
use to any but themselves, and losing all interest in the chest she
closed the lid and again crossed over the high bed to Inez.

The result of this investigation, which had consumed a full hour, so
thorough had she been, convinced Mildred that there was no immediate way
for them to leave their prison. So she began to plan how they might keep
themselves and baby Jane comfortable until they were rescued.

The bottle of milk, which Inez still held in her hand, was a prepared
food of a highly nourishing quality. The contents of the bottle had
scarcely been touched by baby when, rousing from her sleep, she had been
taken up and comforted by Inez until slumber again overtook her. Usually
Jane consumed two bottles of such food each day, and another during each
night.

Mildred looked at her watch and found it was nearly four oclock. With a
little care in its administration the babys food might last until
morning, but not longer. For themselves, they must be content without
food, unless

She decided to search the boxes and shelves while daylight lasted, and
bade Inez place the sleeping infant on one of the cushioned seats and
support it with a pillow brought from the couch. Then the two girls
began to take down the boxes from the shelves and explore their
contents. Some were of tin and square in shape; others were round, like
canisters.

In one they found some tea and in another a small quantity of loaf
sugar. There was no other food, except a few cracker crumbs in the
bottom of a tin.

Leaving Inez to sit beside baby, Mildred next visited the room below.
Here the light was more dim, but she discovered a box of wax candlestwo
or three dozen in numberand a quantity of matches in a small iron safe.
She tried these last and after several attempts managed to light one of
them and with it light a candle. The matches were at least eight years
old, but there was not a particle of dampness in the place and so they
had not greatly deteriorated.

A broad slab of redwood, hinged and fastened to the wall by
turn-buttons, was made to let down and serve as a table. When Mildred
lowered it she found that it covered a small recess or cupboard in the
wall, in which stood three tin cans. One was labeled tomatoes and the
other two corn.

Here was food, of a certain sort; but the cans were tightly soldered and
there seemed to be no tool that might be used to open them. Although the
place was littered with many small articles there was nothing else among
them that especially interested the girl. Two sabers were crossed upon
the wall over the table, and below them hung a big revolver. A panama
hat, yellowed with age, hung upon a peg. A broom made of palm fiber
stood in a corner.

Mildred returned to the upper floor, carrying with her several candles
and some matches.

Inez, said she, we must make the best of our misfortune. I hope that
before long we shall be rescued, both on babys account and on our own.
There are some tins of tomatoes and corn down stairs, but nothing that
baby could eat. However, we shall suffer more from thirst than from
hunger, as there is not a drop of water in the place.

Inez had been thinking during Mildreds absence.

Can we not scream, and so make them hear us? she asked.

I have thought of that and we will make the attempt. The servants are
all in the opposite wing, so it is useless to try to arouse their
attention; but when Mr. and Mrs. Weldon return, with the others, they
may be able to hear us and so rescue us.

When will they be back? Inez inquired.

Mildred considered this question.

I heard them say they were to stay in town for luncheon, but Mrs.
Weldon remarked that they would be back soon after. I think, Inez, they
may already have returned and even now may be searching for us. Stay
here, and I will go below, so as not to disturb baby, and call.

She went again down the steep stairs to the lower room where, standing
near to the place where they had come through the wall, she uttered a
sharp, shrill cry, such as she thought might penetrate the thick blocks
of adobe. The sound echoed with startling reverberations through the
secret chambers and baby Jane, wakening in affright, set up a series of
such lusty screams that it seemed as if they ought to be heard a mile
away.

Inez did her best to soothe and quiet the baby, but succeeded only when
she had given little Jane the precious bottle of milk.




CHAPTER XVMILDRED CONFIDES IN INEZ


Mildred had hastened upstairs in alarm at the pandemonium of sound her
own cry had aroused, for the babys screams also gave back a thousand
echoes and these sent the little one into fresh paroxysms of terror.

This wont do, at all, she said anxiously, when baby Jane had sobbed
herself into a doze, with the bottle to comfort her. If we scream again
it will frighten the child to death.

Perhaps they have heard us, suggested Inez, rocking Jane to and fro in
her arms.

Perhaps. Let us hope so, sighed Mildred.

Presently she went over to the couch and examined the condition of the
bedding. The linen sheets had withstood the years very well, but the
blankets and coverlets had a musty smell. She spread some of these out
to air and then went back and sat beside Inez.

Together they watched the light fade until the narrow space was full of
creeping shadows. The air began to grow chilly, so Mildred arranged the
couch and they laid baby Jane upon it, covered her snugly with a blanket
and drew the silk curtain to shield her eyes from the glare of the
candles. They had lighted several of these, placing them in heavy brass
candlesticks which they found ranged upon the shelves. Each of the girls
took a blanket and folded it about her and then they sat down together
to await their fate as patiently as they could.

They both realized, by this time, that their dilemma was likely to prove
serious. Not a sound from within the house penetrated the adobe walls of
their prison. They were unable to tell if their whereabout had yet been
discovered.

I think it best to wait until morning before we make any further effort
to be heard, said Mildred. Our cries would only distract baby and if
our screams have not already attracted notice it would be folly to
continue them. Anyway, let us try to be brave and patient. Something may
happen to save us, before morning.

Even by the flickering candle-light the place was awesome and uncanny.
Inez crept closer to Mildreds side, quite forgetting her former
aversion for her companion. Because the sound of their own voices lent
them a certain degree of courage they conversed together in low tones,
talking on any subject that occurred to them.

At one time Inez broke an oppressive stillness by saying:

Tell me about yourselfwhen you were a girl. And why did you leave here
to go to New York?

Mildred regarded the girl musingly. She felt a strong temptation to
speak, to confide in some one.

Will you keep my secret, Inez? she asked.

Yes; of course. I do not tell all I know, was the reply.

If you told, it would drive me away from here, said Mildred.

Inez gave a start, remembering that a few hours ago she would have done
anything to drive Mildred away. But, somehow, she had come to regard her
companion in misfortune more favorably. A bond of sympathy had been
established between them by this terrible experience they were now
undergoing. Whatever their fate might be, Inez could not hate Mildred
after this.

I do not wish to drive you away, she asserted in a positive voice. I
will not tell your secret.

For a time Mildred mused silently, as if considering how to begin.

My mother died when I was a baby, said she. She was a Travers and
lived on a ranch near here.

I know the Travers Ranch, said Inez quickly. But no Travers have live
there in a long time.

My mother lived there, continued Mildred, until she married my
father. Indeed, she lived there several years after, for I was born in
the ranch house. But my mothers peoplethe Traversesdid not like my
father, and when mother died he took me away to a house in Escondido. I
think he was sent away, and the family sold the ranch and went back to
England, where they had originally come from.

In Escondido an old Mexican woman kept house for us. She was named
Izbel.

Ah! cried Inez, nodding her head wisely; I know. Then, as Mildred
looked at her questioningly, she added: Go on.

My father was away from home much of the time. He traveled, and
sometimes he took me with him into Mexico, and we went as far south as
Matanzas, and once to Mexico City. That was when I was quite small, and
I do not remember much about it. But often we came here to visit Seor
Cristoval, with whom he had some secret business. I have seen him give
my father big bags of golden coins, although everyone said he was a
miser. I remember that at one time my father hid in this very wall for a
day and a night, and officers came to the house and searched it, saying
they were looking for a smuggler and had traced him here.

But Seor Cristoval laughed at them and told them to examine the house
thoroughly. This they did, and went away satisfied. Afterward my father
came out of the wall and took me across the country to San Bernardino,
where we stayed at a friends house for several days. Finally Seor
Cristoval came there to visit us and I heard him tell my father it would
not be safe for him to return home and advised him to go far away. He
also gave my father much money, and one curious thing which he said to
him I never forgot. I will keep your fortune safely until you need it,
was his remark. I will hide it where no one will ever find it, any more
than they could find you.

Ah! then he hid your fathers fortune in this place? cried Inez
eagerly. Then her face fell. But, no, she added. We have look, and
there is no fortune here.

Mildred sighed and continued her tale.

After this Seor Cristoval shook my fathers hand, and kissed mefor he
was always fond of meand went away. I never saw him again. My father
and I traveled to New York and as I was then eleven years of age I
became much troubled over our exile and begged to be told why it was not
safe for us to stay in California. He explained to me that he had
purchased laces and other goods in Mexico and brought them into the
United States secretly, without paying the duty which the robbing
government officials imposed. For that he said he was liable to be
arrested and put in prison, and if I ever allowed the secret to escape
me I would be the means of ruining him. I was a very sensitive child,
and the importance of this great secret weighed upon me heavily. My
father declared he had done no wrong, but I knew that the officers of
the law were constantly searching for him and it so crushed me and
destroyed my happiness that at twelve years of age I was as nervous, as
suspicious and evasive as any old woman could be.

She paused and gave a little shudder. Said Inez, who had listened
intently:

I know now who you are. Your name is Mildred Leighton.

You know that! cried Mildred, amazed.

Of course I know that, when I know your father was the great smuggler
that the officers never could catch. I am told many stories about
Leighton the smuggler, and old Izbel, who kept his house, is my aunt.
Old Izbel say Seor Cristoval give Leighton the money to buy with, and
Leighton give Seor Cristoval, who love money so much, half of all he
make. But no one could ever prove that. Leighton was very clever man. No
one could ever catch him.

Inez spoke admiringly, as if Mildreds father was a hero and Mildred had
gained added prestige by being his daughter. But the other girl frowned
and continued her story.

In New York, she said, we lived in a boarding house and I was sent to
school. My father was not kind to me any more. He grew cross and gloomy
and often would say if I told his secret he would kill me. I did not
tell; I kept the secret safe locked in my heart and suffered agonies of
apprehension for his sake, for I still loved him fondly. He now bought a
little ship and began to make sea voyages to and from Cuba. He would not
let me go with him and he only swore when I tried to get him to give up
the wicked and dangerous life he was leading. Often he denounced
Cristoval, who had in his possession valuable goods and money belonging
to my father but would not give them up because he knew my father dared
not go to California to get them.

For years father continued to smuggle without being suspected. Then one
morning I received a note asking me to come to the prison to see him.
They had caught him at last and seized his ship, and he said there had
been a fight in which several of the government agents had been shot,
and one killed. My father did not shoot, he told me, but they would
blame him for everything.

He stayed in the prison for a month, and every day I went to see him.
Then came the trial and he was sentenced to prison for life. Theythey
proved that he ordered his men to shoot, she added, lowering her head
as if ashamed.

Well, that was right, maintained Inez, cheerfully. If they try to
arrest him, Leighton was right to shoot.

No, Inez, he was very wrong, replied Mildred sadly. I would never be
allowed to see my father after he was taken away, so they let us talk
for the last time. He told me they had taken away all his money and he
had nothing to give me, but that if I could manage to get to California
old Seor Cristoval owed him much money andand other things, and
perhaps he would give it to me, although he had refused to give it to my
father. Afterward they took him away to Sing Sing prison, and that was
the last I ever saw of him, for a year later he died.

I do not suppose, Inez, any girl was ever left with such a heritage of
shame and trouble. You think me hard and cold; but can you blame me?
Always I think some one will discover my secret, that they will say I am
the daughter of Leighton the smuggler and point the finger of shame at
me.

I was a friendless girl with no money. The people at the boarding house
would not let me remain and I took my little bundle and wandered out
into the street in search of home and employment. It was then that a
kind lady, a Mrs. Runyon, had pity on me and put me into a school for
nurses. I was fifteen years old and big and strong for my age. At
seventeen I was nursing in a charity hospital, but my fathers disgrace
had made me an outcast and prevented my obtaining situations with good
families. Mrs. Runyon tried to help me but my story was too well known.
I changed my name from Leighton to Travers, but even that did not bring
me better luck.

For two years longer I worked for a bare pittance, and then suddenly a
ray of sunshine appeared. Miss De Graf came to the hospital where I was
caring for an injured child and offered me a position with her cousin
out here in California, where I had known the happiest days of my life.
More than that, I found to my joy that I was coming directly to the old
Cristoval house, for although Seor Cristoval was long since deadas I
had found out by writing himI remembered the secret rooms and hoped I
might find at least a part of my fathers fortune still hidden there.

Well, she added after a pause, these are the rooms, and there is
nothing of value left in them; this is the old Cristoval home, where my
father was forced to hide from the law; this is the country where the
officers hounded the hated smuggler like a dog and finally drove him
away. And here is the girl, Inez, who has passed through all these
scenes and to-day finds nothing in life worth living for.

Inez took her hand, shyly but tenderly.

Meeldred, she said softly, perhaps your life will end here. It will
be strange, will it not, if that is so? But if we cannot get out, it
makes a good story to die in this old den of the smuggler, your father.
I will die with you; but I do not mindmuch. But Mees Jane

She broke off with a wail of anguish and Mildred said hastily:

Inez, we must save the baby! And, if we do, we shall also save
ourselves. Come; you, at least, have much to live for. You will care for
the baby after I have gone far away, and you will be glad, then, that
the hated Mildred is out of your life.

But I do not hate you any more! cried the Mexican girl protestingly.
I like you now, Meeldred. We will be friends, an we will be happy
together, ifif

If what, Inez?

If we live to get out of this wall.




CHAPTER XVIAN UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL


As the night advanced the two girls continued to talk, in low and
subdued voices because of their anxiety and growing fears. They kept the
candles trimmed, for the light lent them courage. They were not hungry,
although they had eaten nothing since noon, but they were beginning to
suffer from thirst.

The baby wakened with shrill screams and the only way to quiet her was
to give her the bottle, which was now less than a third full. Mildred
was in a quandary whether to withhold the remainder of the food from
little Jane, so as to prolong her life as much as possible, or to allow
the baby to eat what she desired, as long as any of the food remained.
She finally decided on the latter course, hoping the morning would bring
some one to their rescue.

After the little one was again hushed in slumber and cuddled in warm
blankets on a seat beside them, the two imprisoned girls renewed their
desultory conversation. They realized it must be long after midnight but
Mildred avoided looking at her watch because that made the minutes drag
so slowly.

Finally a dull sound from the other side of the wall reached their ears.
It seemed that some one was pounding upon the adobe. Both girls sprang
to their feet in excitement, their heads bent to listen. The pounding
was not repeated but a voice was hearda far-away voiceas of one
calling.

Mildred answered the cry, at the top of her lungs, and immediately Inez
followed with a shrill scream that roused a thousand echoes in the
hidden passage. And now Toodlums joined the chorus, startled from her
sleep and terrified by the riot of sound.

They tried to listen, but the babys cries prevented anything else from
being heard, so they devoted themselves to quieting little Jane. It took
some time to do this, for the sobbing infant was thoroughly frightened,
but finally Inez succeeded in comforting her and the bottle of precious
milk was sacrificed to put baby to sleep again.

By this time the sounds on the other side of the wall had ceased; but
the girls were now full of eager hope, believing they had succeeded in
letting their friends know they were imprisoned in the wall.

Within the hour more dull pounding began and this continued so regularly
that Mildred told Inez the rescuers were surely trying to break through
the adobe. They listened alertly to each blow and for a time forgot both
thirst and fatigue in the excitement of the moment. Daybreak was near,
for already a gray light was creeping in through the gratings overhead.

Suddenly a crash like a thunder-clap resounded from the end of the
passage. From the gloomy recess behind the couch a mans form appeared,
struck the bed, was rebounded by the springs into the air, turned a
complete somersault and landed on the floor of the passage in a sitting
position, facing the two startled nurses.

He did not seem to be hurt, but was evidently bewildered. He glared in
amazement at the girls and they glared in amazement at him. Then,
slowly, he turned his eyes to view his surroundings and blinked stupidly
at the candles, the antique carved furniture, the baby bundled upon a
cushioned seat and finally rested his eyes again upon the faces of the
nurses.

Why, it is Seor Bul-Run! cried Inez, clapping her hands with joy. He
have come to save us.

Pardon me, said the man, in a rather quavering falsetto, Im not sure
whether Ive come to save you or to share your peril. Where am I,
please?

It is the hollow of the wall, sir, replied Mildred, who had never seen
the big fellow before. It is the secret apartment constructed by Seor
Cristoval, who built this house.

Well, said he, slowly getting upon his feet and with another curious
glance around, I cant say that I consider it a desirable place of
residence. Certainly its no place for our precious Toodlums, and he
bent over the sleeping babe and tenderly kissed its forehead. Then,
straightening up, he said in as determined a tone as his high voice
would permit: We must find a way to get out of here!

Cant you get out the same way you got in? asked Mildred.

He looked at her in perplexed astonishment.

How did I get in? he inquired.

Dont you know?

Ive no idea. I was sitting in the window of the blue room, resting,
when there was a bang, whirligig, fireworksand here I am, your
uninvited guest.

The blue room! cried Mildred.

Yes. Did you happen to notice my arrival? I dont mean its lack of
dignity, but the direction I came from?

You came from somewhere behind that bed. I saw you strike the mattress
andand bound up again.

To be sure. I remember bounding up again. II didnt care to stop, you
see. I was anxious totosee if baby Jane was all right.

Mildred could not repress a smile, while Inez giggled openly.

However, continued the big man, good-humoredly, the direction affords
us a clew. Pardon my absence for a moment while I investigate.

He took one of the candles, cautiously made his way over the couch and
stood upon the oak chest at the end of the narrow chamber. Here he was
able to examine the heavy planking set in the adobe, through which he
had doubtless made his appearance but which now appeared as solid and
immovable as the wall itself.

Runyons first act was to pass the light of the candle carefully over
every joint and edge, with the idea of discovering a spring or hinge.
But no such thing seemed to exist. Then he took out his big jackknife
and began prying. When a blade snapped he opened another, only to break
it in his vain twisting and jabbing. Finally he threw the now useless
knife from him and began pounding with his fists upon the planking, at
the same time shouting with the best voice he could muster. Perhaps the
pounding might have been heard had not his friends at that moment been
seeking for his mangled form in the garden, among the rose vines.

After listening in vain for a reply, Runyon came back to the girls,
saying:

This is certainly a singular occurrence. I came in as easily as I ever
did anything in my life, I assure you; but the way out is not so easy.
However, we wont have to endure this confinement long, for the boys are
breaking down the wall in two places.

Then, in reply to their anxious questioning, he related the incidents of
the night: how the discovery was made that Toodlums and her two nurses
were missing; of the search throughout the country in automobiles; how
the major had heard the ghost of baby Jane, which had given them their
first intimation of the truth, and of the desperate and vain attempts
made to get into the secret chamber.

Mildred, in return, explained the accident that had led to their
imprisonment and of their failure to find any means of escape.

There must be a way out, of course, she added, for Seor Cristoval
would never invent such clever and complicated ways of getting into this
hollow wall without inventing other means of getting out.

True enough, agreed Runyon; but I cant see why he thought it
necessary to make the means of getting _out_ a secret. These rooms were
probably built as hiding-places, and there are at least two separate
entrances. But whoever hid here should be master of the situation and
have no difficulty in escaping when the danger was over.

Unless, said Mildred, thoughtfully, the rooms were also intended as a
prison.

Well, perhaps that is it, said the man. Old Cristoval may have
thought the occasion would arise when he would like to keep one or more
prisoners here, so he concealed the exits as carefully as the entrances.
Let us admit, young ladies, that its a first-class prison. But, his
tone changing to one of kindly concern, how have you stood this ordeal?
You must be worn out with anxiety, and desperately hungry, too.

As he gazed into Mildreds face it occurred to him, for the first time,
that Janes new nurse was an interesting girl. She was not exactly
beautiful, butattractive. Indeed, at that moment Mildred was at her
best, despite the nights vigil. The hard, defiant look had left her
eyes for the first time in years, driven out by a train of exciting
events that had led her to forget herself and her rebellion against
fate, at least for the time being.

We are not very hungry, she said, smiling at the big, boyish rancher,
but we are thirsty. Id give anything for a good drink of water. And
baby is now devouring the last few drops of her prepared food. When it
is gone there is nothing here that she can eat.

Well, said he, spurred to action by this report, Im going to explore
this place carefully, for if we can manage to find a way out it will
save Weldon and his men from ruining that wall, and also save time, for
the blamed adobe is so hard and thick that it will still require hours
for them to make a hole big enough to get us out.




CHAPTER XVIITHE PRODIGAL SON


With the added light that now came from the gratings in the ceiling
every object in the upper room was plainly visible. Runyon began his
inspection in a methodical manner, starting at one corner and eyeing the
inner wall on every inch of its surface. He tested each block at its
corners and edges. The girls watched him listlessly, for they expected
no result, having covered the same methods themselves.

At length Runyon was obliged to abandon the wall in despair.

The opening is there, of course, he said, but that confounded
Cristoval was too clever for us. If I had the rascal here now, Id
strangle him!

As he stood in the center of the narrow space, looking around him, his
eye fell upon the upholstered seats ranged along one side and he
regarded them suspiciously. They were box-like affairs, with the surface
of the covers padded and cushioned.

He reached down and lifted one of the lids. As he glanced within he
uttered an exclamation of astonishment. The box was almost filled with
bottles, lying regularly on their sides.

Wine! he cried. Now, MissI dont remember to have heard your nameI
shall be able to relieve your thirst.

My name is TraversMildred Travers, sir; but I cant drink wine.

Not to quench your thirstjust a few swallows? he asked, taking a
bottle and trying to remove the cork.

Not a drop, even to save my life, she replied positively.

But I will, Seor RunyonI will! cried Inez eagerly.

Runyon! exclaimed Mildred, stepping back in amazement and looking at
the man rather wildly.

Excuse me; havent I introduced myself? he asked, looking up. Yes; my
names Runyon.

Something in her expression arrested his gaze and he regarded the girl
curiously.

Bulwer Runyon? she said in a low voice.

He sat down on the box, holding the bottle between his knees.

They christened me that. Very foolishly, I think. But what do you know
of Bulwer Runyon?

Your motherisMartha Runyon?

To be surebless her heart! Ah, you know my mother, then, and thats
how you have heard of me. But nothing good, from the dear old ladys
lips, Ill be bound.

She really loves you, replied Mildred quickly; onlyyou have
disappointed her.

Indeed I have. Ive always disappointed her, ever since I can
remember.

You were very extravagant, said Mildred in a reproachful tone.

Yes; that was my fault. Father spoiled me; then he died and left all
his fortune to mother. Quite right. But mother is pretty close with her
money.

Did she not pay all your debts?

Yes; but that was foolish. She reproached me for owing people, which
was one of my pet recreations. So she paid the bills, bought me a ranch
out here, shipped me into exile and washed her hands of me, declaring
that the ranch was my sole inheritance and I must never expect another
cent of her fortune. She proposes, I believe, to invest her surplus in
charity. Nice idea, wasnt it?

It was very generous in her, declared Mildred.

Was it? Well, thats a matter of opinion. But I regard her gift of this
ranch as the first step to perpetual pauperdom. She tossed the land at
me, shuffled me off, and then expected me to make a living.

Cant you do that? asked Mildred wonderingly.

Make a living on a California ranch! he said, as if astonished.

Others do, she asserted.

There is no other just like your humble servant, he assured her, again
struggling with the cork. I cant grow enough lemonsits a lemon ranch
she handed meto pay expenses. The first year I decorated my estate with
a mortgage; had to have an automobile, you know. The second year I put
another plaster on to pay the interest of the first mortgage and a few
scattering debts. Third year, the third patch; fourth year, the usual
thing. Fifth yearthats this onethe money sharks balked. They said the
ranch is loaded to its full capacity. So, Ill have to sell some
lemons.

Oh, Im so sorry! cried Mildred.

So am I, thank you. Stupid thing, selling lemons. But the wolfs at the
door and all I can do is shoot lemons at the brute. Lemons! Wasnt it
tart of the dear mother to load me with such an acidulous estate?
Perhaps she imagined it would make me assiduouseh?

Your mother hoped you would turn over a new leaf andand redeem your
past, said the girl.

Well, its too late to do that now. I cant redeem the past without
redeeming the ranch, and thats impossible, he declared with a grin.
But tell me, please, how you happen to be so deep in my mothers
confidence.

Mildred hesitated, but reflected that she really owed him an
explanation.

She protected me when I was in trouble, she said softly.

Ah; thats like the dear old girl. Do you know, Ive an idea that when
Im down and out shell relent and come to my assistance with a fatted
calf? It would be just like her. Ive known of others she befriended.
Her hobby is to help poor girls. There was that Leighton girl, for
instance, whose smuggling, murderous father was imprisoned for life. The
poor little thing hadnt a friend in the world till mother took her in
hand and put her in a training school for nurses. The mother wrote me
how interested she was in that case. Her protege did her credit, it
seems, for the child turned out a very good nurse, whowho

He suddenly paused, flushed red and stared at the girl uncertainly.

You say your name isTravers? he asked.

Yes, she replied, casting down her eyes.

NotLeighton?

Cannot you pull the cork, Seor Runyon? I am so thirsty! cried Inez
quickly, to save her friend from disclosing her secret. But big Runyon
was bright enough, in spite of his peculiarities. He read Mildreds
confusion and suspected the truth, but was too considerate to press the
question.

The cork is obstinate, said he; so we wont argue with the thing,
and he struck the neck of the bottle against a corner of the seat and
broke it so neatly that not a drop of the contents was spilled. Then he
took a cup from the shelf and poured out some of the wine.

Its a native vintage, said he, but it ought to be mellow and mild
after all the years it has lain here.

Inez drank. The California Mexicans are accustomed to the native wines
and consume them as freely as water. But Mildred, although again pressed
to quench her thirst, steadfastly refused.

Runyon took a little of the wine, for he also was thirsty, and then he
made an examination of the other seats. Some contained more wine; others
were quite empty; but no water was discovered anywhere.

Now I shall go below, said Runyon, and see if I can unearth anything
of importance there. Do you hear those dull sounds on the other side of
the wall? They tell us that our friends are busy drilling the holes.
Its wonderful how tough that adobe is.

Little Jane had awakened again and Inez took baby Jane in her arms and,
with Mildred, followed Runyon down the stairs into the lower chamber.
Here they watched his careful inspection of the room but did not hope
for any favorable result.

Here is food, he announced, as, having given up the idea of finding
egress, he came upon the cans of tomatoes and corn.

Yes; but we have no can-opener, replied Mildred; and, unless the
contents were cooked, they would not be eatable.

Im not thinking of the eatables, said Runyon, taking out a small
pen-knife, for he had already ruined the larger one he always carried.
Tomatoes usually have a lot of liquid in the cans, a sort of watery
juice which I am sure would help to relieve your thirst.

He began prying at the tin with a knife blade, but it was a heavy
quality of plate, such as is rarely used nowadays, and resisted his
attempt. Soon the blade of the frail tool snapped at the handle, and he
tried the other blade. That, too, soon broke and Runyon regarded the can
with a sort of wonder.

It beats me, he said, shaking his head. But I dont like to give up,
and that tomato-juice would be of service if we could only get at it.

Looking around for another implement his eye spied the revolver hanging
upon its peg.

Ah! if that weapon is loaded Ill use a bullet as a can-opener, he
exclaimed, and reaching up he removed the revolver from its place.

Good; six cartridges, 32 caliber, said he. Now, young ladies, if you
can stand the noise, and the powder hasnt spoiled, I believe I can make
a hole in that can which will allow the juice to run out.

I dont care, said Inez, but I will take Mees Jane upstairs, first.

The sound will echo like a regular battle, said Mildred; but as I am
really thirsty and your suggestion of relief tempts me, I am willing to
have you shoot the pistol.

Runyon placed the can upon the edge of the low hinged table, where it
stood about waist high. When Inez had gone above with little Jane, the
man took a position whereby he faced obliquely the outer wall and aiming
at the tomatoes said:

Better stop up your ears, MissMildred.

She obeyed and he fired.

Even their anticipations could not prepare them for the wild riot of
sound that followed the explosion. The bullet found its mark, for the
can toppled and fell from the shelf and lay spilling its contents upon
the floor. The bullet went farther and struck a crevice of the outer
wall. A cloud of smoke for a moment obscured their view and Mildred,
regarding the tomato-can, cried out:

Oh, pick it up! Pick it up, quick! It is spilling.

Runyon made no reply. He was staring straight ahead, in a dazed,
bewildered way, and now Mildreds eyes followed his.

The smoke was rolling out of a large aperture in the outer wall. Three
huge blocks of adobe, neatly joined together, had swung outward, moved
by a secret spring which the bullet had released.

Through the grim prison wall they were looking out at the sunshine that
flooded the rose garden.

Mildred sank to her knees, sobbing with joy. Big Runyon walked to the
staircase.

Hi, there, Inez! he called. Come down here and take Toodlums to her
mother. Ill bet a button shell be jolly glad to see that kid again!




CHAPTER XVIIILACES AND GOLD


At four oclock in the afternoon Patsy rubbed her eyes, yawned and
raised her head from her pillow.

Dear me! she sighed, Im tired yet, but this sleeping in the daytime
is unnatural. I wonder if Beth is awake.

She went to the door of the adjoining room, opened it and found her
cousin dressing.

Do you suppose anyone else is up? she inquired.

See there, replied Beth, pointing through the window.

Patsy saw. Mr. Runyon was seated on a garden bench in earnest
conversation with Mildred Travers.

Didnt he go home this morning, after the excitement was over? she
asked.

No, replied Beth. Mr. and Mrs. Hahn drove their car home, but our
interesting neighbor at the north, Mr. Bul Run, declared there was
nothing at his own ranch half so enticing as a bed here. Hes a
bachelor, it seems, and leads rather a lonely life. So Arthur gave him a
room and he went to bed; but it seems he has had his sleep out and is
indulging in other recreations.

Patsy was eyeing the couple in the garden.

Mr. Runyon seems to have struck up a friendship with your protg
Mildred, she observed.

Yes, answered Beth. You know he was shut up in the wall with her and
Inez for awhile and the adventure must have made them feel well
acquainted. Wasnt that imprisonment a most peculiar thing, Patsy?

Very peculiar. I havent had much time to think about it, for as soon
as Toodlums was safe in Louises arms I went to bed. But it occurs to me
to wonder how Mildred Travers knew so much of the secrets of this absurd
old house and why she ventured to explore the hidden rooms in our
absence. Put that with the fact that she lived in these parts as a girl,
and with her eagerness to come out heredont you remember her fervent
thank heaven?and it seems the whole mystery isnt unraveled yet; its
only getting more tangled.

Beth was thoughtful for a time.

I am sure Mildred will have some explanation to make, she said
presently. Dont let us judge her just yet, Patsy. And I advise you to
get dressed, for theres Louise wheeling the baby, and perhaps everyone
else is downstairs but us.

Louise and baby both slept all through that awful night, remarked
Patsy, again yawning. No wonder theyre up and around and looking
bright and happy. But she took her cousins hint and dressed so rapidly
that she descended the stairs only a few moments after Beth did.

Uncle John, the major and Arthur were in the court, smoking and sipping
coffee. The events of the past night were still being earnestly
discussed by them and much speculation was indulged in concerning the
rooms in the hollow wall and the uses to which they had been put during
the pioneer days when Cristoval constructed them, and even afterward
when his son, the last owner, had occupied the premises.

The entire ranch, said Arthur, as well as this house, was sold by the
executors appointed by the court, for it seems that Cristoval had no
heirs in this country. The money was sent over to Spain and divided
among a host of relations, the executors were discharged, and that ended
the matter as far as the law is concerned. But I am sure the secret of
the wall was at that time unknown to any, for otherwise the furniture in
those narrow rooms, some of which is expensive and valuable on account
of its unique carving, and the bins of wine and other truck, would have
been sold with the other personal possessions. I bought this place of
a man who had purchased it at the executors sale but never has lived in
it. All the rooms were stripped bare, which goes to prove that the
hidden recesses in the walls were unknown. Now, the question is, do I
legally own the contents of that wall, or dont I?

I stepped into the rooms, this morning, with the others, but merely
glanced around a bit, said Mr. Merrick. Ive an idea you may
rightfully claim whatever is there. The value of such old, odd pieces is
arbitrary and they wouldnt total enough at an auction sale to bother
about. My idea, Arthur, is that you remove whatever you care to retain,
stop up the rat holes, and then seal up the place forever.

I suppose, remarked the major, those hollow places in the wall were
of real value in the days of wild Indians and murdering highwaymen. But,
as John Merrick says, theyre of no use to anyone now, but rather a
source of danger.

Was that door left open? asked Patsy.

Yes; and I put a brace against it, so it couldnt close and shut us
out, replied Arthur.

That doesnt matter; Mildred knows the way in, said Beth. The whole
trouble was that Inez closed the door behind them and they couldnt
manage to get out again.

Mr. Merrick sipped his coffee reflectively.

That girl, said he, ought to explain how she knows so muchand so
little.

And what she was doing in the secret rooms, added the major.

Shell do that, piped a high voice, and in sauntered Mr. Runyon and
sat down to pour himself some coffee. Ive just left
MissererTravers, and she has decided to tell you all her whole story,
frankly and without reservation, and then she wants to ask your advice.

Whose advice? demanded Arthur.

Everybodys advice. She asked mine, a little while ago, and I told her
to put it up to the crowd. The poor thing has had a sad history and
theres a bit of romance and tragedy connected with it; but she has been
quite blameless. I havent known you people long, but Ill bank on your
generosity and fairness, and thats what I told the poor girl.

Where is she now? asked Patsy.

In the garden with Mrs. Weldon and Toodlums. Theyll all be here
presently.

The little group remained silent and thoughtful until Louise entered
wheeling the baby in her cab and followed by Mildred Travers. The
nurses face was white and troubled but she had acquired a new
attractiveness for the reason that her eyes had softened and were now
pleading instead of defiant.

Inez came running from the nursery to take baby, but Louise would not
let little Jane go. Although she had escaped much of the past nights
misery, thanks to Dr. Knoxs quieting powders, the young mother was
still unnerved and liked to have the child where she could see it. So
Inez sat on a bench and held Jane, who was the least concerned of anyone
over her recent peril and fortunate escape.

The court was shady, cool and quiet. Those assembled eyed Mildred
curiously and expectantly, so that she was really embarrassed at first.
Beth, who felt in a measure responsible for this waif of a great city,
because she had been instrumental in bringing her here, gently led
Mildred to a beginning of her story by asking a few questions that
afforded the girl an opening.

The entire party listened gravely to the recital, for only Inez, among
those present, had ever heard any part of the strange tale before.

Mildred told practically the same story she had related to the Mexican
girl the night before, but went more into details and explained more
fully her girlhood acquaintance with Seor Cristoval.

He was an unusual man, said she; aged and white-haired, as I remember
him, and always dressed in white flannels, which threw his dark skin
into sharp relief. He lived alone in the house, having but one
man-servant to do all the work, cook his meals and cater to his
slightest whim.

Miguel Zaloa, said Inez in a low voice.

Cristoval was not popular, said Mildred, for he loved money so well
that he was reputed to be a miser. It was this love of money, I think,
that induced him to go into partnership with my father in his illegal
smuggling enterprises. Cristoval furnished the money and when my father
had slipped across the border with his bales of rare laces, they were
hidden in the hollow wall until they could be forwarded to San Francisco
and sold.

And this brings me to a relation of my present interest in this house,
she continued. When we escaped from California a large lot of very
valuable Mexican laces which belonged exclusively to my father was
hidden in the wall. The sale of a former lot of smuggled goods had
resulted in a large profit and Cristoval had received a bank draft for
the amount, one half of which was due my father. When we last saw
Cristoval at San Bernardino, before we left for New York, he promised my
father to cash the draft and send him the proceeds. This he never did,
although he advanced my father, at that time, a sum of money from other
sources to pay our expenses until we could establish ourselves in the
east.

To avoid suspicion, my father always allowed Cristoval to bank the
partnership money, drawing on the rich Spaniard from time to time for
what he required. Father told me that altogether Cristoval owed him nine
thousand dollars, besides the bale of laces, valued at ten thousand
more. He wrote many times to demand this money, using a cipher they had
arranged between them, but his letters were never answered. I know now
that Cristoval died soon after we went to New York, so whoever got the
letters, being unable to read the secret cipher, of course ignored them.

Just as Leighton was being taken to prison, the last time I ever saw
him, he told me to find some way to come here and get the money. He said
that if Cristoval was dead, as he then suspected, the secret of the wall
was still safe, for the old man had vowed never to disclose it. He
thought I would find the laces still hidden in the wall, and perhaps the
money.

Did you look to see, while you were there? asked Arthur Weldon.

Yes. There is no evidence of any property that I could rightfully
claim.

It was a strange recital, and a fascinating one to those who heard it.

Who would think, said Patsy, that in this prosaic age we would get so
close to a real story of smuggling, hidden treasure and secret recesses
in walls? It smacks more of the romantic days of past centuries.

We must not forget, replied Louise, that of all our numerous states
California has the most romantic history. It wasnt so long ago that the
Spanish don flourished in this section and even yet it is more Spanish
than American except in the big cities.

As for smuggling, added Runyon, that is going on to-dayas merrily as
in the days of the famous Leighton, if on a smaller scale. Ive some
choice cigars over at my ranch that have never paid duty, and Ive an
order with the smuggler for more. So, after all, theres nothing very
astonishing in Mildred Leightons story.

The wall we have practical evidence of, said Uncle John. I suppose it
will hold its secret rooms for many years to come, for these adobe
dwellings are practically fire-proof and are built to defy time.

But about Mildreds fortune, cried Patsy. Dont you suppose it is
hidden, after all, some place in the wall?

From what I have heard of Cristoval, said Arthur in a reflective tone,
he was not considered a dishonest man, but rather miserly and
grasping.

My father, explained Mildred, trusted him fully until we went away
and could get no answer to his letters. The old Spaniard was very fond
of me, also, and he would hold me in his arms and say that one day I
would be a rich lady, for my father and he were both making my fortune.
I was very young, as you know, but I never forgot that statement.

Suppose, suggested the major, we make another and more thorough
search of those secret rooms.

We will do that, replied Arthur promptly. It is too late to undertake
the task to-night, but we will begin it right after breakfast to-morrow
morning. Inez, I wish you would slip down to the quarters and ask Miguel
to come and help us. Tell him to be here at nine oclock.

The girl nodded, gave the baby to Mildred and stole quietly out of the
court.




CHAPTER XIXINEZ AND MIGUEL


Inez found Miguel Zaloa smoking his cigarette among the orange trees. He
was quite alone and looked at the girl in an expectant way as she
approached.

Oh, Miguel! she cried. I tell you a secret. Of course it is no secret
any more, for now they all know it, up there at the house. Meeldred
Travers, the girl from New York, is not Meeldred Travers. She is the
child of Leighton the smugglershe is Meeldred Leighton!

The old ranchero stood as if turned to stone, but he bit his cigarette
in two and it fell unnoticed upon the ground. While Inez regarded him
with disappointment, because he had exhibited no emotion at hearing the
wonderful news, Miguel turned his back and mechanically walked away
through a row of trees. A dozen paces distant he halted and again stood
motionless for the space of a full minute. Then he swung around and with
slow, hesitating steps returned to Inez.

You saysheees Meeldred Leighton? he asked, as if he thought he had
not heard aright.

Of course. Dont you remember, Miguel? She say, when she used to come
here, a little girl, with Leighton the great smuggler, you did know her.
It was then you served Seor Cristoval, at the big house.

He nodded, his dark eyes fixed upon her face but displaying no
expression.

Leighton is dead, continued Inez, delighted to be able to gossip of
all she had heard. They put him in a prison an he died. So Meeldred
was ashame of her fathers bad name an call herself Travers. She is
poor, an that is why she come here as nurse, so she can find the money
that belong to her.

Miguel suddenly seized her wrist in a powerful grip.

What money? he demanded.

Dont; you hurt my arm! It is the money Seor Cristoval owed her
father. Take your hand away, Miguel Zaloa!

Slowly he released her.

Where will she find thees money? he asked.

She does not know. Perhaps it is not here at all. But there was a great
heap of laces, worth much money, which Seor Cristoval hid in the wall
to keep for Leighton.

Miguel laughed. He seemed suddenly to have regained his equanimity. He
began rolling another cigarette.

They will be old, by now, thees lace, said he.

A lace is better when it is old, asserted the girl.

The man paused, looked at the half-made cigarette and tossed it away.
Then he glanced around to see if they were observed and taking Inez
armgently, this timehe led her away from the path and into a thicket
of orange trees.

Thees Meeldred, he said in soft tones, you hate.

No, no! I do not hate her now. I love Meeldred.

So! he said, drawing in his breath and regarding the girl with
surprise. You tell me once she is witch-woman.

I am wrong, declared Inez earnestly. She is good. She have been poor
an friendless, all because of her father, the noble smuggler Leighton.
But see, Miguel; I have been all night shut up in the wall with her. We
talk, an I learn to know her better. I do not hate Meeldred any moreI
love her!

Sit down, said the old man, pointing to a hillock beside a tree. Inez
obeyed, and he squatted on the ground facing her and coolly rolled
another cigarette. Tell me more about thees girlLeightons girl, he
said.

Inez related Mildreds story as well as she was able, exaggerating such
romantic details as appealed to her fancy, but showing unbounded
sympathy for her new friend. The aged ranchero listened intently,
nodding his white head now and then to show his interest. When the girl
had finished he smoked for a time in silence.

What Meeldred do now? he inquired.

They will hunt in the wall, to-morrow, to find the lace, she replied.
Meest Weldon say for you to come to the house at nine oclock, in
morning, to help them.

Meest Weld say that?

Yes. But we have search alreadyMeeldred an mean Meest Bul-Run have
search, an no lace is there. I am sure of that. I am sure no money is
there, too. So Meeldred mus stay as nurse all her life an help me take
care of Mees Jane.

Miguel pondered this.

Bmby Mees Jane grow up, said he. What can Leightons daughter do
then?

How can I tell that? answered Inez, shaking her head. Always poor
people mus work, Miguel. Is it not so?

Rich people mus work, too, continued the Mexican girl dreamily, as
she embraced her drawn-up legs and rested her chin upon her knees. Was
old Seor Cristoval more happy than we, with all the money he loved? No!
Meest Weldon works; Meest Hahn works; even Meest Bul-Run workssometime.
If one does not work, one is not happy, Miguel; an if one mus work,
money makes not any difference. So, when Meeldred find she is still
poor, an has no money an no laces, like she hope for, she will work
jus the same as ever, an be happy.

I, too, work, remarked the old man. I have always work.

If you had much money, Miguel, you would still work.

Yes.

You would not care for money; not you. It would not do you any good. It
would not change your life.

No.

Again they sat in silence, as if reflecting on this primitive
philosophy. Finally Inez said:

You remember Leighton, Miguel?

Yes. He was good man. He make much money for Seor Cristoval an for
heemself. Sometime I see them count goldten pieces to Seor Cristoval,
ten pieces to Leightonto divide even. Then Leighton will throw me a
gold-piece an say: That for you, Miguel, because you are faithful an
true.

An Seor Cristoval, did he throw the gold-piece to you, also?

No.

What did you do with the gold Leighton give you, Miguel?

The old man shrugged his shoulders. Tobacco. Some wine. A game of
card.

An were you faithful an true, as Leighton say?

He looked at her long and steadily.

What you theenk about that, Inez?

When people talk about Miguel Zaloa, they always say he is good man. I
hear Meest Weldon say: Miguel is honest. I would trust Miguel with all
I have.

Meest Weld say that?

Yes.

Well?

I think you are sometime honest, sometime not; like I am myself,
replied the girl.

The old man rose and led the way back to the path.

To be always honest is to be sometime foolish, he muttered on the way.
Tell Meest Weld I will be there, like he say, at nine oclock.




CHAPTER XXMR. RUNYONS DISCOVERY


Sing Fing excelled himself at the dinner that evening, which was a merry
meal because all dangers and worries seemed to belong to the past. Also
it was, as Uncle John feelingly remarked, the first square meal they
had enjoyed since the one at Castros restaurant. Of course Runyon
stayed, because he was to help search the wall the next day, and as the
telephone had been repaired Louise called up Rudolph and Helen Hahn and
begged them to drive over and help them celebrate at the festive board.

So the Hahns camealthough they returned home again in the late
eveningand it was really a joyous and happy occasion. Inez brought in
the baby, which crowed jubilantly and submitted to so many kisses that
Patsy declared she was afraid they would wear the skin off Toodlums
chubby cheeks unless they desisted.

Mildred had gone to her room immediately after her confession in the
court and Louise had respected her desire for privacy and had ordered
her dinner sent in to her.

As they all sat in the library, after dining, in a cosy circle around
the grate fire, they conversed seriously on Mildred Leighton and
canvassed her past history and future prospects.

I cannot see, said Beth, always the nurses champion, that we are
called upon to condemn poor Mildred because her father was a criminal.

Of course not, agreed Patsy, the poor child wasnt to blame.

These criminal tendencies, remarked the major gravely, are sometimes
hereditary.

Oh, but thats nonsense! declared Uncle John. We cant imagine
Mildreds becoming a smuggleror smuggleress, or whatever you call it.
That hard, cold look in her eyes, which we all so thoughtlessly
condemned, was merely an indication of suffering, of hurt pride and
shame for the disgrace that had been thrust upon her. I liked the girl
better to-day, as with blazing cheeks she told of all her grief and
struggles, than ever before since I knew her.

The expression of the eye, said Arthur, is usually considered an
infallible indication of character.

Thats a foolish prejudice, asserted Patsy, whose own frank and
brilliant eyes were her chief attraction.

I do not think so, dear, objected Louise. The eyes may not truly
indicate character, but they surely indicate ones state of mind. We did
not read the hard look in Mildreds eyes correctly, I admit, but it
showed her to be on guard against the worlds criticism, resentful of
her hard fate and hopeless in her longing for a respectable social
position. She realized that were her story known she would meet with
sneers and jeers on every side, and therefore she proudly held herself
aloof.

But now, said Patsy, circumstances have changed Mildreds viewpoint.
She found that our knowledge of her story only brought her sympathy and
consideration, and when she left us I noticed that her eyes were soft
and grateful and full of tears.

Big Runyon had listened to this conversation rather uneasily and with
evident disapproval. Now he said, in as positive a tone as his
unfortunate voice would permit:

That girls a corker, and Im proud of her. In the first place, my
mother is a shrewd judge of character. You cant fool her about a
persons worth; just see how accurately she judged _my_ character! When
the dear old ladywhose only fault is being so close-fistedpicked up
Mildred Leighton and defended her, that act vouched for the girls worth
beyond dispute. Mrs. Runyonbless her stingy old heart!never makes a
mistake. Just think of it: she actually spent money in giving Mildred an
education as a trained nurse. To my mind that settled the girls
character for all time. Now, I dont care a continental whether she
finds any smuggled laces or not; she needs a friend, and now that she is
away from my mothers care _Im_ going to be that friend.

Oh, Bul! cried Louise with lively interest, are you in love?

Me? At my age? Cer-tain-ly not!

How old are you?

Thirty.

Old enough to know better, said Uncle John.

Old enough to need a wife to care for him, suggested Helen Hahn.

Honest Injun, Run; arent you a little soft on Mildred? asked Rudolph.

Well, perhaps a little; but its nothing like that currant-jelly,
chocolate bonbon, glucose-like feeling which Ive observed is the
outward demonstration of love.

Oh, well; marry the girl and be done with it, then, laughed Arthur.

And rob me of my nurse? protested Louise.

Runyon needs a nurse as much as Jane. In fact, hes a much bigger
baby.

Mr. Runyon accepted all this jollying with calm indifference.

The days of chivalry are over, he sighed. If a fellow tries to
protect a maiden in distress, they think he wants to marry her.

Dont you? asked Patsy, in a sympathetic tone.

Why, I hadnt thought of it before; but it wouldnt be a half-bad
idea, he confessed. Ranch life is a bit lonely without women around to
bother one.

You are all talking foolishly, observed Beth, who was not romantic.
Mildred might object to washing Mr. Runyons dishes.

Why, yes; I believe she would, said Mr. Runyon. Im sure she
disapproves of my character; thats why I respect her judgment, so
highly. She didnt seem at all interested in those various mortgages,
when I mentioned them; and what else have I to offer a wife?

Even the cosy library could not hold them very late, for none had been
fully restored by the sleep obtained during the day. Bed seemed more
alluring than a grate fire and when the Hahns went home the party broke
up, to meet again at an eight oclock breakfast.

As soon as the meal was over Arthur Weldon announced that the first
business of the day would be an examination of the secret rooms in the
wall of the old East Wing.

And this must be a thorough and final inspection of the place, he
added. We must satisfy ourselves and Mildred Travers, without the
shadow of a doubt, that we have inventoried every blessed thing in those
roomseven to the rats and beetles.

Thats right, approved Mr. Merrick. Let us do the job once and for
all. Weve plenty of time at our disposal and there are enough of us
with sharp eyes to ferret out every mystery of the place. In Mildreds
interest we must be thorough.

In the court they found old Miguel, sitting motionless and patient. He
was carefully dressed in his best clothes and wore a red necktie, just
as if, said Patsy, he was going to a party instead of delving in dusty
places.

The ranchero arose and made his master and mistress one of his best
bows. Then he waited silently for instructions.

Beth went to Mildreds room and brought the girl to join the searchers,
for this undertaking had been planned on her account. Her face wore an
anxious look, for although she was not very hopeful of results it was
the last chance of her securing any of her fathers personal
possessions. Otherwise she greeted the party with modesty and with
gentle dignity and had never seemed to them more womanly or agreeable.

Together they left the court and proceeded to the nursery. There were no
laggards and everyone except the servants was determined to have a part
in the fascinating investigation.

Mildred explained to them the manner in which she had first entered the
wall, putting in action the secret method taught her as a girl by
Cristoval and demonstrating the mechanism before their very eyes. They
entered the lower chamber, one by one, and this time the adobe door was
not closed behind them, although the light of broad day now flooded the
place through the opening discovered by Runyon. This opening led into
the garden and was half choked with rose vines. The series of swinging
blocks had been propped back against the outer wall to insure a ready
exit in case of accident.

And now they eagerly set to work to pry into every crack and corner of
the place. The main idea was to find some secret cavity or cupboard in
the wall which might contain the missing laces or other valuables. With
this in view they had brought levers and pries and all sorts of tools
that might be of service.

The girls were mainly useful in taking up and turning the matting, now
somewhat decayed by age, and investigating those nooks and shelves
already discovered. But they found little more than Mildred had done
during her first exploration, and the men who were testing the wall met
with no encouragement at all. Aside from the two cleverly constructed
openingsone into the nursery and one into the gardenthe blocks which
composed the wall seemed every one solid and immovable and resisted
every attempt to wrest them from their places.

After more than two hours of industry, during which every man believed
he had examined every block, they were forced to abandon the lower
chamber and ascend the steep stairs to the upper one.

This, said Arthur, looking around him, seems far more promising. Let
us give the floor our first attention, for it is not over the lower room
but to one side of it. It strikes me that the builder would be quite
likely to make a secret pocket in the floor.

Following this advice they attacked the blocks of the floor with pry and
crowbar, but found nothing to reward them. Old Miguel worked steadily
and did whatever he was told, but displayed no particle of enthusiasm,
or even of interest.

After the floor, the walls were examined, one by one, from floor to
ceiling. The panel on the inner wall, which had baffled both Mildred and
Runyon on that eventful night of their imprisonment, suddenly disclosed
its secret when accidentally pressed on opposite corners at the same
time. It slipped down and discovered a similar panel beyond it, which
was operated by a spring placed in plain sight. Releasing this, they
found they were looking into the vacant second story room which they had
once before unsuccessfully searched.

So this was one way from the house into the upper chamber of the wall.
Of course there was another waythat through which Runyon had been so
abruptly precipitated. In order to find this the more readily, they sent
the big rancher into the blue room and asked him to take the same
position in the window he had on the night of his disappearance. This he
did, pushing against the planking that boxed the window, with both
elbows and with his back and shoulders, but without result. Finally, in
his attempts, he inadvertently struck the opposite panel with his heel,
and the response was startling. The panel, at his back, being released,
fell backward without warning and for the second time Runyon tumbled
unawares into the chamber of the wall. As soon as his body had fallen
through, the panel slammed into place again, urged by a very powerful
steel spring, but the major, who had been in the blue room to watch
Runyon, had caught the trick and the mystery was solved.

As for Mr. Runyon, he again fell upon the bed and rebounded, knocking
over both Mr. Merrick and Miguel as he alighted in the narrow chamber,
but fortunately not injuring either of them.

A little dazed by his second precipitation, the big rancher stared a
moment and then slapped his thigh a mighty stroke.

I have itI have it! he cried.

It occurs to me, said Uncle John, a little resentfully, that you
deserve all youve got, and more. Its a wonder you didnt break your
neck.

What have you, Run? asked Arthur.

Ive found the laces.

What?where? they exclaimed.

In the blue room, or on the way down? added Beth sarcastically.

After I got down, he answered. What fools we have all been!

Will you kindly explain, Mr. Runyon? asked Mildred, very earnestly.

I will. Its simple enough. Just look at that bed.

The bed! And now every eye was turned upon the couch.

Of course, said Runyon. Theres something more than a mere mattress
and springs. Ive tumbled onto the thing twice, and I ought to know.




CHAPTER XXIA FORTUNE IN TATTERS


Already Arthur was pulling off the bedding and piling it upon the floor.
They stood back of him in an excited group, every head craned forward to
watch his movements.

Off came the pillowsblanketssheetsfinally the mattress. This last, a
thin cotton affair, left a trail of fuzzy, lint-like debris behind it
and disclosed on removal a canvas cover that had been spread underneath.
The canvas, which was about on a level with the boxed-in bed frame, was
as full of holes as a Swiss cheese and especially toward the center the
weave had become disintegrated and given away to a dusty pulp.

Rats! exclaimed Uncle John, whose head was thrust between the
shoulders of the major and Runyon.

As if his cry had been a summons, out sprang a huge gray rodent and the
girls pushed back with loud screams as the dreaded beast struck the
floor and scurried away down the passage. Another and another followed
it, and now Louise, Patsy, Beth, Mildred and Inez were all dancing on
top the seats, wrapping their skirts about their ankles and whooping
like a tribe of Indians.

Amid this wild hullabaloo, which struck terror to the hearts of the
brave men assembled, because at the instant they were too bewildered to
realize what caused it, some six or eight monstrous rats leaped from the
tattered canvas which covered the bed and vanished down the stairs.

Arthur put his hand down to raise the canvas and jumped back as he
unearthed a nest of smaller vermin, squirming here and there in blind
endeavors to escape their disturbers. Runyon brought a deep brass bowl
from a shelf and dumped the small rats into it, standing by to capture
others as they appeared.

Gradually Weldon drew back the cover and as he did so the truth of
Runyons prophecy was apparent. The entire space boxed in by the carved
bed-frame, from the floor to its upper edge, was packed solidly with
valuable laces. That is, it had once been solidly packed, but now the
rats had eaten tunnels and nests and boulevards through the costly laces
in every direction. It was a scene of absolute ruin. However precious
this collection might once have been, in its present state it was not
worth a copper cent.

The party gazed upon the sight with mingled awe and astonishment. Regret
for the destruction of the beautiful fabrics at first rendered them
oblivious to the fact that the inheritance of Mildred Leighton was at
last recoveredonly to be proved worthless.

Arthur dragged out a few scraps and spread them upon the floor, thereby
exhibiting portions of the beautiful patterns of the various pieces.
Then, hoping to find some that had escaped the ruthless teeth of the
rats, he and Runyon began pulling at the heap and working downward
toward the floor. Just a few small pieces were found intact, but these
were of slight value. Practically the entire lot was irretrievably
ruined.

Scarcely a word was spoken as the investigation proceeded. Beth had
clasped one of Mildreds hands and Patsy the other, but neither dared
look in the poor girls face, for they dreaded the poignant
disappointment sure to reign there.

But after the first shock, Mildred bore up bravely. She had not
expected, in the beginning, any tangible result; still it was very
bitter to find her long sought fortune and realize that it amounted to
nothing.

They sat around upon the benches, or leaning against the wall, and
stared at the ruined laces with various emotions, the keenest being
regret for the loss of so much beautiful handwork and sympathy for
Mildred Leighton.

Suddenly Runyon broke the silence.

This discovery is too thundering bad for mere words, he said with
feeling; but Miss TraversMildredmust know were all as sorry as she
is. She was right about the laces, but the laces are all wrong. This sad
exhibit reminds me of my own perverse mortgages, and my mortgages remind
me of something else. Mildred, he added, turning to the girl in a
dogged and rather shamefaced way, Im going to hold a private
conversation with you right here before our good friends, for I know
every one of them will back me up. Eh? he questioned, glancing around
the group.

There were some smiles, but many nods. As if encouraged, Runyon
proceeded:

This settles the question of your fortune. Its gonevanished into
scraps. Youre a poor girl, now, with no glittering prospects, so what
Im going to say wont seem quite so selfish as it would otherwise. In
fact, had these laces been perfect, they would have rendered me dumb. As
it is, here stand two impecunious onesyou and I. Between us we havent
much more than enough to fry a fish, in solid cash, but among my
encumbrances are a delightful little bungalow, nicely furnished, and a
lot of lemon trees that can be coaxed to buy us groceries and ordinary
comforts. Im a lonely fellow, Mildred, and I need a companion. Will you
marry me, and look after that bungalow?

This extraordinary proposal was heard in breathless silence. The men
were astounded, the girls delighted. Every eye turned curiously upon
Mildred Travers, who regarded the big rancher with frank wonder, a wan
smile upon her pallid features.

You do not say you love me, she suggested, striving through mild
banter to cover her confusion.

Well, isnt that implied? he answered. No one would propose to a girl
he didnt love, would he?

You have only known me two days.

Two days and seven hours. But mother endorsed you and Ill bank on her
judgment.

When the mortgages come due, there wont be any bungalow, she
continued.

Dont you believe it, cried Runyon, earnestly. With you to work for,
Ill make those tart old lemons pay the interest and a good income
besides. In fact, if we live long enough, we may even manage to reduce
the mortgages. You see, Ive been extravagant and foolish, but it was
because I had no aim in life. The minute you say yes, Im a reformed
character.

She shook her head and the smile faded from her face.

Dont think me ungrateful, Mr. Runyon, she said quietly. Unusual
andandpeculiaras this proposal is, I believe you are sincere in what
you say. But you are influenced just now by pity for me and I assure you
I am quite capable of earning my own living.

Butoh, Mildred-hes so lonely, cried Patsy, impulsively.

Im sorry for that, she said, but it is not my fault.

It will be, though, if you refuse, declared Runyon.

I fear I must.

I see, he said with a sigh. Mother endorsed you, but she didnt
endorse me. Youve heard some tough yarns about meall true as
gospeland youre prejudiced. I dont know as I blame you. If I were a
girl Id hesitate to reform such a desperate character, Im sure. But
Ive the notion theres the making of a decent fellow in me, if the
right workman undertakes the job.

She looked at him earnestly, nowvery earnestly. In spite of the squeaky
voice and the inopportune time he had chosen for such a serious
proposal, there was an innate manliness and ingenuousness in his
attitude, as he stood there unabashed and towering above the other men,
that seemed to her admirable and impressive. Both Beth and Patsy were
reflecting that a girl might do much worse than to accept Bulwer Runyon
as a mate.

Said Mildred, still speaking in the same quiet and composed voice:

I will give you a positive answer in three days, Mr. Runyon. That delay
is mere justice to us both.

Thank you, he said. Shall we fuss with these tattered laces any
longer? It hardly seems worth while.

Now that the strain of the situation was removed they all began
chattering volubly in order to give countenance to Mildred. Runyon
seemed not to need such consideration.

Old Miguel had witnessed and overheard this scene from the background
and his bright black eyes had roamed restlessly from the girls face to
Runyons as if trying to read their true feelings. The discovery of the
laces had not drawn any exclamation from the ancient ranchero, whose
stolid expression nothing seemed able to disturb. As the others filed
down the stairs and out of the recess in the wall, into the roomy
nursery, old Miguel followed imperturbable and serene as ever. In the
court he touched his hat to his master.

I go now, Meest Weld? he asked.

Yes. Thank you, Miguel, for your help.

I thank you, too, said Mildred, stepping forward to take the Mexicans
hand. I remember you well, Miguel. In the old days you often took care
of me while my father and Seor Cristoval talked. Dont you remember?

He nodded, his eyes fixed full upon her face.

Once a friend, always a friend, Miguel, she continued brightly. Even
to-day you have been trying to help me, and I am grateful. Some time we
will have a good talk together about the old days.

Then he went away, and if one who knew old Miguel Zaloa could have
followed him, his actions would have caused surprise.

First he wandered deep into the orange groves, wherewhen absolutely
alonehe began muttering excitedly. At times he would kick his booted
foot viciously against a tree-trunk, regardless of the impact that
numbed his toes and sent a tingle up his legs. After a time this
remarkable exhibit of passion subsided and for the period of half an
hour he stood quite motionless, staring straight before him and seeing
nothing. Then he started off through the groves, climbed the fence into
the lane and marched away through miles and miles of the surrounding
country.

It was growing dark when Miguel at last appeared at the quarters,
growling at the men and ordering them to get into the groves and work.
They marked his ill temper and took care not to arouse his further
anger. In the morning he was up at daybreak and in more gentle mood
directed the beginning of the days labors.




CHAPTER XXIIFAITHFUL AND TRUE


Late that afternoon Arthur and Louise sat in the court, chatting with
their guests, who were occupied in coddling and amusing baby Jane, when
Inez approached Mr. Weldon and said that Miguel wished to speak with
him.

Send him here, said Arthur, and presently the old Mexican appeared,
again arrayed in his best clothes and with the red necktie carefully
arranged. He held his hat in his hand and looked uncertainly around the
circle. Then his eyes wandered to the nursery and through the open door
he saw Mildred sitting in a rocker, engaged in reading a book. Runyon
had gone home that morning, to see if the ranch is still there, he
said.

I havesomeprivate talks to make, Meest Weld, began the old ranchero.

Speak out, Miguel, said his master encouragingly.

Oh; but he said private, Patsy reminded him.

I know. Miguel understands that he may speak before my friends.

It eesaboutSeor Cristoval, Meest Weld.

Yes? Well, what about him, Miguel?

I am once servant for Seor Cristoval. I stay here in house with him,
long time. When he get sick, before he die, I care for him. Doctor say
to me that Seor Cristoval can not get well; I say so to Seor
Cristoval. He say never mind, he have live long enough.

This was interesting to them all in view of the recent happenings, and
the girls bent nearer to hear the old mans story. Arthur, the major and
Uncle John were equally intent.

Seor Cristoval, he say, when he get very bad, there ees one thing he
hate to leave, an that eeshis money, continued Miguel. He say, money
ees his bes friend, all time. But he no can take money where he will
go. He ees mad that many poor fools will spend the money he have love
an cared for. So he make me take three big bag of gold an drive to
bank an put away so the poor fools will find it. Much more money ees in
bank, too. Then, when doctor come, he ask me when he will die, an
doctor say when sun next shine Seor Cristoval will not see it. Doctor
want to stay all night, but Seor Cristoval pay an tell him go. He want
to die alone.

But I am there. Some time in night Seor Cristoval he call an say:
Miguel, I mus not die till I have give to Leighton what belong to him.
I have keep Leightons money for him. I will show you where it ees hid,
so you can give it to Leighton.

Ah, they were intent enough now. Intuitively each listener seemed to
know that a secret was about to be revealed and many glances were cast
toward the unconscious Mildred, who continued to read placidly. But no
one interrupted the old Mexican.

I help Senor Cristoval to stand up. He ees not strong, so I hold him.
He walk from blue room to back room an there he show me how to take
block from wall. Behind block ees big place for money. Seor Cristoval
he say all money what belong to Leighton ees there. He tell me count it.
So I put Seor Cristoval in chair an he watch while I take out money
an count. There ees four bag. I count three bag an he say good, it ees
right. He say count last bag. So I empty bag on floor an count gold an
put in bag again. When thees ees done I say: Is eet right? But Seor
Cristoval say nothing. I look up, an Seor Cristoval ees dead.

The old man spoke simply and quietly, but they found his relation
intensely dramatic. Patsy was trembling with excitement. Beth clasped
Louises hand and found it cold from nervousness.

And then, Miguel? said Arthur.

Then, Meest Weld, I put gold in wall an fix block so no one know an
carry Seor Cristoval to his bed. That ees all, Meest Weld.

And you told no one of Leightons gold?

I tell no one. It ees belong to Leighton.

Where is it now, Miguel?

In wall, Meest Weld.

All of it?

All.

There was a moments pause.

You know now that it belongs to Mildredto Leightons daughter,do you
not? he asked, an accent of sternness in his voice.

I know, Meest Weld.

Then why did you not tell us of this before?

Old Miguel stood silent, shifting from one foot to another, his eyes
cast down, his slender brown fingers spasmodically pressing the rim of
his sombrero. But when he spoke it was in his former quiet manner.

I am a bad man, Meest Weld. I theenk I keep gold for myself. Why not,
when no one know? Long time after Seor Cristoval die no one come here.
Some time I go to room an count gold. When I see it I have bad thought.
I theenk it ees nice if I keep all myself. But when I go away an work
in the grove, I tell Miguel many time that gold ees not his; it ees
Leightons gold. I say when Leighton come for it he mus have it. But
Leighton do not come. Many year the gold ees mine, an no one know. Then
come Leightons girl, an I know I am bad man if I keep gold. But I say
nothing. I theenk no one ever know.

But tell me, said Arthur curiously, what good is the money to you
when it is hidden in a wall?

Not much, Meest Weld; but I know I am rich. I say I can buy ranch an
be big man, an no one know I have steal Leightons gold.

Then why have you told us the secret?

Miguel glanced toward the nursery.

I am man for work, said he. Always I work; always I mus work. I am
old. When I can no work, I mus die. Seor Cristoval mus leave gold
when he die; it ees same with Miguel. Now I have good job. I can work
an be happy. But

Well, Miguel?

Leightons daughter, she ees a girl. A girl can not work like a man. It
ees her gold, not mine. When you say it, I will show you where
Leightons gold ees hid.

Uncle John sprang up and grasped the mans hand.

You are an honest fellow, Miguel! he cried.

No, Meest Mereek, was the reply. I have wish to steal, so I am not
honest.

But you have given up the gold.

Yes, Meest Mereek; because I am afraid.

I dont believe a word of it, said Patsy. You were tempted to do
wrong, Miguel, and if you had kept silent no one would ever have known;
but you told us of the gold, and so you are faithful and true.

Ah, that ees what Meest Leighton tell me, some time, said he. An
that ees what spoil me from being bad. Because Leighton say I am
faithful an true, I have theenk I mus be that way. That ees it.

                                  

Mildreds gold proved to be a small fortune. Perhaps Cristoval had added
to his partners earnings, for the childs sake, for the total amounted
to more than she had ever expected.

It was all in hard cash and Arthur drove over to the bank and deposited
it to the credit of Mildred Travers, as she preferred to retain that
name.

Patsy and Beth were curious to know what the girl would do with her
windfall, but Mildred proved noncommittal.

How about Bul Run? asked Patsy.

Mildred smiled but blushed deeply at the question.

Would my money be enough to pay his mortgages? she inquired.

Perhaps, said Beth, but that would be foolish. He would soon be in
debt again.

No, no! protested Patsy. Im sure he will reform if

If Mildred marries him?

Yes.

Mildred seemed troubled.

The best way, declared Beth, would be to have Mildred keep her money
in her own name, and help out in case of emergency.

Mildred approved that, and being pressed by the two girls she frankly
confided to them that she would accept Mr. Runyon when he came for his
answer.

Runyon appeared on the third day and Arthur met him and told him the
good news of the finding of Mildreds inheritance. But the effect of
this discovery on the big rancher was to overwhelm him with despair.

She will never marry me now, he asserted in doleful tones, and Id
rather die than ask her. It would be beastly to take such an advantage
of the poor child. When she was poor, I could offer her a home with good
grace, but now that shes rolling in gold the jig is up! If youll tell
me, where I can find old Miguel, Ill strangle the villain. Why in
thunder couldnt he hold his tongue?

Arthur laughingly replied that money wouldnt make a particle of
difference with a girl like Mildred, but Runyon would not listen and
remained disconsolate. He stayed at the ranch, but moped around with a
woe-begone countenance and refused to speak with anyone.

Patsy and Beth skillfully contrived several opportunities for Runyon to
approach Mildred, but he ignored all chances and preferred to remain
miserable. The day passed without his demanding his answer. Mildred had
been bright and expectant and the girls read her disappointment when her
unaccountable wooer delayed putting his fortune to the test.

The next day he was no more cheerful, but rather seemed to have
accumulated an added gloom. He sought a garden bench and smoked
innumerable cigars in solitary grief. If anyone approached, Runyon would
retreat to the shrubbery. At mealtime he was likewise silent but
consumed enormous quantities of food, which made Patsy accuse him of
being an impostor.

No regulation lover, she said to him, ever had an appetite. The
novels all say so. Therefore you cant love Mildred a bit.

Runyon groaned, cast her a reproachful glance and went on eating.

Several days passed without his asking Mildred for her answer, and now
the absurd situation began to get on all their nerves. Mildred herself
grew impatient and watched from the nursery window the garden bench on
which Runyon sat gloomily in his perpetual cloud of smoke.

Hell make himself sick, with those black cigars, Im sure, observed
Patsy, on one occasion.

And he cant afford to smoke so many, added Beth. Unless this thing
stops, hell soon have to take out a new mortgage.

Or sell some lemons, added Patsy.

I believe, said Mildred slowly, as if summoning her courage, I will
speak to him myself. Dont you think that would be best?

Of course, approved Patsy. Runyon is a big baby, and needs a nurse
more than little Jane. Ill hold Toodlums, Mildred, while you sally
forth and take the bull by the horns.

Mildred looked at Beth for counsel.

Unless you speak to him, said that young lady, you will never get
together. Moreover, the rest of us will grow mad or idiotic. So, for all
our sakes, youd better take Mr. Runyon in hand. Youll have to manage
him afterward, anyhow, so the sooner you begin the better.

Mildred handed little Jane to Patsy and left the nursery. Through the
window the other girls watched her approach Mr. Runyon and stand before
him. At once he stood up and threw away his cigar, but his face was
toward them and they could see that he did not speak.

Mildred, however, was talking very earnestly. Runyon shook his head. He
turned half away. Then he swung sharply around and caught the girl in
his arms.

Come, Beth, said Patsy; lets go and tell Louise.




CHAPTER I

THE HOBO AT CHAZY JUNCTION


Mr. Judkins, the station agent at Chazy Junction, came out of his little
house at daybreak, shivered a bit in the chill morning air and gave an
involuntary start as he saw a private car on the sidetrack. There were
two private cars, to be exact--a sleeper and a baggage car--and Mr.
Judkins knew the three o'clock train must have left them as it passed
through.

"Ah," said he aloud; "the nabobs hev arrove."

"Who are the nabobs?" asked a quiet voice beside him.

Again Mr. Judkins started; he even stepped back a pace to get a better
view of the stranger, who had approached so stealthily through the dim
light that the agent was unaware of his existence until he spoke.

"Who be you?" he demanded, eyeing the man suspiciously.

"Never mind who I am," retorted the other in a grumpy tone; "the
original question is 'who are the nabobs?'"

"See here, young feller; this ain't no place fer tramps," observed Mr.
Judkins, frowning with evident displeasure; "Chazy Junction's got all it
kin do to support its reg'lar inhabitants. You'll hev to move on."

The stranger sat down on a baggage truck and eyed the private car
reflectively. He wore a rough gray suit, baggy and threadbare, a flannel
shirt with an old black tie carelessly knotted at the collar, a brown
felt hat with several holes in the crown, and coarse cowhide shoes that
had arrived at the last stages of usefulness. You would judge him to be
from twenty-five to thirty years of age; you would note that his face
was browned from exposure, that it was rather set and expressionless but
in no way repulsive. His eyes, dark and retrospective, were his most
redeeming feature, yet betrayed little of their owner's character. Mr.
Judkins could make nothing of the fellow, beyond the fact that he was
doubtless a "tramp" and on that account most unwelcome in this retired
neighborhood.

Even tramps were unusual at Chazy Junction. The foothills were sparsely
settled and the inhabitants too humble to be attractive to gentlemen of
the road, while the rocky highways, tortuous and uneven, offered no
invitation to the professional pedestrian.

"You'll hev to move on!" repeated the agent, more sternly.

"I can't," replied the other with a smile. "The car I was--er--attached
to has come to a halt. The engine has left us, and--here we are, I and
the nabobs."

"Be'n ridin' the trucks, eh?"

"No; rear platform. Very comfortable it was, and no interruptions. The
crazy old train stopped so many times during the night that I scarcely
woke up when they sidetracked us here, and the first thing I knew I was
abandoned in this wilderness. As it grew light I began to examine my
surroundings, and discovered you. Glad to meet you, sir."

"You needn't be."

"Don't begrudge me the pleasure, I implore you. I can't blame you for
being gruff and unsociable; were you otherwise you wouldn't reside
at--at--" he turned his head to read the half legible sign on the
station house, "at Chazy Junction. I'm familiar with most parts of the
United States, but Chazy Junction gets my flutters. Why, oh, why in the
world did it happen?"

Mr. Judkins scowled but made no answer. He was wise enough to understand
he was no match in conversation for this irresponsible outcast who knew
the great world as perfectly as the agent knew his junction. He turned
away and stared hard at the silent sleeper, the appearance of which was
not wholly unexpected.

"You haven't informed me who the nabobs are, nor why they choose to be
sidetracked in this forsaken stone-quarry," remarked the stranger,
eyeing the bleak hills around him in the growing light of dawn.

The agent hesitated. His first gruff resentment had been in a manner
disarmed and he dearly loved to talk, especially on so interesting a
subject as "the nabobs." He knew he could astonish the tramp, and the
temptation to do so was too strong to resist.

"It's the great John Merrick, who's got millions to burn but don't light
many bonfires," he began, not very graciously at first. "Two years ago
he bought the Cap'n Wegg farm, over by Millville, an'--"

"Where's Millville?" inquired the man.

"Seven mile back in the hills. The farm ain't nuthin' but cobblestone
an' pine woods, but--"

"How big is Millville?"

"Quite a town. Eleven stores an' houses, 'sides the mill an' a big
settlement buildin' up at Royal, where the new paper mill is jest
started. Royal's four mile up the Little Bill Hill."

"But about the nabob--Mr. Merrick, I think you called him?"

"Yes; John Merrick. He bought the Cap'n Wegg place an' spent summer
'fore last on it--him an' his three gals as is his nieces."

"Oh; three girls."

"Yes. Clever gals, too. Stirred things up some at Millville, I kin tell
you, stranger. Lib'ral an' good-natured, but able to hold their own with
the natives. We missed 'em, last year; but t'other day I seen ol' Hucks,
that keeps their house for 'em--he 'n' his wife--an' Hucks said they was
cumin' to spend this summer at the farm an' he was lookin' fer 'em any
day. The way they togged up thet farmhouse is somethin' won'erful, I'm
told. Hain't seen it, myself, but a whole carload o' furnitoor--an' then
some more--was shipped here from New York, an' Peggy McNutt, over t'
Millville, says it must 'a' cost a for-tun'."

The tramp nodded, somewhat listlessly.

"I feel quite respectable this morning, having passed the night as the
guest of a millionaire," he observed. "Mr. Merrick didn't know it, of
course, or he would have invited me inside."

"Like enough," answered the agent seriously. "The nabob's thet reckless
an' unaccountable, he's likely to do worse ner that. That's what makes
him an' his gals interestin'; nobody in quarries. How about breakfast,
friend Judkins?"

"That's my business an' not yourn. My missus never feeds tramps."

"Rather ungracious to travelers, eh?"

"Ef you're a traveler, go to the hoe-tel yonder an' buy your breakfas'
like a man."

"Thank you; I may follow your advice."

The agent walked up the track and put out the semaphore lights, for the
sun was beginning to rise over the hills. By the time he came back a
colored porter stood on the platform of the private car and nodded to
him.

"Folks up yit?" asked Judkins.

"Dressing, seh."

"Goin' ter feed 'em in there?"

"Not dis mohnin'. Dey'll breakfas' at de hotel. Carriage here yit?"

"Not yit. I s'pose ol' Hucks'll drive over for 'em," said the agent.

"Dey's 'spectin' some one, seh. As fer me, I gotta live heah all day,
an' it makes me sick teh think of it."

"Heh!" retorted the agent, scornfully; "you won't git sick. You're too
well paid fer that."

The porter grinned, and just then a little old gentleman with a rosy,
cheery face pushed him aside and trotted down the steps.

"Mornin', Judkins!" he cried, and shook the agent's hand. "What a
glorious sunrise, and what crisp, delicious air! Ah, but it's good to be
in old Chazy County again!"

The agent straightened up, his face wreathed with smiles, and cast an "I
told you so!" glance toward the man on the truck. But the stranger had
disappeared.




CHAPTER II

THE INVASION OF MILLVILLE


Over the brow of the little hill appeared a three-seated wagon, drawn by
a pair of handsome sorrels, and in a moment the equipage halted beside
the sleeper.

"Oh, Thomas Hucks--you dear, dear Thomas!" cried a clear, eager voice,
and out from the car rushed Miss Patricia Doyle, to throw her arms about
the neck of the old, stoop-shouldered and white-haired driver, whose
face was illumined by a joyous smile.

"Glad to see ye, Miss Patsy; right glad 'ndeed, child," returned the old
man. But others were waiting to greet him; pretty Beth De Graf and
dainty Louise Merrick--not Louise "Merrick" any longer, though, but
bearing a new name she had recently acquired--and demure Mary, Patsy's
little maid and an old friend of Thomas Hucks', and Uncle John with his
merry laugh and cordial handshake and, finally, a tall and rather
dandified young man who remained an interested spectator in the
background until Mr. Merrick seized and dragged him forward.

"Here's another for you to know, Thomas," said the little millionaire.
"This is the other half of our Louise--Mr. Arthur Weldon--and by and by
you can judge whether he's the better half or not."

The aged servant, hat in hand, made a respectful bow to Mr. Weldon. His
frank eyes swept the young man from head to foot but his smile was the
same as before.

"Miss Louise is wiser ner I be," said the old fellow simply; "I'm safe
to trust to her jedgment, I guess."

There was a general laugh, at this, and they began to clamber aboard the
wagon and to stow away beneath the seats the luggage the colored porter
was bringing out.

"Stop at the Junction House, Thomas," said Mr. Merrick as they moved
away.

"Nora has the breakfast all ready at home, sir," replied Thomas.

"Good for Nora! But we can't fast until we reach home--eight good miles
of jolting--so we'll stop at the Junction House for a glass of Mrs.
Todd's famous milk."

"Very good, sir."

"Is anyone coming for our trunks and freight? There's half a car of
truck to be carted over."

"Ned's on the way, sir; and he'll get the liveryman to help if he can't
carry it all."

The Junction House was hidden from the station by the tiny hill, as were
the half dozen other buildings tributary to Chazy Junction. As the wagon
drew up before the long piazza which extended along the front of the
little frame inn they saw a man in shabby gray seated at a small table
with some bread and a glass of milk before him. It was their
unrecognized guest of the night--the uninvited lodger on the rear
platform--but he did not raise his eyes or appear to notice the new
arrivals.

"Mrs. Todd! Hey, Mrs. Todd!" called Uncle John. "Anybody milked the cow
yet?"

A frowsy looking woman came out, all smiles, and nodded pleasantly at
the expectant group in the wagon. Behind her loomed the tall, lean form
of Lucky Todd, the "proprietor," who was serious as a goat, which animal
he closely resembled in feature.

"Breakfas' all 'round, Mr. Merrick?" asked the woman.

"Not this time, Mrs. Todd. Nora has our breakfast waiting for us. But we
want some of your delicious milk to last us to the farm."

"Las' night's milkin's half cream by this time," she rejoined, as she
briskly reentered the house.

The man at the table held out his empty glass.

"Here; fill this up," he said to Lucky Todd.

The somber-faced proprietor turned his gaze from the Merrick group to
the stranger, eyed him pensively a moment and then faced the wagon
again. The man in gray got up, placed the empty glass in Todd's hand,
whirled him around facing the door and said sternly:

"More milk!"

The landlord walked in like an automaton, and a suppressed giggle came
from the girls in the wagon. Uncle John was likewise amused, and despite
the unknown's frazzled apparel the little millionaire addressed him in
the same tone he would have used toward an equal.

"Don't blame you, sir. Nobody ever tasted better milk than they have at
the Junction House."

The man, who had resumed his seat, stood up, took off his hat and bowed.
But he made no reply.

Out came Mrs. Todd, accompanied by another frowsy woman. Between them
they bore a huge jug of milk, a number of thick glasses and a plate of
crackers.

"The crackers come extry, Mr. Merrick," said the landlady, "but seein'
as milk's cheap I thought you might like 'em."

The landlord now came out and placed the stranger's glass, about half
filled with milk, on the table before him. The man looked at it,
frowned, and tossed off the milk in one gulp.

"More!" he said, holding out the glass.

Todd shook his head.

"Ain't no more," he declared.

His wife overheard him and pausing in her task of refilling the glasses
for the rich man's party she looked over her shoulder and said:

"Give him what he wants, Lucky."

The landlord pondered.

"Not fer ten cents, Nancy," he protested. "The feller said he wanted ten
cents wuth o' breakfas', an' by Joe he's had it."

"Milk's cheap," remarked Mrs. Todd. "It's crackers as is expensive these
days. Fill up his glass, Lucky."

"Why is your husband called 'Lucky,' Mrs. Todd?" inquired Patsy, who was
enjoying the cool, creamy milk.

"'Cause he got me to manage him, I guess," was the laughing reply. "Todd
ain't much 'count 'nless I'm on the spot to order him 'round."

The landlord came out with the glass of milk but paused before he set it
down.

"Let's see your money," he said suspiciously.

It seemed to the girls, who were curiously watching the scene, that the
tramp flushed under his bronzed skin; but without reply he searched in
a pocket and drew out four copper cents, which he laid upon the table.
After further exploration he abstracted a nickel from another pocket and
pushed the coins toward the landlord.

"'Nother cent," said Todd.

Continued search seemed for a time hopeless, but at last, in quite an
unexpected way, the man produced the final cent and on receiving it Todd
set down the milk.

"Anything more, yer honor?" he asked sarcastically.

"Yes; you might bring me the morning paper," was the reply.

Everyone except Todd laughed frankly at this retort. Uncle John put two
silver dollars in Mrs. Todd's chubby hand and told Thomas to drive on.

"I dunno," remarked old Hucks, when they were out of earshot, "whether
that feller's jest a common tramp or a workman goin' over to the paper
mill at Royal. Jedgin' from the fact as he had money I guess he's a
workman."

"Wrong, Thomas, quite wrong," said Beth, seated just behind him. "Did
you notice his hands?"

"No, Miss Beth."

"They were not rough and the fingers were slender and delicate."

"That's the mark of a cracksman," said Arthur Weldon, with a laugh. "If
there are any safes out here that are worth cracking, I'd say look out
for the gentleman."

"His face isn't bad at all," remarked Patsy, reflectively. "Isn't there
any grade between a workman and a thief?"

"Of course," asserted Mr. Merrick, in his brisk way. "This fellow,
shabby as he looked, might be anything--from a strolling artist to a
gentleman down on his luck. But what's the news, Thomas? How are Ethel
and Joe?"

"Mr. an' Mrs. Wegg is quite comf't'ble, sir, thank you," replied old
Hucks, with a show of eagerness. "Miss Ethel's gran'ther, ol' Will
Thompson, he's dead, you know, an' the young folks hev fixed up the
Thompson house like a palace. Guess ye'd better speak to 'em about
spendin' so much money, Mr. Merrick; I'm 'fraid they may need it some
day."

"Don't worry. They've a fine income for life, Thomas, and there will be
plenty to leave to their children--if they have any. But tell me about
the mill at Royal. Where _is_ Royal, anyhow?"

"Four mile up the Little Bill Creek, sir, where the Royal Waterfall is.
A feller come an' looked the place over las' year an' said the pine
forest would grind up inter paper an' the waterfall would do the
grindin'. So he bought a mile o' forest an' built a mill, an' they do
say things is hummin' up to the new settlement. There's more'n two
hundred hands a-workin' there, a'ready."

"Goodness me!" cried Patsy; "this thing must have livened up sleepy old
Millville considerably."

"Not yet," said Hucks, shaking his head. "The comp'ny what owns the mill
keeps a store there for the workmen, an' none of 'em come much to
Millville. Our storekeepers is madder'n blazes about it; but fer my part
I'm glad the two places is separated."

"Why?" asked Louise.

"They're a kinder tough lot, I guess. Turnin' pine trees inter paper
mus' be a job thet takes more muscle than brains. I don't see how it's
done, at all."

"It's simple enough," said Mr. Merrick. "First the wood is ground into
pulp, and then the pulp is run through hot rollers, coming out paper.
It's a mighty interesting process, so some day we will all go to Royal
and see the paper made."

"But not just yet, Uncle," remarked Patsy. "Let's have time to settle
down on the farm and enjoy it. Oh, how glad I am to be back in this
restful, sleepy, jumping-off-place of the world again! Isn't it
delightful, Arthur Weldon? Did you ever breathe such ozony, delicious
mountain air? And do you get the fragrance of the pine forests, and
the--the--"

"The bumps?" asked Arthur, as the wagon gave a jolt a bit more emphatic
than usual; "yes, Patsy dear, I get them all; but I won't pass judgment
on Millville and Uncle John's farm just yet. Are we 'most there?"

"We're to have four whole months of it," sighed Beth. "That ought to
enable us to renew our youth, after the strenuous winter."

"Rubbish!" said Uncle John. "You haven't known a strenuous moment, my
dears, and you're all too young to need renewals, anyhow. But if you can
find happiness here, my girls, our old farm will become a paradise."

These three nieces of Mr. Merrick were well worth looking at. Louise,
the eldest, was now twenty--entirely too young to be a bride; but having
decided to marry Arthur Weldon, the girl would brook no interference
and, having a will of her own, overcame all opposition. Her tall,
slender form was exceedingly graceful and willowy, her personality
dainty and refined, her temperament under ordinary conditions
essentially sweet and agreeable. In crises Louise developed considerable
character, in strong contrast with her usual assumption of well-bred
composure. That the girl was insincere in little things and cultivated a
polished manner to conceal her real feelings, is undeniable; but in
spite of this she might be relied upon to prove loyal and true in
emergencies.

Patricia Doyle was more than two years the junior of her cousin Louise
and very unlike her. Patsy's old father, Major Gregory Doyle, said "she
wore her heart on her sleeve," and the girl was frank and outspoken to a
fault. Patsy had no "figure" to speak of, being somewhat dumpy in build,
nor were her piquant features at all beautiful. Her nose tipped at the
end, her mouth was broad and full-lipped and her complexion badly
freckled. But Patsy's hair was of that indescribable shade that hovers
between burnished gold and sunset carmine. "Fiery red" she was wont to
describe it, and most people considered it, very justly, one of her two
claims to distinction. Her other admirable feature was a pair of
magnificent deep blue eyes--merry, mischievous and scintillating as
diamonds. Few could resist those eyes, and certain it is that Patsy
Doyle was a universal favorite and won friends without a particle of
effort.

The younger of the three nieces, Elizabeth De Graf, was as beautiful a
girl as you will often discover, one of those rarely perfect creations
that excite our wonder and compel admiration--as a beautiful picture or
a bit of statuary will. Dreamy and reserved in disposition, she lacked
the graciousness of Louise and Patsy's compelling good humor; yet you
must not think her stupid or disagreeable. Her reserve was really
diffidence; her dreamy, expressionless gaze the result of a serious
nature and a thoughtful temperament. Beth was quite practical and
matter-of-fact, the reverse of Patsy's imaginative instincts or Louise's
affected indifference. Those who knew Beth De Graf best loved her
dearly, but strangers found her hard to approach and were often repulsed
by her unresponsive manner. Underneath all, the girl was a real girl,
with many splendid qualities, and Uncle John relied upon Beth's
stability more than on that of his other two nieces. Her early life had
been a stormy and unhappy one, so she was but now developing her real
nature beneath the warmth of her uncle's protecting love.

Topping the brow of a little hill the wagon came to a smooth downward
grade where the road met the quaint old bridge that spanned Little Bill
Creek, beside which stood the antiquated flour and feed mill that had
given Millville its name. The horses were able to maintain their brisk
trot across the bridge and through the main street of the town, which
was merely a cluster of unimposing frame buildings, that lined either
side of the highway for the space of an ordinary city block. Then they
were in the wilds again and rattling over another cobblestone trail.

"This 'ere country's nuth'n' but pine woods 'n' cobblestones," sighed
old Hucks, as the horses subsided to a walk. "Lor' knows what would 'a'
happened to us without the trees! They saves our grace, so's to speak."

"I think the scenery is beautiful," observed Patsy. "It's so different
from other country places."

"Not much farming around here, I imagine," said Arthur Weldon.

"More than you'd think, sir," replied Thomas. "There's certain crops as
thrives in stony land, an' a few miles north o' here, towards
Huntingdon, the soil's mighty rich 'n' productive. Things ain't never as
bad as they seem in this world, sir," he added, turning his persistently
smiling face toward the young man.

Mr. Merrick sat beside the driver on the front seat. The middle seat was
occupied by Patsy and Beth, between whom squeezed little Mary, the
maid. Louise and Arthur had the back seat.

A quarter of a mile beyond the town they came to a sort of lane running
at right angles with the turnpike, and down this lane old Hucks turned
his team. It seemed like a forbidding prospect, for ahead of them loomed
only a group of tall pines marking the edge of the forest, yet as they
came nearer and made a little bend in the road the Wegg farm suddenly
appeared in view. The house seemed so cozy and homelike, set upon its
green lawn with the tall pines for a background, that the girls, who
knew the place well, exclaimed with delight, and Arthur, who now saw it
for the first time, nodded his head approvingly.

Uncle John was all excitement over the arrival at his country home. An
old fashioned stile was set in a rail fence which separated the grounds
from the lane, and Hucks drew up the wagon so his passengers could all
alight upon the step of the stile. Patsy was out at a bound. Louise
followed more deliberately, assisted by her boy husband, and Beth came
more sedately yet. But Uncle John rode around to the barn with Thomas,
being eager to see the cows and pigs and poultry with which the
establishment was liberally stocked.

The house was of two stories, the lower being built of cobblestones and
the upper of pine slabs; but it had been artistically done and the
effect was delightful. It was a big, rambling dwelling, and Mr. Merrick
had furnished the old place in a lavish manner, so that his nieces would
lack no modern comfort when they came there to spend a summer.

On the porch stood an old woman clothed in a neat gingham dress and
wearing a white apron and cap. Her pleasant face was wreathed in smiles
as she turned it toward the laughing, chattering group that came up the
path. Patsy spied her and rushed up to give old Nora a hug and kiss, and
the other two girls saluted the blind woman with equal cordiality, for
long ago she had won the love and devotion of all three. Arthur, who had
heard of Nora, pressed her hand and told her she must accept him as
another of her children, and then she asked for Mr. Merrick and ran in
to get the breakfast served. For, although blind, old Nora was far from
being helpless, and the breakfast she had prepared in anticipation of
their arrival was as deliciously cooked as if she had been able to use
her eyes as others did.




CHAPTER III

THE DAWN OF A GREAT ENTERPRISE


The great enterprise was sprung on Mr. Merrick the very morning
following his arrival at the farm. Breakfast was over and a group had
formed upon the shady front lawn, where chairs, benches and hammocks
were scattered in profusion.

"Well, Uncle, how do you like it?" asked Louise. "Are you perfectly
comfortable and happy, now we've escaped so far from the city that its
humming life is a mere memory?"

"Happy as a clam," responded Uncle John, leaning back in his chair with
his feet on a foot rest. "If I only had the morning paper there would be
nothing else to wish for."

"The paper? That's what that queer tramp at the Junction House asked
for," remarked Beth. "The first thought of even a hobo was for a
morning paper. I wonder why men are such slaves to those gossipy
things."

"Phoo!" cried Patsy; "we're all slaves to them. Show me a person who
doesn't read the daily journals and keep abreast of the times and I'll
show you a dummy."

"Patsy's right," remarked Arthur Weldon. "The general intelligence and
cosmopolitan knowledge of the people are best cultivated by the
newspapers. The superiority of our newspapers has been a factor in
making us the greatest nation on earth, for we are the best informed."

"My, what big words!" exclaimed Louise.

"It is quite true," said Uncle John soberly, "that I shall miss our
daily paper during our four months' retirement in these fascinating
wilds. It's the one luxury we can't enjoy in our country retreat."

"Why not?" asked Patsy, with startling abruptness, while a queer
expression--as of an inspiration--stole over her bright face.

"Chump!" said Beth, drily; "you know very well why not, Patsy Doyle.
Mooley cows and the fourth estate don't intermingle, so to speak."

"They can be made to, though," declared Patsy. "Why hasn't some one
thought of it before? Uncle John--girls!--I propose we start a daily
paper."

Louise laughed softly, Beth's lip curled and Arthur Weldon cast an
amused glance at the girl; but Uncle John stared seriously into Patsy's
questioning blue eyes.

"How?" he asked in a puzzled tone. If anything could interest this
eccentric little millionaire more than the usual trend of events it was
an original proposition of this sort. He loved to do things that other
people had not attempted, nor even thought of. He hated conversational
platitudes and established conventions, and his nieces had endeared
themselves to him more by their native originality and frank disregard
of ordinary feminine limitations than in any other way. It was generally
conceded that Patsy was his favorite because she could advance more odd
suggestions than the other girls, and this niece had a practical
aptitude for carrying out her whimsical ideas that had long since won
her uncle's respect. Not that she could outdo Mr. Merrick in
eccentricity: that was admitted to be his special province, in which he
had no rival; but the girl was so clever a confederate that she gave her
erratic uncle much happiness of the sort he most appreciated.

Therefore, this seemingly preposterous proposition to establish a daily
paper on a retired country farm did not strike the old gentleman as
utterly impossible, and anything within the bounds of possibility was
sure to meet his earnest consideration, especially when it was proposed
by one of his favorite nieces.

"How?" responded Patsy; "why, it's easy enough, Uncle. We'll buy a
press, hire a printer, and Beth and Louise will help me edit the paper.
I'm sure I can exhibit literary talents of a high order, once they are
encouraged to sprout. Louise writes lovely poetry and 'stories of human
interest,' and Beth--"

"I can't write even a good letter," asserted that young lady; "but I'd
dearly love to edit a newspaper."

"Of course," agreed Louise; "we all would. And I think we could turn
out a very creditable paper--for Millville. But wouldn't it cost a lot
of money?"

"That isn't the present question," replied Uncle John. "The main thing
is, do you girls want to be tied down to such a task? Every day in the
week, all during our summer holiday--"

"Why, you've made our whole lives a holiday, Uncle John," interrupted
Patsy, "and we've been so coddled and swamped with luxuries that we are
just now in serious danger of being spoiled! You don't want three
spoiled nieces on your hands, do you? And please make allowance for our
natural impetuosity and eagerness to be up and doing. We love the farm,
but our happiness here would be doubled if we had some occupation to
keep us busy, and this philanthropic undertaking would furnish us with
no end of fun, even while we were benefiting our fellow man."

"All jabber, dear," exclaimed Beth. "I admit the fun, but where does the
philanthropy come in?"

"Don't you see?" asked Patsy. "Both Uncle John and that tramp we
encountered have met on common ground to bewail the lack of a daily
newspaper 'in our midst'--to speak in journalistic parlance. At the
paper mill at Royal are over two hundred workmen moaning in despair
while they lose all track of the world's progress. At Huntingdon, not
five miles distant, are four or five hundred people lacking all the
educational advantages of an up-to-date--or is 'down-to-date'
proper?--press. And Millville--good gracious! What would sleepy
Millville folks think of having a bright, newsy, metropolitan newspaper
left on their doorsteps every morning, or evening, as the case may be?"

"H-m," said Uncle John; "I scent a social revolution in the wilds of
Chazy County."

"Let's start it right away!" cried Patsy. "The 'Millville Tribune.' What
do you say, girls?"

"Why 'Tribune?'" asked Louise.

"Because we three will run it, and we're a triumvirate--the future
tribunal of the people in this district."

"Very good!" said Uncle John, nodding approval. "A clever idea, Patsy."

"But it's all nonsense, sir," observed Arthur Weldon, in astonishment.
"Have you any idea of the details of this thing you are proposing?"

"None whatever," said the little millionaire. "That's the beauty of the
scheme, Arthur; it may lead us into a reg'lar complicated mix-up, and
the joy of getting untangled ought to repay us for all our bother."

"Perhaps so--if you ever untangle," said the young man, smiling at the
whimsical speech. Then he turned to his young bride. "Do you want to go
into this thing, Louise?" he asked.

"Of course I do," she promptly replied. "It's the biggest thing in the
way of a sensation that Patsy's crazy brain has ever evolved, and I'll
stand by the _Millville Tribune_ to the last. You mustn't forget,
Arthur, that I shall be able to publish all my verses and stories, which
the Century and Harpers' so heartlessly turned down."

"And Beth?"

"Oh, I'm in it too," declared Beth. "There's something so delightfully
mysterious and bewildering in the idea of our editing and printing a
daily paper here in Millville that I can hardly wait to begin the
experiment."

"It's no experiment whatever," asserted Patsy boldly. "The daily
newspaper is an established factor in civilization, and 'whatever man
has done, man can do'--an adage that applies equally to girls."

"Have you any notion of the cost of an outfit such as is required to
print a modern daily?" asked Arthur.

"Oh, two or three hundred, perhaps, but--"

"You're crazy, child! That wouldn't buy the type."

"Nevertheless," began Patsy, argumentatively, but her uncle stopped her.

"You needn't figure on that," he said hastily. "The outfit shall be my
contribution to the enterprise. If you girls say you're anxious and
willing to run a newspaper, I'll agree to give you a proper start."

"Oh, thank you, Uncle!"

"Of course we're willing!"

"It is all absolutely settled, so far as we are concerned," said Patsy,
firmly. "How long will it take to get the things here, Uncle?"

Mr. Merrick considered a moment.

"There's a long-distance telephone over at Cotting's General Store, in
town," he said. "I'll drive over and get Major Doyle on the wire and
have him order the stuff sent out at once."

"Oh, no!" protested Patsy; "don't tell daddy of this plan, please. He'd
think we were all fit subjects for the lunatic asylum."

"Major Doyle wouldn't be far wrong in that conclusion," suggested
Arthur.

"I'd like to surprise him by sending him the first copy of the
_Millville Tribune_," added the major's daughter.

"Then," said Mr. Merrick, "I'll call up Marvin, my banker. He'll perhaps
attend to the matter more understandingly and more promptly than the
major would. Tell Hucks to harness Joe to the buggy, Patsy, and I'll go
at once."

"We'll all go!" exclaimed Beth.

"Of course," added Louise; "we are all equally interested in this
venture."

So Patsy had old Hucks hitch Joe to the surrey, and the three girls
accompanied their uncle in his drive to town, leaving Arthur Weldon
shaking his head in a deprecating way but fully realizing that no
protest of his would avail to prevent this amazing undertaking.

"That old man is as much a child as Beth or Patsy," he reflected. "It
puzzles me to explain how he made all those millions with so little
worldly wisdom."




CHAPTER IV

THE WAY INTO PRINT


Sam Cotting's General Store at Millville divided importance with Bob
West's hardware store but was a more popular loafing place for the
sparse population of the tiny town. The post office was located in one
corner and the telephone booth in another, and this latter institution
was regarded with much awe by the simple natives. Once in awhile some
one would telephone over to the Junction on some trivial business, but
the long-distance call was never employed except by the "nabobs"--the
local name for John Merrick and his nieces--or by the manager of the new
mill at Royal, who had extended the line to his own office in the heart
of the pine forest.

So, when Uncle John and the girls entered Cotting's store and the little
gentleman shut himself up in the telephone booth, a ripple of
excitement spread throughout the neighborhood. Skim Clark, the youthful
hope of the Widow Clark, who "run the Emporium," happened to be in the
store and he rushed out to spread the news that "the nabob's talkin' to
New Yoruk!"

This information demanded immediate attention. Marshall McMahon McNutt,
familiarly known as "Peggy" McNutt--because he had once lost a foot in a
mowing machine--and who was alleged to be a real estate agent, horse
doctor, fancy poultry breeder and palmist, and who also dabbled in the
sale of subscription books, life insurance, liniment and watermelons,
quickly slid off his front porch across the way and sauntered into
Cotting's to participate in the excitement. Seth Davis, the blacksmith,
dropped his tools and hurried to the store, and the druggist three doors
away--a dapper gentleman known as Nib Corkins--hurriedly locked his door
and attended the meeting. Presently the curious group was enlarged by
the addition of Nick Thome the liveryman, Lon Taft, a carpenter and
general man-of-all-work, and Silas Caldwell the miller, the latter a
serious individual who had "jest happened to come acrost from the mill
in the nick o' time."

Sam Cotting, being himself of great local importance, had never regarded
with favor the rivalry of the nabob, but he placed stools near the
telephone booth for the three girls, who accepted the courtesy with a
graciousness that ought to have disarmed the surly storekeeper. They
could not fail to be amused at the interest they excited, and as they
personally knew every one of the town people they pleasantly nodded to
each arrival and inquired after their health and the welfare of their
families. The replies were monosyllables. Millville folks were diffident
in the presence of these city visitors and while they favored the girls
with rather embarrassing stares, their chief interest was centered on
the little man in the telephone booth, who could plainly be seen through
the glass door but might not be heard, however loudly he shouted.

"Talkin' to New Yoruk" was yet a marvelous thing to them, and much
speculation was exchanged in low tones as to the probable cost of such
a conversation as Mr. Merrick was now indulging in.

"Costs a dollar to connect, ye know," remarked Peggy McNutt to Ned Long.
"Bet a cookie he's runnin' the blame bill up to two dollars, with all
this chinnin'. Why can't th' ol' nabob write a letter, like common
folks, an' give his extry cash to the poor?"

"Meanin' you, Peggy?" asked Nib Corkins, with a chuckle.

"He might do wuss ner that," retorted Peggy. "Lor' knows I'm poor
enough. You don't ketch _me_ a-talkin' to New York at a dollar a throw,
Nib, do ye?"

Meantime Mr. Merrick had succeeded in getting Mr. Marvin, of the banking
house of Isham, Marvin & Co., on the wire.

"Do me a favor, Marvin," he said. "Hunt up the best supply house and
have them send me a complete outfit to print a daily newspaper.
Everything must be modern, you know, and don't let them leave out
anything that might come handy. Then go to Corrigan, the superintendent
of the railroad, and have him send the freight up here to Chazy
Junction by a special engine, for I don't want a moment's delay and the
regular freight takes a week or so. Charge everything to my account and
impress upon the dealer the need of haste. Understand all that, Marvin?"

"I think I do, sir," was the reply; "but that's a pretty big order, Mr.
Merrick. The outfit for a modern daily will cost a small fortune."

"Never mind; send it along."

"Very well. But you'd better give me some details. How big a newspaper
do you want to print?"

"Hold the wire and I'll find out," said Uncle John. Then he opened the
door of the booth and said: "Patsy, how big a thing do you want to
print?"

"How big? Oh, let me see. Four pages will do, won't it, Louise?"

"Plenty, I should say, for this place," answered Louise.

"And how many columns to a page?" asked Uncle John.

"Oh, six or seven. That's regular, I guess."

"Make it six," proposed Beth. "That will keep us busy enough."

"All right," said Uncle John, and closed the door again.

This conversation was of the most startling nature to the assembled
villagers, who were all trying to look unconcerned and as if "they'd
jest dropped in," but were unable to dissemble their curiosity
successfully. Of course much of this interchange of words between the
man in the booth and the girls outside was Greek to them all, but "to
print" and "columns" and "pages" could apply only to one idea, which,
while not fully grasped, was tremendously startling in its suggestion.
The Merrick party was noted for doing astonishing things in the past and
evidently, in the words of Peggy McNutt, they were "up to some blame
foolishness that'll either kill this neighborhood or make it talked
about."

"It's too dead a'ready to kill," responded Nick Thorne gloomily. "Even
the paper mill, four mile away, ain't managed to make Millville wiggle
its big toe. Don't you worry over what the nabob'll do, Peggy; he
couldn't hurt nuthin' if he tried."

The door opened again and Mr. Merrick protruded a puzzled countenance.

"He wants to know about a stereotype plant, Patsy. What'll I tell him?"

Patsy stared. Louise and Beth shook their heads.

"If it belongs to the--the thing we want, Uncle, have 'em send it
along," said Patsy in desperation.

"All right."

A few minutes later the little man again appealed to them.

"How'll we run the thing, girls; steam or electricity?"

Patsy's face was a blank. Beth giggled and Louise frowned.

"Of course it'll have to be run," suggested Mr. Merrick; "but how?
That's the question."

"I--I hadn't given that matter thought," admitted Patsy. "What do you
think, Uncle?"

He considered, holding open the door while he thoughtfully regarded the
silent but interested group of villagers that eagerly hung upon every
word that passed.

"Cotting," called Mr. Merrick, "how do they run the paper mill at
Royal?"

"'Lectricity! 'Lectricity, sir!" answered half a dozen at once.

"They develops the power from the Royal Waterfall of the Little Bill,"
explained Cotting, with slow and pompous deliberation. "Mr. Skeelty he
tol' me they had enough 'lectric'ty to light up the whole dum country
fer ten mile in all directions, 'sides a-runnin' of the mill."

"Who's Skeelty?"

"Manager o' the mill, sir, an' part owner, he says."

"Has he a telephone?"

"Yes, Mr. Merrick."

"Thank you."

Mr. Merrick shut the door and called up Skeelty. Five minutes of
bargaining settled the question and he then connected with Mr. Marvin
again and directed him to have the presses and machinery equipped to run
by electricity. Thinking he had now given the banker all the commissions
he could attend to with celerity, Uncle John next called up Major Doyle
and instructed his brother-in-law to send four miles of electric cable,
with fittings and transformers, and a crew of men to do the work, and
not to waste a moment's time in getting them to Millville.

"What in blazes are ye up to now, John?" inquired the major, on
receiving this order.

"None of your business, Gregory. Obey orders."

"Going to light the farm and turn night into day?" persisted the major.

"This is Patsy's secret, and I'm not going to give it away," said Mr.
Merrick. "Attend to this matter promptly, Major, and you'll see the
result when you come to us in July for your vacation."

Having attended to all the requirements of the projected _Millville
Tribune_, as he thought, Mr. Merrick called the operator for the amount
of his bill and paid it to Sam Cotting--three dollars and eighty cents.
The sum fairly made the onlookers gasp, and as the Merrick party passed
out, Silas, the miller, said solemnly:

"Don't anybody tell me talk is cheap, arter this. John Merrick may be a
millionaire, but ef he keeps this thing up long he'll be a pauper.
Thet's _my_ prophe-sigh."

"Yer off yer base, Si," said McNutt "Joe Wegg tol' me once thet the
nabob's earnin's on his money were more'n he could spend ef he lays
awake nights a-doin' it. Joe says it keeps pilin' up on him, till
sometimes it drives him nigh desp'rit. I hed an idee I'd ask him to
shuck off some of it onter me. _I_ could stan' the strain all right, an'
get plenty o' sleep too."

"Ye won't hev no call to stan' it, Peggy," pre-dcted Lon Tait.
"Milyunhairs may spend money foolish, but they don't never give none
away. I've done sev'ral odd jobs fer Mr. Merrick, but he's never give me
more'n jest wages."

"Well," said McNutt with a sigh, "while he's in easy reach there orter
be _some_ sort o' pickings fer us, an' it's our duty to git all we can
out'n him--short o' actoo-al robbery. What do ye s'pose this new deal
means, boys? Sounds like printin' somethin', don't it?"

"P'raps it's some letterheads fer the Wegg Farm," suggested Nib
Corkins. "These Merricks do everything on a big scale."

"Four pages, an' six columns to a page?" asked Cotting scornfully.
"Sounds to me more like a newspaper, folks!"

There was a moment's silence, during which they all stared at the
speaker fearfully. Then said Skim Clark, in his drawling, halting way:

"Ef thet's the case, an' there's goin' ter be a newspaper here in
Millville, we may as well give up the struggle, fer the town'll be
ruined!"




CHAPTER V

DIVIDING THE RESPONSIBILITY


The rest of that day and a good share of the night was devoted to an
earnest consultation concerning the proper methods of launching the
_Millville Daily Tribune_.

"We must divide the work," said Patsy, "so that all will have an equal
share of responsibility. Louise is to be the literary editor and the
society editor. That sounds like a good combination."

"There is no society here," objected Louise.

"Not as we understand the term, perhaps," replied Miss Doyle; "but every
community, however small, believes it is a social center; and so it
is--to itself. If there is a dance or a prayer meeting or a christening
or illness, it must be recorded in our local columns. If Bob West sells
a plow we've got to mention the name of the farmer who bought it; if
there's a wedding, we'll make a double-header of it; if a baby is born,
we will--will--"

"Print its picture in the paper. Eh, Uncle John?" This from Beth.

"Of course," said Mr. Merrick. "You must print all the home news, as
well as the news of the world."

"How are you going to get the news of the world?" asked Arthur.

"How? How?"

"That was my question."

"Private wire from New York," said Mr. Merrick, as the girls hesitated
how to meet this problem. "I'll arrange with the telegraph company
to-morrow to have an extension of the wire run over from Chazy Junction.
Then we'll hire an operator--a girl, of course--to receive the news in
the office of the paper."

"But who will send us the news?" asked Beth.

"The Associated Press, I suppose, or some news agency in New York. I'll
telegraph to-morrow to Marvin to arrange it."

Arthur whistled softly.

"This newspaper is going to cost something," he murmured. Uncle John
looked at him with a half quizzical, half amused expression.

"That's what Marvin warned me yesterday, when I ordered the equipment,"
said he. "He told me that before I got through with this deal it would
run up into the thousands. And he added that Millville wasn't worth it."

"And what did you say to that, Uncle John?" asked Beth.

"In that case, I said, I would be sure to get some pleasure and
satisfaction out of your journalistic enterprise. My last financial
statement showed a frightful condition of affairs. In spite of Major
Doyle's reckless investments of my money, and--and the little we manage
to give to deserving charities, I'm getting richer every day. When a
small leak like this newspaper project occurs, it seems that Fortune is
patting me on the back. I've no idea what a respectable newspaper will
cost, but I hope it will cost a lot, for every dollar it devours makes
my mind just that much easier."

Arthur Weldon laughed.

"In that case, sir," said he, "I can make no further protest. But I
predict you will find the bills--eh--eh--entirely satisfactory."

"You mentioned an office, just now, Uncle," observed Louise. "Must we
have a business office?"

"To be sure," Mr. Merrick replied. "We must find a proper location,
where we can install the presses and all the type and machinery that go
to making up a newspaper. I hadn't thought of this before, but it is a
serious matter, my dears. We may have to build a place."

"Oh, that would take too long, entirely," said Patsy. "Can't we put it
in the barn, Uncle?"

"What would happen to the horses and cows? No; we'll take a look over
Millville and see what we can find there."

"You won't find much," predicted Beth. "I can't think of a single
unoccupied building in the town."

"Then we'll put it in a tent," declared Patsy.

"Don't borrow trouble," advised Uncle John. "Wait till we've gone over
the ground together. Our truck will require a pretty big place, for
Marvin said one freight car wouldn't hold all the outfit. He's going to
send two cars, anyhow."

"Have him fill up the second with print paper," proposed Arthur.

"Ah; that's another thing I hadn't thought of," said Mr. Merrick. "How
big a daily edition will you print, Patsy?"

"Let's see," pondered the girl. "There are about two hundred at Royal,
say four hundred at Huntingdon, at Millville about--about--"

"Say fifteen," said Uncle John; "that's six hundred and fifteen, and--"

"And the farmers, of course. There must be at least a hundred and fifty
of 'em in the county, so that makes seven hundred and seventy-five
copies a day."

"Wait a moment!" cried Arthur, somewhat bewildered by this figuring. "Do
you suppose every inhabitant--man, woman and child--will subscribe for
your paper?"

Patsy blushed.

"Why, no, of course not," she acknowledged frankly. "How many do you
think _will_ subscribe, Arthur? Remember, it's to be a great
newspaper."

"Four pages of six columns each. Plenty big enough for Millville," he
said, thoughtfully. "My advice, girls, is to print a first edition of
about four hundred copies and distribute the papers free in every house
within a radius of five or six miles from Millville. These will be
samples, and after the people have had a chance to read them you can ask
them to subscribe. By the way, what will you charge for subscription?"

"How much, Uncle?" asked Patsy, appealingly.

"A penny paper is the most popular," he said, regarding her with merry,
twinkling eyes. "Say thirty cents a month, or three-fifty a year. That's
as much as these poor people can stand."

"I think so too," replied the girl, seriously.

"But it seems to me a penny paper isn't dignified," pouted Louise. "I
had intended to print all my poems in it, and I'm sure that ought to
make it worth at least five cents a copy."

"That will make it worth more, my dear," commented Uncle John; "but
frequently one must sell property for less than it's actually worth.
You must remember these people have not been used to spending much money
on literature, and I imagine you'll have to coax them to spend thirty
cents a month. Many of the big New York papers are sold for a penny, and
without any loss of dignity, either."

"Do you think we can make it pay on that basis, Uncle?" asked Beth.

Uncle John coughed to gain time while he thought of a suitable reply.
"That, my dear," he informed his niece, "will depend upon how many
subscribers you can get. Subscribers and advertisers are necessary to
make any paper pay."

"Advertisers!"

"Of course," said practical Beth. "Every merchant in Millville and
Huntingdon will naturally advertise in our paper, and we'll make the
major get us a lot from New York."

"Oh," said Patsy; "I see. So _that_ difficulty is settled."

Arthur smiled, but held his peace. Uncle John's round face was growing
merrier every minute.

"Patsy, do you think we shall make any money from this venture?" asked
Louise.

"We ought to, if we put our hearts and souls into the thing," was the
reply. "But before we divide any profits we must pay back to Uncle John
the original investment."

"We don't especially care to make any profit, do we?" inquired Beth.
"It's fun for us, you know, and a--a--great educational experience,
and--and--a fine philanthropy--and all that. We don't need the money, so
if the paper pays a profit at a cent a copy we'd better cut down the
price."

"Don't do that yet," advised Uncle John, soberly. "There will be
expenses that as yet you don't suspect, and a penny for a paper is about
as low as you can go."

"What's to be my position on the staff, Patsy?" asked Beth, turning to
her cousin.

"You're a good mathematician, Beth, so I propose you act as secretary
and treasurer, and keep the books."

"No; that's too mechanical; no bookkeeping for me. I want something
literary."

"Then you can be sporting editor."

"Goodness, Patsy! There will be no sporting news in Millville."

"There will be a ball game occasionally, and I saw some of the men
pitching quoits yesterday. But this is to be a newspaper reflecting the
excitement of the entire world, Beth, and all the telegraphic news of a
sporting character you must edit and arrange for our reading columns.
Oh, yes; and you'll take care of the religious items too. We must have a
Sunday Sermon, by some famous preacher, Uncle. We'll print that every
Saturday, so those who can't go to church may get as good a talk as if
they did--and perhaps a better one."

"That will be fine," he agreed. "How about murders, crimes and
divorces?"

"All barred. Nothing that sends a cold chill down your back will be
allowed in our paper. These people are delightfully simple; we don't
want to spoil them."

"Cut out the cold chills and you'll spoil your newspaper," suggested
Arthur. "People like to read of other folks' horrors, for it makes them
more contented with their own lot in life."

"False philosophy, sir!" cried Fatsy firmly. "You can't educate people
by retailing crimes and scandals, and the _Millville Tribune_ is going
to be as clean as a prayer book, if I'm to be managing editor."

"Is that to be your office, dear?" asked Louise.

"I think so. I've a heap of executive ability, and I'm running over with
literary--eh--eh--literary discrimination. In addition to running the
thing, I'll be the general news editor, because I'm better posted on
newspaper business than the other girls."

"How does that happen?" inquired Louise, wonderingly.

"Why, I--I _read_ the papers more than you or Beth. And I've set myself
to master every detail of the business. No more crocheting or fancy
work--no novel reading--no gossipy letter writing. From this day on we
must attend strictly to business. If we're to become journalist, girls,
we must be good ones--better than the ordinary--so that Uncle John may
point to us with pride, and the columns of the _Millville Daily Tribune_
will be quoted by the New York and Chicago press. Only in that way can
we become famous throughout the world!"

"Pass me the bonbons, dear," sighed Louise. "It's a high ambition, isn't
it?"

"A very laudable ambition," added Uncle John approvingly. "I hope my
clever nieces will be able to accomplish it."

"How about pictures?" asked Beth. "Modern newspapers are illustrated,
and have cartoons of the leading events of the day."

"Can't we buy those things somewhere?" asked Patsy, appealing to Uncle
John again. "There isn't an artist among us, of any account; and we
shall be too busy to draw pictures."

"We must hire an artist," said Mr. Merrick, adding the item to his
memoranda. "I'll speak to Marvin about it."

All these details were beginning to bewilder the embryo journalists. It
is quite possible that had not Uncle John placed his order for presses
and type so promptly the girls might have withdrawn from the
proposition, but the die was now cast and they were too brave--perhaps
too stubborn--to "back down" at this juncture.

"I realize," said Patsy, slowly and with a shake of her flaming head,
"that we have undertaken an important venture. Our new enterprise is a
most serious one, girls, for there is nothing greater or grander in our
advanced age than the daily newspaper; no power so tremendous as the
Power of the Press."

"Yes, the press must be powerful or it wouldn't print clearly," remarked
Beth.

"We are to become public mentors to the simple natives of Chazy County,"
continued Patsy, warming up to her subject and speaking oratorically.
"We shall be the guiding star of the--er--er--the benighted citizens of
Millville and Huntingdon. We must lead them in politics, counsel them in
the management of their farms and educate them to the great World
Movements that are constantly occurring."

"Let's put all that rot in our prospectus," said Louise, looking at her
cousin admiringly. "Can you remember it, Patsy, or had I better write it
down now? I like that about teaching the farmers how to run their
farms; it's so practical."

"You wait," said Patsy unflinchingly. "I'll write 'em an editorial that
will make their eyes roll. But it won't do a bit of harm for you and
Beth to jot down all the brilliant thoughts you run across, for the
benefit of our subscribers."

"We haven't any subscribers yet," remarked Beth, placidly.

"I'll overcome that defect," said Uncle John. "I want to subscribe right
now for ten copies, to be mailed to friends of mine in the city who--who
need educating. I'll pay in advance and collect of my friends when I see
'em."

This was certainly encouraging and Patsy smiled benignantly.

"I'll take five more yearly subscriptions," said Arthur.

"Oh, but you're going to be on the staff!" cried Patsy.

"Am I?"

"Certainly. I've been thinking over our organization and while it is
quite proper for three girls to run paper, there ought to be a man to
pose as the editor in chief. That'll be you, Arthur."

"But you won't print my name?"

"Oh, yes we shall. Don't groan, sir; it's no disgrace. Wait till you see
the _Millville Tribune_. Also we shall print our own names, in that case
giving credit to whom credit is due. The announcement will run something
like this: 'Arthur Weldon, General Manager and Editor in Chief; P.
Doyle, General News Editor; L. Merrick Weldon, Society and Literary
Editor; E. DeGraf, Sporting Editor, Secretary and Treasurer.' You see,
by using our initials only, no one will ever suspect we are girls."

"The Millville people may," said Arthur, slyly, "and perhaps the
disguise will be penetrated by outsiders. That will depend on the
paper."

"I don't like that combination of sporting editor and secretary and
treasurer," objected Beth. "It isn't the usual thing in journalism, I'm
sure. Suppose you call me Editor of Special Features, and let it go at
that?"

"Have we any special features?" asked Louise.

"Oh, yes," said Arthur; "there's Beth's eyebrows, Patsy's nose, and--"

"Do be sensible!" cried Patsy. "This isn't a joking matter, sir. Our
newspaper will have plenty of special features, and Beth's suggestion is
a good one. It sounds impressive. You see, Arthur, we've got to use you
as a figurehead, but so you won't loaf on your job I've decided to
appoint you Solicitor of Advertising and Subscriptions."

"Thank you, my dear," he said, grinning in an amused way.

"You and Louise, who still like to be together, can drive all over the
county getting subscriptions, and you can write letters on our new
stationery to all the big manufacturers of soaps and breakfast foods and
beauty powders and to all the correspondence schools and get their
advertisements for the _Tribune_. If you get a good many, we may have to
enlarge the paper."

"Don't worry, Miss Doyle; I'll try to keep within bounds."

And so they went on, laying plans and discussing details in such an
earnest way that Uncle John became as enthusiastic as any of them and
declared in no uncertain tone that the _Millville Daily Tribune_ was
bound to be a "howling success."

After the girls had retired for the night and the men sat smoking
together in Uncle John's own room, Arthur said:

"Tell me, sir, why you have encouraged this mad project."

The little millionaire puffed his pipe in silence a moment. Then he
replied:

"I'm educating my girls to be energetic and self-reliant. I want to
bring out and develop every spark of latent ability there is in them.
Whether the _Millville Tribune_ succeeds or fails is not important; it
will at least keep them busy for a time, along new lines, and tax their
best resources of intellect and business ability. In other words, this
experience is bound to do 'em good, and in that way I figure it will be
worth all it costs--and more. I like the originality of the idea; I'm
pleased with the difficulties I see looming ahead; I'm quite sure my
girls will rise to every occasion and prove their grit." He paused to
knock the ashes from his pipe. "I'm worth a lot of money, Arthur," he
continued, meekly, "and some day these three girls will inherit immense
fortunes. It is my duty to train them in all practical business ways to
take care of their property."

"I follow your line of reasoning, sir," observed Arthur Weldon; "but
this absurd journalistic venture is bound to result in heavy financial
loss."

"I know it, my boy. I'm sure of it. But can't you see that the lesson
they will learn will render them more cautious in making future
investments? I'm going to supply a complete newspaper outfit--to the
last detail--and give 'em a good running start. Then I shall sit back
and watch results. If they lose money on running expenses, as they
surely will, they'll first take it out of their allowances, then sell
their jewelry, and finally come to me for help. See? The lesson will be
worth while, Arthur, and aside from that--think of the fun they'll
have!"




CHAPTER VI

MR. SKEELTY OF THE MILL


The next morning they drove to town again, passing slowly up the street
of the little village to examine each building that might be a possible
location for a newspaper office. Here is a map that Patsy drew of
Millville, which gives a fair idea of its arrangement:

[Illustration: Village Street]

Counting the dwellings there were exactly twelve buildings, and they all
seemed occupied.

When they reached the hardware store, opposite Cotting's, Mr. West, the
proprietor, was standing on the broad platform in front of it. In many
respects Bob West was the most important citizen of Millville. Tall and
gaunt, with great horn spectacles covering a pair of cold gray eyes, he
was usually as reserved and silent as his neighbors were confiding and
talkative. A widower of long standing, without children or near
relatives, he occupied a suite of well-appointed rooms over the hardware
store and took his meals at the hotel. Before Mr. Merrick appeared on
the scene West had been considered a very wealthy man, as it was known
he had many interests outside of his store; but compared with the
multi-millionaire old Bob had come to be regarded more modestly,
although still admitted to be the village's "warmest" citizen. He was an
authority in the town, too, and a man of real importance.

Mr. Merrick stopped his horse to speak with the hardware man, an old
acquaintance.

"West," said he, "my girls are going to start a newspaper in Millville."

The merchant bowed gravely, perhaps to cover the trace of a smile he
was unable to repress.

"It's to be a daily paper, you know," continued Mr. Merrick, "and it
seems there's a lot of machinery in the outfit. It'll need quite a bit
of room, in other words, and we're looking for a place to install it."

West glanced along the street--up one side and down the other--and then
shook his head negatively.

"Plenty of land, but no buildings," said he. "You might buy the old mill
and turn it into a newspaper office. Caldwell isn't making much of a
living and would be glad to sell out."

"It's too dusty and floury," said Patsy. "We'd never get it clean, I'm
sure."

"What's in that shed of yours?" asked Uncle John, pointing to a long,
low building' that adjoined the hardware store.

West turned and looked at the shed reflectively.

"That is where I store my stock of farm machinery," he said. "There's
very little in there now, for it's a poor season and I didn't lay in
much of a supply. In fact, I'm pretty well cleaned out of all surplus
stock. But next spring I shall need the place again."

"Good!" cried Mr. Merrick. "That solves our problem. Has it a floor?"

"Yes; an excellent one; but only one small window."

"We can remedy that," declared Uncle John. "Here's the proposition,
West: Let us have the shed for six months, at the end of which time we
will know whether the _Millville Tribune_ is a success or not. If it is,
we'll build a fine new building for it; if it don't seem to prosper,
we'll give you back the shed. What do you say?"

West thought it over.

"There is room on the rear platform, for all the farm machinery I now
have on hand. All right, Mr. Merrick; I'll move the truck out and give
you possession. It won't make a bad newspaper office. But of course you
are to fit up the place at your own expense."

"Thank you very much, sir!" exclaimed Uncle John. "I'll set Lon Taft at
work at once. Where can he be found?"

"Playing billiards at the hotel, usually. I suppose he is there now."

"Very good; I'll hunt him up. What do you think of our newspaper scheme,
West?"

The old merchant hesitated. Then he said slowly:

"Whatever your charming and energetic nieces undertake, sir, will
doubtless be well accomplished. The typical country newspaper groans
under a load of debt and seldom gets a fair show to succeed; but in this
case there will be no lack of money, and--why, that settles the
question, I think. Money is the keystone to success."

"Mr. West," said Louise, with dignity, "we are depending chiefly on the
literary merit of our newspaper to win recognition."

"Of course; of course!" said he hastily. "Put me down as a subscriber,
please, and rely upon my support at all times. It is possible, young
ladies--nay, quite probable, I should say--that your originality and
genius will yet make Millville famous."

That speech pleased Uncle John, and as the hardware merchant bowed and
turned away, Mr. Merrick said in his cheeriest tones: "He's quite right,
my dears, and we're lucky to have found such a fine, roomy place for our
establishment. Before we go after the carpenter to fix it up I must
telephone to Marvin about the things we still need."

Over the long-distance telephone Mr. Marvin reported that he had bought
the required outfit and it was even then being loaded on the freight
cars.

"I've arranged for a special engine," he added, "and if all goes well
the freight will be on the sidetrack at Chazy Junction on Monday
morning. The dealer will send down three men to set up the presses and
get everything in running order. But he asks if you have arranged for
your workmen. How about it, Mr. Merrick? have you plenty of competent
printers and pressmen at Millville?"

"There are none at all," was the reply. "Better inquire how many we will
need, Marvin, and send them down here. And, by the way, hire women or
girls for every position they are competent to fill. This is going to
be a girls' newspaper, so we'll have as few men around as possible."

"I understand, sir."

Uncle John ordered everything he could think of and told his agent to
add whatever the supply man thought might be needed. This business being
accomplished, he found Lon Taft at the hotel and instructed the
carpenter to put rows of windows on both sides of the shed and to build
partitions for an editorial office and a business office at the front.

This was the beginning of a busy period, especially for poor Uncle John,
who had many details to attend to personally. The next morning the
electricians arrived and began stringing the power cables from the paper
mill to the newspaper office. This rendered it necessary for Mr. Merrick
to make a trip to Royal, to complete his arrangement with Mr. Skeelty,
the manager. He drove over with Arthur Weldon, in the buggy--four miles
of hill climbing, over rough cobble-stones, into the pine forest.

Arriving there, the visitors were astonished at the extent of the plant
so recently established in this practically unknown district. The great
mill, where the wood pulp was made, was a building constructed from pine
slabs and cobblestones, material gathered from the clearing in which it
stood, but it was quite substantial and roomy. Adjoining the mill was
the factory building where the pulp was rolled into print paper.
Surrounding these huge buildings were some sixty small dwellings of the
bungalow type, for the use of the workmen, built of rough boards, but
neat and uniform in appearance. Almost in the center of this group stood
the extensive storehouse from which all necessary supplies were
furnished the mill hands, the cost being deducted from their wages. The
electric power plant was a building at the edge of Royal Waterfall, the
low and persistent roar of which was scarcely drowned by the rumble of
machinery. Finally, at the edge of the clearing nearest the mills, stood
the business office, and to this place Mr. Merrick and Arthur at once
proceeded.

They found the office a busy place. Three or four typewriters were
clicking away, operated by sallow-faced girls, and behind a tall desk
were two bookkeepers, in one of whom Uncle John recognized--with mild
surprise--the tramp he had encountered at Chazy Junction on the morning
of his arrival. The young fellow had improved in appearance, having
discarded his frayed gray suit for one of plain brown khaki, such as
many of the workmen wore, a supply being carried by the company's store.
He was clean-shaven and trim, and a gentlemanly bearing had replaced the
careless, half defiant attitude of the former hobo. It was evident he
remembered meeting Mr. Merrick, for he smiled and returned the "nabob's"
nod.

Mr. Skeelty had a private enclosed office in a corner of the room. Being
admitted to this sanctum, the visitors found the manager to be a small,
puffy individual about forty-five years of age, with shrewd, beadlike
black eyes and an insolent assumption of super-importance. Skeelty
interrupted his task of running up columns of impressive figures to ask
his callers to be seated, and opened the interview with characteristic
abruptness.

"You're Merrick, eh? I remember. You want to buy power, and we have it
to sell. How much will you contract to take?"

"I don't know just how much we need," answered Uncle John. "We want
enough to run a newspaper plant at Millville, and will pay for whatever
we use. I've ordered a meter, as you asked me to do, and my men are now
stringing the cables to make the connection."

"Pah! a newspaper. How absurd," said Mr. Skeelty with scornful emphasis.
"Your name, Merrick, is not unknown to me. It stands for financial
success, I understand; but I'll bet you never made your money doing such
fool things as establishing newspapers in graveyards."

Uncle John looked at the man attentively.

"I shall refrain from criticising your conduct of this mill, Mr.
Skeelty," he quietly observed, "nor shall I dictate what you may do with
your money--provided you succeed in making any."

The manager smiled broadly, as if the retort pleased him.

"Give an' take, sir; that's my motto," he said.

"But you prefer to take?"

"I do," was the cheerful reply. "I'll take your paper, for instance--if
it isn't too high priced."

"In case it is, we will present you with a subscription," said Uncle
John. "But that reminds me: as a part of our bargain I want you to allow
my nieces, or any representative of the _Millville Tribune_, to take
subscriptions among your workmen."

Mr. Skeelty stared at him a moment. Then he laughed.

"They're mostly foreigners, Mr. Merrick, who haven't yet fully mastered
the English language. But," he added, thoughtfully, "a few among them
might subscribe, if your country sheet contains any news of interest at
all. This is rather a lonely place for my men and they get dissatisfied
at times. All workmen seem chronically dissatisfied, and their women
constantly urge them to rebellion. Already there are grumblings, and
they claim they're buried alive in this forlorn forest. Don't appreciate
the advantages of country life, you see, and I've an idea they'll begin
to desert, pretty soon. Really, a live newspaper might do them
good--especially if you print a little socialistic drivel now and then."
Again he devoted a moment to thought, and then continued: "Tell you what
I'll do, sir; I'll solicit the subscriptions myself, and deduct the
price from the men's wages, as I do the cost of their other supplies.
But the Company gets a commission for that, of course."

"It's a penny paper," said Uncle John. "The subscription is only thirty
cents a month."

"Delivered?"

"I suppose so."

"Well, I'll pay you twenty cents, and keep the balance for commission.
That's fair enough."

"Very well, Mr. Skeelty. We're after subscriptions more than money, just
now. Get all you can, at that rate."

After signing a contract for the supply of electrical power, whereby he
was outrageously robbed but the supply was guaranteed, Mr. Merrick and
Arthur returned to the farm.

"That man," said Louise's young husband, referring to the manager of the
paper mill, "is an unmitigated scoundrel, sir."

"I won't deny it," replied Mr. Merrick. "It occurs to me he is hiring
those poor workmen at low wages and making a profit on all their living
necessities, which he reserves the right of supplying from his own
store. No wonder the poor fellows get dissatisfied."




CHAPTER VII

THE SKETCH ARTIST


During the next three days so many things happened at Millville that the
natives were in a panic of excitement. Not only was electricity brought
from the paper mill, but a telegraph wire was run from Chazy Junction to
Bob West's former storage shed and a telephone gang came along and
placed a private wire, with long-distance connections, in the new
newspaper office. The office itself became transformed--"as full o'
winders as a hothouse!" exclaimed Peggy McNutt, with bulging eyes--and
neat partitions were placed for the offices. There was no longer any
secret as to the plans of the "nabobs"; it was generally understood that
those terribly aggressive girls were going to inflict a daily paper on
the community. Some were glad, and some rebelled, but all were excited.
A perpetual meeting was held at Cotting's store to discuss developments,
for something startling occurred every few minutes.

"It's a outrage, this thing," commented young Skim Clark despondently.
"They're tryin' to run mother out o' business--an' she a widder with me
to look after! Most o' the business at the Emporium is done in
newspapers an' magazines an' sich; so these gals thought they'd cut
under an' take the business away from her."

"Can't the Widder Clark sell the new paper, then?" asked the blacksmith.

"I dunno. Hadn't thought o' that," said Skim. "But the price is to be
jus' one cent, an' we've ben gittin' five cents fer all the outside
papers. Where's the profit comin' from, on one cent, I'd like to know?
Why, we make two or three cents on all the five cent papers."

"As fer that," remarked the druggist, "we'll get a cheap paper--if it's
any good--an' that's somethin' to be thankful for."

"'Twon't be any good," asserted Skim. "Ma says so."

But no one except McNutt was prepared to agree with this prediction.
The extensive plans in preparation seemed to indicate that the new paper
would be fully equal to the requirements of the populace.

On Monday, when the news spread that two big freight cars had arrived at
the Junction, and Nick Thorne began working three teams to haul the
outfit to Millville, the rest of the town abandoned all business other
than watching the arrival of the drays. Workmen and machinists arrived
from the city and began unpacking and setting up the presses, type cases
and all other paraphernalia, every motion being watched by eager faces
that lined the windows. These workmen were lodged at the hotel, which
had never entertained so many guests at one time in all its past
history. The three girls, even more excited and full of awe than the
townspeople, were at the office early and late, taking note of
everything installed and getting by degrees a fair idea of the extent of
their new plaything.

"It almost takes my breath away, Uncle," said Patsy. "You've given the
_Tribune_ such a splendid start that we must hustle to make good and
prove we are worthy your generosity."

"I sat up last night and wrote a poem for the first page of the first
number," announced Louise earnestly.

"Poems don't go on the first page," observed Patsy; "but they're needed
to fill in with. What's it about, dear?"

"It's called 'Ode to a Mignonette,'" answered Louise. "It begins this
way:

    "Wee brown blossom, humble and sweet,
      Content on my bosom lying,
     Who would guess from your quiet dress
      The beauty there is lying
          Under the rust?"

"Hm," said Patsy, "I don't see as there's any beauty under the rust, at
all. There's no beauty about a mignonette, anyhow, suspected or
unsuspected."

"She means 'fragrance,'" suggested Beth. "Change it to: 'The fragrance
there is lying under the rust.' That'll fix it all right, Louise."

"It doesn't seem right, even then," remarked Uncle John. "If the
fragrance lies under the rust, it can't be smelt, can it?"

"I did not anticipate all this criticism," said Louise, with an air of
injured dignity. "None of the big publishing houses that returned my
poems ever said anything mean about them; they merely said they were
'not available.' However, as this poem has not made a hit with the
managing editor, I'll tear it up and write another."

"Don't do that," begged Patsy. "Save it for emergencies. We've got to
fill twenty-four columns every day, remember!"

By Wednesday night the equipment was fully installed and the workmen
departed, leaving only Jim McGaffey, an experienced pressman, and
Lawrence Doane--familiarly called Larry--who was to attend to the
electrotyping and "make-up." The press was of the best modern
construction, and folded, cut and counted the papers automatically, with
a capacity for printing three thousand copies an hour.

"And at that rate," observed Patsy, "It will run off our regular edition
in eight minutes."

Aside from the newspaper press there were two "job" presses and an
assortment of type for printing anything that might be required, from a
calling card to a circus poster. A third man, who came from the city
Thursday morning, was to take charge of the job printing and assist in
the newspaper work. Three girls also arrived, pale-faced, sad-eyed
creatures, who were expert typesetters. Uncle John arranged with Mrs.
Kebble, the landlady at the hotel, to board all the "help" at moderate
charge.

It had been decided, after much consultation, to make the _Tribune_ a
morning paper. At first it was feared this would result in keeping the
girls up nights, but it was finally arranged that all the copy they
furnished would be turned in by nine o'clock, and Miss Briggs, the
telegraph editor, would attend to anything further that came in over the
wires. The advantages of a morning edition were obvious.

"You'll have all day to distribute a morning paper," Arthur pointed out,
"whereas an evening paper couldn't get to your scattered subscribers
until the next morning."

Miss Briggs, upon whom they were to rely so greatly, proved to be a
woman of tremendous energy and undoubted ability. She was thirty-five
years of age and had been engaged in newspaper work ever since she was
eighteen. Bright and cheerful, of even temper and shrewd comprehension,
Miss Briggs listened to the eager explanations of the three girls who
had undertaken this queer venture, and assured them she would assist in
making a newspaper that would be a credit to them all. She understood
clearly the conditions; that inexperience was backed by ample capital
and unpractical ideas by unlimited enthusiasm.

"This job may not last long," she told herself, "but while it does it
will be mighty amusing. I shall enjoy these weeks in a quiet country
town after the bustle of the big city."

So here were seven regular employees of the _Millville Daily Tribune_
already secured and the eighth was shortly to appear. Preparations were
well under way for a first edition on the Fourth of July and the office
was beginning to hum with work, when one afternoon a girl strolled in
and asked in a tired voice for the managing editor.

She was admitted to Patsy's private room, where Beth and Louise were
also sitting, and they looked upon their visitor in undisguised
astonishment.

She was young: perhaps not over twenty years of age. Her face bore marks
of considerable dissipation and there was a broad scar underneath her
right eye. Her hair was thin, straggling and tow-colored; her eyes
large, deep-set and of a faded blue. The girl's dress was as queer and
untidy as her personal appearance, for she wore a brown tailored coat, a
short skirt and long, buttoned leggings. A round cap of the same
material as her dress was set jauntily on the back of her head, and over
her shoulder was slung a fiat satchel of worn leather. There was little
that was feminine and less that was attractive about the young woman,
and Patsy eyed her with distinct disfavor.

"Tommy sent me here," said the newcomer, sinking wearily into a chair.
"I'm hired for a month, on good behavior, with a chance to stay on if I
conduct myself in a ladylike manner. I've been working on the _Herald_,
you know; but there was no end of a row last week, and they fired me
bodily. Any booze for sale in this town?"

"It is a temperance community," answered Patsy, stiffly.

"Hooray for me. There's a chance I'll keep sober. In that case you've
acquired the best sketch artist in America."

"Oh! Are you the artist, then?" asked Patsy, with doubtful intonation.

"I don't like the word. I'm not a real artist--just a cartoonist and
newspaper hack. Say, it's funny to see me in this jungle, isn't it? What
joy I'll have in astonishing the natives! I s'pose a picture's a
picture, to them, and Art an impenetrable mystery. What sort of stuff do
you want me to turn out?"

"I--I'm not sure you'll do," said Miss Doyle, desperately. "I--we--that
is--we are three quite respectable young women who have under-taken to
edit the _Millville Daily Tribune_, and the people we have secured to
assist us are all--all quite desirable, in their way. So--; ahem!--so--"

"That's all right," remarked the artist composedly. "I don't know that
I blame you. I can see very well the atmosphere is not my atmosphere.
When is the next train back to New York?"

"At four o'clock, I believe."

"I'll engage a nice upholstered seat in the smoking car. But I've
several hours to loaf, and loafing is my best stunt. Isn't this a queer
start for girls like you?" looking around the "den" critically. "I
wonder how you got the bug, and what'll come of it. It's so funny to see
a newspaper office where everything is brand new, and--eminently
respectable. Do you mind my lighting a cigarette? This sort of a deal is
quite interesting to an old-timer like me; but perhaps I owe you an
apology for intruding. I had a letter from Tommy and one from a big
banker--Marvin, I guess his name is."

She drew two letters from her satchel and tossed them on the desk before
Patsy.

"They're no good to me now," she added. "Where's your waste basket?"

The managing editor, feeling embarrassed by the presence of the artist,
opened the letters. The first was from Mr. Marvin, Uncle John's banker,
saying:

"After much negotiation I have secured for you the best newspaper
illustrator in New York, and a girl, too, which is an added
satisfaction. For months I have admired the cartoons signed 'Het' in the
New York papers, for they were essentially clever and droll. Miss Hewitt
is highly recommended but like most successful artists is not always to
be relied upon. I'm told if you can manage to win her confidence she
will be very loyal to you."

The other letter was from the editor of a great New York journal. "In
giving you Hetty," he said, "I am parting with one of our strongest
attractions, but in this big city the poor girl is rapidly drifting to
perdition and I want to save her, if possible, before it is too late.
She has a sweet, lovable nature, a generous heart and a keen intellect,
but these have been so degraded by drink and dissipation that you may
not readily discover them. My idea is that in a country town, away from
all disreputable companionship, the child may find herself, and come to
her own again. Be patient with her and help her all you can. Her
wonderful talent will well repay you, even if you are not interested in
saving one of God's creatures."

Silently Patsy passed the letters to Beth and Louise. After reading them
there was a new expression on the faces they turned toward Hetty Hewitt.

"Forgive me," said Patsy, abruptly. "I--I think I misjudged you. I was
wrong in saying what I did."

"No; you were quite right." She sat with downcast eyes a moment, musing
deeply. Then she looked up with a smile that quite glorified her wan
face. "I'd like to stay, you know," she said humbly. "I'm facing a
crisis, just now, and on the whole I'd rather straighten up. If you feel
like giving me a chance I--I'd like to see if I've any reserve force or
whether the decency in me has all evaporated."

"We'll try you; and I'm sure you have lots of reserve force, Hetty,"
cried Patsy, jumping up impulsively to take the artist's soiled, thin
hand in her own. "Come with me to the hotel and I'll get you a room.
Where is your baggage?"

"Didn't bring it. I wasn't sure I'd like the country, or that you'd care
to trust me. In New York they know me for what I'm worth, and I get lots
of work and good advice--mixed with curses."

"We'll send for your trunk," said Patsy, leading the girl up the street.

"No; it's in hock. But I won't need it. With no booze to buy I can
invest my earnings in wearing apparel. What a picturesque place this is!
Way back in the primitive; no hint of those namby-pamby green meadows
and set rows of shade trees that make most country towns detestable;
rocks and boulders--boulders and rocks--and the scraggly pines for
background. The wee brook has gone crazy. What do you call it?"

"Little Bill Creek."

"I'm going to stab it with my pencil. Where it bumps the rocks it's
obstinate and pig-headed; where it leaps the little shelves of slate
it's merry and playful; where it sweeps silently between the curving
banks it is sulky and resentful. The Little Bill has moods, bless its
heart! Moods betoken character."

Patsy secured for Hetty a pleasant room facing the creek.

"Where will you work, at the office or here?" she asked.

"In the open, I guess. I'll run over the telegraph news to get a subject
for the day's cartoon, and then take to the woods. Let me know what
other pictures you want and I'll do 'em on the run. I'm a beast to
work."

Arthur Weldon, in his capacity as advertising manager, wrote to all the
national advertisers asking their patronage for the _Millville Daily
Tribune_. The letters were typewritten by the office stenographer on
newly printed letterheads that Fitzgerald, the job printer, had
prepared. Some of the advertisers were interested enough in Arthur's
novel proposition to reply with questions as to the circulation of the
new paper, where it was distributed, and the advertising rates. The
voting man answered frankly that they had 27 subscribers already and
were going to distribute 400 free copies every day, for a time, as
samples, with the hope of increasing the subscription list. "I am not
sure you will derive any benefit at all from advertising in our paper,"
he added; "but we would like to have you try it, and you can pay us
whatever you consider the results warrant."

To his astonishment the advertisements arrived, a great many from very
prominent firms, who accepted his proposal with amusement at his
originality and a desire to help the new venture along.

"Our square statement of facts has given us a good start," he told the
girls. "I'm really amazed at our success, and it's up to you to make a
paper that will circulate and make trade for these trustful
advertisers."

With the local merchants the results were less satisfying. Bob West put
in a card advertising his hardware business and Nib Corkins cautiously
invested a half dollar to promote his drug store and stock of tarnished
cheap jewelry; but Sam Cotting said everybody knew what he had for sale
and advertising wouldn't help him any. Arthur drove to Huntingdon with
Louise and while the society editor picked up items her husband
interviewed the merchants. The Huntingdon people were more interested in
the new paper than the Millville folk, and Arthur quoted such low prices
that several advertisements were secured. Two bright boys of this
thriving village were also employed to ride over to Millville each
morning, get a supply of _Tribunes_ and distribute a sample copy to
every house in the neighborhood.

"Fitz" set up the "ads" in impressive type and the columns of the first
edition began to fill up days before the Fourth of July arrived. Louise
had a story and two poems set in type and read over the proofs dozens of
times with much pride and satisfaction, while Beth prepared an article
on the history of baseball and the probable future of our national game.

They did not see much of their artist during the first days following
her arrival, but one afternoon she brought Patsy a sketch and asked:

"Who is this?"

Patsy glanced at it and laughed gleefully. It was Peggy McNutt, the
fish-eyed pooh-bah of Millville, who was represented sitting on his
front porch engaged in painting his wooden foot. This was one of
McNutt's recognized amusements. He kept a supply of paints of many
colors, and every few days appeared with his rudely carved wooden foot
glistening with a new coat of paint and elaborately striped. Sometimes
it would be blue with yellow stripes, then green with red stripes, and
anon a lovely pink decorated with purple. One drawback to Peggy's
delight in these transformations was the fact that it took the paint a
night and a day to dry thoroughly, and during this period of waiting he
would sit upon his porch with the wooden foot tenderly resting upon the
rail--a helpless prisoner.

"Some folks," he would say, "likes pretty neckties; an' some wears fancy
socks; but fer my part I'd ruther show a han'some foot ner anything. It
don't cost as much as wearin' socks an' neckties, an' it's more artistic
like."

Hetty had caught the village character in the act of striping the wooden
foot, and his expression of intense interest in the operation was so
original, and the likeness so perfect, from the string suspenders and
flannel shirt to the antiquated straw hat and faded and patched
overalls, that no one would be likely to mistake the subject. The sketch
was entitled "The Village Artist," and Patsy declared they would run it
on an inside page, just to make the Millville people aware of the "power
of the press." Larry made an etching of it and mounted the plate for a
double column picture. The original sketch Patsy decided to have framed
and to hang it in her office.




CHAPTER VIII

THE MILLVILLE DAILY TRIBUNE


The first edition of the _Millville Daily Tribune_ certainly proved it
to be a wonderful newspaper. The telegraphic news of the world's doings,
received and edited by the skillful Miss Briggs, was equal to that of
any metropolitan journal; the first page cartoon, referring to the
outbreak of a rebellion in China, was clever and humorous enough to
delight anyone; but the local news and "literary page" were woefully
amateurish and smacked of the schoolgirl editors who had prepared them.
Perhaps the Chazy County people did not recognize these deficiencies,
for the new paper certainly created a vast amount of excitement and won
the praise of nearly all who read it.

On the eventful night of the _Tribune's_ "first run" our girls were too
eager to go home and await its appearance, so they remained at the
office to see the birth of their enterprise, and as it was the night
preceding the Fourth of July Uncle John gave an exhibition of fireworks
in front of the newspaper office, to the delight of the entire
population.

The girl journalists, however, were not so greatly interested in
fireworks as in the birth of their fascinating enterprise. Wearing long
gingham aprons they hovered over the big table where the forms were
being locked up, and watched anxiously every movement of the workmen. It
was exceedingly interesting to note how a column of the first page was
left open until the last, so that copy "hot from the wire" of the very
latest news might be added before going to press. Finally, at exactly
two o'clock, the forms were locked, placed upon the bed of the press,
and McGaffey, a sour-faced individual whose chief recommendation was his
ability as a pressman, began to make ready for the "run."

Outside the brilliantly lighted windows, which were left open for air,
congregated a wondering group of the Millville people, many of whom had
never been up so late before in all their lives. But the event was too
important to miss. The huge, complicated press had already inspired
their awe, and they were eager to "see it work" as it printed the new
paper.

The girls tolerated this native curiosity with indulgent good humor and
at midnight even passed out sandwiches to the crowd, a supply having
been secured for the workmen. These were accepted silently, and as they
munched the food all kept their eyes fixed upon the magicians within.

There was a hitch somewhere; McGaffey muttered naughty words under his
breath and plied wrenches and screwdrivers in a way that brought a
thrill of anxiety, approaching fear, to every heart. The press started
half a dozen times, only to be shut down abruptly before it had printed
a single impression. McGaffey counseled with Larry, who shook his head.
Fitzgerald, the job printer, examined the machinery carefully and again
McGaffey screwed nuts and regulated the press. Then he turned on the
power; the big cylinder revolved; the white paper reeled out like a long
ribbon and with a rattle and thump the first copy of the _Millville
Daily Tribune_ was deposited, cut and folded, upon the table placed to
receive it. Patsy made a rush for it, but before she could reach the
table half a dozen more papers had been piled above it, and gathering
speed the great press hummed busily and the pile of _Tribunes_ grew as
if by magic.

Patsy grabbed the first dozen and handed them to Beth, for they were to
be reserved as souvenirs. Then, running back to the table, she seized a
bunch and began distributing them to the watchers outside the window.
The natives accepted them eagerly enough, but could not withdraw their
eyes from the marvelous press, which seemed to possess intelligence
almost human.

Each of the three girl journalists now had a copy in hand, scanning it
with boundless pride and satisfaction. It realized completely their
fondest hopes and they had good cause to rejoice.

Then Uncle John, who ought to have been in bed and sound asleep at this
uncanny hour of night, came bouncing in, accompanied by Arthur Weldon.
Each made a dive for a paper and each face wore an expression of genuine
delight. The roar of the press made conversation difficult, but Mr.
Merrick caught his nieces in his arms, by turn, and gave each one an
ecstatic hug and kiss.

Suddenly the press stopped.

"What's wrong, McGaffey?" demanded Patsy, anxiously.

"Nothing, miss. Edition off, that's all."

"What! the entire four hundred are printed?"

"Four twenty-five. I run a few extrys."

And now a shriek of laughter came from the windows as the villagers,
slowly opening the papers they held, came upon the caricature of Peggy
McNutt. The subject of the cartoon had, with his usual aggressiveness,
secured the best "standing room" available, and his contemplative,
protruding eyes were yet fixed upon the interior of the workroom. But
now, his curiosity aroused, he looked at the paper to see what his
neighbors were laughing at, and his expression of wonder slowly changed
to a broad grin. He straightened up, looked triumphantly around the
circle and exclaimed:

"By gum, folks, this 'ere paper's going to be a go! I didn't take no
stock in it till now, but them fool gals seem to know their business,
an' I'll back 'em to the last ditch!"




CHAPTER IX

TROUBLE


Of course the girls exhausted their store of "effusions" on the first
two or three papers. A daily eats up "copy" very fast and the need to
supply so much material began to bewilder the budding journalists. There
was not sufficient local news to keep them going, but fortunately the
New York news service supplied more general news than they could
possibly use, and, besides, Mr. Marvin, foreseeing this dilemma, had
sent on several long, stout boxes filled with "plate matter," which
meant that a variety of stories, poems, special articles and paragraphs
of every sort had been made into stereotyped plates of column width
which could be placed anywhere in the paper where a space needed to be
filled. This material, having been prepared by skilled writers, was of
excellent character, so that the paper gained in its class of contents
as the girlish contributions began to be replaced by "plates." The
nieces did not abandon writing, however, and all three worked sedulously
to prepare copy so that at least one column of the Tribune each day was
filled with notes from their pens.

Subscriptions came in freely during those first days, for farmers and
villagers alike were proud of their local daily and the price was so low
that no one begrudged the investment. But Uncle John well knew that if
every individual in the county subscribed, and the advertising patronage
doubled, the income would fall far short of running expenses.

Saturday night, when the pay roll had to be met, the girls consulted
together seriously. In spite of the new subscriptions received, a
deficiency must be supplied, and they quietly advanced the money from
their private purses. This was no great hardship, for each had an ample
allowance from Uncle John, as well as an income from property owned in
her own name.

"It's only about thirty dollars apiece," said Patsy. "I guess we can
stand that until--until more money begins coming in."

On Saturday evening there was an invasion of workmen from Royal, many of
whom we're rough foreigners who came to Millville in search of
excitement, as a relief from their week's confinement at the pine woods
settlement at the mill. Skeelty, who thought he knew how to manage these
people, allowed every man, at the close of work on Saturday, to purchase
a pint of whiskey from the company store, charging an exorbitant price
that netted a huge profit. There was no strong drink to be had at
Millville, so the workmen brought their bottles to town, carousing on
the way, and thought it amusing to frighten the simple inhabitants of
the village by their rude shouts and ribald songs.

This annoyance had occurred several times since the establishment of the
mill, and Bob West had protested vigorously to Mr. Skeelty for giving
his men whiskey and turning them loose in a respectable community; but
the manager merely grinned and said he must keep "the boys" satisfied at
all hazards, and it was the business of the Millville people to protect
themselves if the workmen became too boisterous.

On this Saturday evening the girls were standing on the sidewalk outside
the printing office, awaiting the arrival of Arthur with the surrey,
when a group of the Royal workmen appeared in the dim light, swaggering
three abreast and indulging in offensive language. Uncle John's nieces
withdrew to the protection of the doorway, but a big bearded fellow in a
red shirt discovered them, and, lurching forward, pushed his evil
countenance in Patsy's face, calling to his fellows in harsh tones that
he had "found a partner for a dance."

An instant later he received a swinging blow above the ear that sent him
sprawling at full length upon the sidewalk, and a quiet voice said:

"Pardon me, ladies; it seemed necessary."

All three at once recognized the supposed tramp whom they had seen the
morning of their arrival, but whom Uncle John had reported to be one of
the bookkeepers at the paper mill. The young fellow had no time to say
more, for the downfall of their comrade brought a shout of rage from
the group of workmen, numbering nearly a dozen, and with one accord they
rushed upon the man who had dared champion the defenseless girls.

Beth managed to open the door of the office, through which Patsy and
Louise slipped instantly, but the younger girl, always cool in
emergencies, held the door ajar while she cried to the young man:

"Quick, sir--come inside!"

Really, he had no time to obey, just then. With his back to the door he
drove his fists at his assailants in a dogged, persistent way that
felled three more of them before the others drew away from his stalwart
bows. By that time Larry and Fitzgerald, who had been summoned by
Louise, rushed from the office armed with iron bars caught up at random,
both eager for a fight. The workmen, seeing the reinforcements, beat a
retreat, carrying their sadly pommeled comrades with them, but their
insulting language was not restricted until they had passed out of
hearing.

Then the young man turned, bowed gravely to the girls, who had now
ventured forth again, and without waiting to receive their thanks
marched calmly down the street.

When Arthur reached home with the girls, Mr. Merrick was very indignant
at his report of the adventure. He denounced Skeelty in unmeasured terms
and declared he would find a way to protect Millville from further
invasion by these rough and drunken workmen.

There was no Sunday paper, so the girlish editors found the morrow a
veritable day of rest. They all drove to Hooker's Falls to church and
returned to find that old Nora had prepared a fine chicken dinner for
them. Patsy had invited Hetty Hewitt, in whom she was now greatly
interested, to dine with them, and to the astonishment of all the artist
walked over to the farm arrayed in a new gown, having discarded the
disreputable costume in which she had formerly appeared. The new dress
was not in the best of taste and its loud checks made dainty Louise
shudder, but somehow Hetty seemed far more feminine than before, and she
had, moreover, washed herself carefully and tried to arrange her
rebellious hair.

"This place is doing me good," she confided to her girl employers,
after dinner, when they were seated in a group upon the lawn. "I'm
getting over my nervousness, and although I haven't drank a drop
stronger than water since I arrived. I feel a new sort of energy
coursing through my veins. Also I eat like a trooper--not at night, as I
used to, but at regular mealtime. And I'm behaving quite like a lady. Do
you know, I wouldn't be surprised to find it just as amusing to be
respectable as to--to be--the other thing?"

"You will find it far more satisfactory, I'm sure," replied Patsy
encouragingly. "What most surprises me is that with your talent and
education you ever got into such bad ways."

"Environment," said Hetty. "That's what did it. When I first went to New
York I was very young. A newspaper man took me out to dinner and asked
me to have a cocktail. I looked around the tables and saw other girls
drinking cocktails, so I took one. That was where I turned into the
rocky road. People get careless around the newspaper offices. They work
under a constant nervous strain and find that drink steadies them--for
a time. By and by they disappear; others take their places, and they are
never heard of again except in the police courts. I knew a girl, society
editor of a big paper, who drew her five thousand a year, at one time.
She got the cocktail habit and a week or so ago I paid her fine for
getting pinched while intoxicated. She was in rags and hadn't a red
cent. That set me thinking, and when Tommy fired me from his paper and
said the best he could do was to get me a job in the country, it seemed
as if my chance to turn over a new leaf had arrived. I've turned it,"
she added, with a pathetic sigh; "but whether it'll stay turned, or not,
is a question for the puzzle page."

"Haven't you a family to look after you--or for you to look after?"
asked Beth.

"No. Brother and I were left orphans in a Connecticut town, and he went
out West, to Chicago, and promised to send for me. Must have forgot that
promise, I guess, for I've never heard of Dan since. I could draw
pictures, so I went to New York and found a job. Guess that's my
biography, and it isn't as interesting as one of Hearst's editorials,
either."

Hetty seemed pleased and grateful to note the frank friendliness of her
girlish employers, in whom she recognized the admirable qualities she
had personally sacrificed for a life of dissipation. In the privacy of
her room at the hotel she had read the first copy of the Millville
Tribune and shrieked with laughter at the ingenuous editorials and
schoolgirl essays. Then she grew sober and thoughtful, envying in her
heart the sweetness and simplicity so apparent in every line. Here were
girls who possessed something infinitely higher than journalistic
acumen; they were true women, with genuine womanly qualities and natures
that betrayed their worth at a glance, as do ingots of refined gold.
What would not this waif from the grim underworld of New York have given
for such clear eyes, pure mind and unsullied heart? "I don't know as I
can ever swim in their pond," Hetty reflected, with honest regret, "but
there's a chance I can look folks square in the eye again--and that
wouldn't be so bad."

Monday morning, when Patsy, Louise and Beth drove to their office, Miss
Briggs said nonchalantly:

"McGaffey's gone."

"Gone! Gone where?" asked Patsy.

"Back to New York. Caught a freight from the Junction Saturday night."

"Isn't he coming back?" inquired Beth.

"Here's a letter he left," said Miss Briggs.

They read it together. It was very brief; "Climate don't suit me. No
excitement. I've quit. McGaffey."

"I suppose," said Patsy, with indignation, "he intended to go, all the
while, and only waited for his Saturday pay."

Miss Briggs nodded. She was at the telegraph instrument.

"What shall we do?" asked Louise. "Can anyone else work the press?"

"I'll find out," said Patsy, marching into the workroom.

Neither Fitz nor Larry would undertake to run the press. They said the
machine was so complicated it required an expert, and unless an
experienced pressman could be secured the paper must suspend
publication.

Here was an unexpected dilemma; one that for a time dazed them.

"These things always happen in the newspaper business," remarked Miss
Briggs, when appealed to. "Can't you telegraph to New York for another
pressman?"

"Yes; but he can't get here in time," said Patsy. "There's no Monday
train to Chazy Junction, at all, and it would be Wednesday morning
before a man could possibly arrive. To shut down the paper would ruin
it, for everyone would think we had failed in our attempt and it might
take us weeks to regain public confidence."

"I know," said Miss Briggs, composedly. "A paper never stops. Somehow or
other it always keeps going--even if the world turns somersaults and
stands on its head. You'll find a way, I'm sure."

But the bewildered girls had no such confidence. They drove back to the
farm to consult with Uncle John and Arthur.

"Let's take a look at that press, my dears," said Mr. Merrick. "I'm
something of a mechanic myself, or was in my young days, and I may be
able to work this thing until we can get a new pressman."

"I'll help you," said Arthur. "Anyone who can run an automobile ought to
be able to manage a printing press."

So they went to the office, took off their coats and examined the press;
but the big machine defied their combined intelligence. Uncle John
turned on the power. The cylinder groaned, swung half around, and then
the huge wooden "nippers" came down upon the table with a force that
shattered them to kindlings. At the crash Mr. Merrick involuntarily shut
down the machine, and then they all stood around and looked gloomily at
the smash-up and wondered if the damage was irreparable.

"Couldn't we print the paper on the job press?" asked the little
millionaire, turning to Fitzgerald.

"In sections, sir," replied Fitz, grinning. "Half a page at a time is
all we can manage, but we might be able to match margins so the thing
could be read."

"We'll try it," said Uncle John. "Do your best, my man, and if you can
help us out of this bog you shall be amply rewarded."

Fitz looked grave.

"Never knew of such a thing being done, sir," he remarked; "but that's
no reason it's impossible."

"'Twill be a horror of a make-up," added Larry, who did not relish his
part in the experiment.

Uncle John put on his coat and went into the front office, followed by
Arthur and the girls in dismal procession.

"A man to see the manager," announced Miss Briggs, nodding toward a
quiet figure seated on the "waiting bench."

The man stood up and bowed. It was the young bookkeeper from the paper
mill, who had so bravely defended the girls on Saturday night. Uncle
John regarded him with a frown.

"I suppose Skeelty has sent you to apologize," he said.

"No, sir; Skeelty is not in an apologetic mood," replied the man,
smiling. "He has fired me."

"What for?"

"Interfering with his workmen. The boys didn't like what I did the other
night and threatened to strike unless I was put in the discard."

"And now? asked Uncle John, looking curiously at the man.

"I'm out of work and would like a job, sir."

"What can you do?"

"Anything."

"That means nothing at all."

"I beg your pardon. Let me say that I'm not afraid to tackle anything."

"Can you run a power printing press?"

"Yes, sir."

"Ever had any experience?"

The young man hesitated.

"I'm not sure," he replied slowly; "but I think I have."

This statement would not have been encouraging under ordinary
circumstances, but in this emergency Uncle John accepted it.

"What is your name?" he asked.

Another moment's hesitation.

"Call me Smith, please."

"First name?"

The man smiled.

"Thursday," he said.

All his hearers seemed astonished at this peculiar name, but Mr. Merrick
said abruptly: "Follow me, Thursday Smith."

The man obeyed, and the girls and Arthur trotted after them back to the
pressroom.

"Our pressman has deserted us without warning," explained Mr. Merrick.
"None of our other employees is able to run the thing. If you can master
it so as to run off the paper tonight, the job is yours."

Thursday Smith took off his jacket--a cheap khaki affair--and rolled up
his sleeves. Then he carefully looked over the press and found the
damaged nippers. Without a word he picked up a wrench, released the stub
ends of the broken fingers, gathered the pieces in his hand and asked:
"Where is there a carpenter shop?"

"Can you operate this press?" asked Mr. Merrick.

"Yes, sir."

"The carpenter shop is a little shanty back of the hotel. You'll find
Lon Taft there."

Smith walked away, and Mr. Merrick drew a long breath of relief.

"That's good luck," he said. "You may quit worrying, now, my dears."

"Are you sure he's a good pressman, Uncle?"

"No; but _he_ is sure. I've an idea he wouldn't attempt the thing,
otherwise."

Mr. Merrick returned to the farm, while Arthur drove Louise over to
Huntingdon to gather items for the paper, and Patsy and Beth sat in the
office arranging copy.

In an hour Smith came back with new nippers, which he fitted to the
steel frame. Then he oiled the press, started it going a few
revolutions, to test its condition, and handled the machinery so
dexterously and with such evident confidence that Larry nodded to Fitz
and muttered, "He'll do."

McGaffey, knowing he was about to decamp, had not kept the press very
clean; but Thursday Smith put in the afternoon and evening removing
grease, polishing and rubbing, until the huge machine shone resplendent.
The girls went home at dinner time, but they sent Arthur to the office
at midnight to see if the new pressman was proving capable. The Tuesday
morning _Tribune_ greeted them at the breakfast table, and the presswork
was remarkably clean and distinct.




CHAPTER X

THURSDAY SMITH


In a day or so Mr. Merrick received a letter from Mr. Skeelty, the
manager of the paper mill. He said: "I understand you have employed one
of my discharged workmen, who is named Thursday Smith. My men don't want
him in this neighborhood, and have made a strong protest. I therefore
desire you to discharge the fellow at once, and in case you refuse to
accede to this reasonable demand I shall shut off your power."

Mr. Merrick replied: "Shut off the power and I'll sue you for damages.
My contract with you fully protects me. Permit me a request in turn:
that you mind your own business. The _Millville Tribune_ will employ
whomsoever it chooses."

Uncle John said nothing to the girls concerning this correspondence,
nor did he mention it to the new pressman.

On Wednesday Larry and Fitz sent in their "resignations," to take effect
Saturday night. They told Patsy, who promptly interviewed them, that the
town was altogether too slow for men accustomed to the city, but to
Smith they admitted they feared trouble from the men at the mill.

"I talked with one of the mill hands last night," said Larry, "and
they're up to mischief. If you stay here, my boy, you'd better watch
out, for it's you they're after, in the first place, and Skeelty has
told 'em he wouldn't be annoyed if they wiped out the whole newspaper
plant at the same time."

Thursday nodded but said nothing. He began watching the work of the two
men with comprehensive care. When Mr. Merrick came down to the office
during the forenoon to consult with his nieces about replacing the two
men who had resigned, Smith asked him for a private interview.

"Come into the office," said Uncle John.

When the man found the three girl journalists present he hesitated, but
Mr. Merrick declared they were the ones most interested in anything an
employee of the paper might have to say to his principals.

"I am told, sir," Thursday began, "that the people at the mill have
boycotted this paper."

"They've cancelled all their subscriptions," replied Beth; "but as they
had not paid for them it won't hurt us any."

"It seems the trouble started through your employing me," resumed the
young man; "so it will be best for you to let me go."

"Never!" cried Mr. Merrick, firmly. "Do you suppose I'll allow that
rascal Skeelty to dictate to us for a single minute? Not by a jug full!
And the reason the men dislike you is because you pounded some of them
unmercifully when they annoyed my girls. Where did you learn to use your
fists so cleverly, Smith?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Well, you have earned our gratitude, and we're going to stand by you. I
don't mind a bit of a row, when I'm on the right side of an argument. Do
you?"

"Not at all, sir; but the young ladies--"

"They're pretty good fighters, too; so don't worry."

Thursday was silent a moment. Then he said:

"Fitzgerald and Doane tell me they're going to quit, Saturday."

"It is true," replied Patsy. "I'm sorry, for they seem good men and we
may have trouble replacing them."

"They are not needed here, Miss Doyle," said Smith. "There isn't a great
deal of electrotyping to do, or much job printing. More than half the
time the two men are idle. It's the same way with my own job. Three
hours a day will take care of the press and make the regular run. If you
will permit me, I am sure I can attend to all the work, unaided."

They looked at one another in amazement.

"How about the make-up?" asked Uncle John.

"I can manage that easily, sir. I've been watching the operation and
understand it perfectly."

"And you believe you can do the work of three men?"

"Three men were unnecessary in a small plant like this, sir. Whoever
sent them to you did not understand very well your requirements. I've
been watching the compositors, too, and your three girls are one too
many. Two are sisters, and can set all the type very easily. I recommend
that you send the other back to New York."

They considered this advice seriously.

"I think Mr. Smith is right," observed Patsy. "The girls have not seemed
busy, at all, and spend most of their time laughing and talking
together."

"It will cut down expenses a lot," said Beth, "and I'm sure we ought to
be able to run this paper more economically than we have been doing."

Uncle John looked at the man thoughtfully.

"Where did you learn the printing business?" he asked.

"I--I don't know, sir."

"What offices have you worked in?"

"I cannot tell you that, sir."

"You seem to answer all my questions with the statement that you 'don't
know,'" asserted Mr. Merrick, with an annoyed frown. "Is there any
reason you should refuse to tell us of your former life?"

"None whatever, sir."

"Who are you, Smith?"

"I--I don't know, sir."

Mr. Merrick was getting provoked.

"This obstinacy is not likely to win our confidence," he said. "Under
the circumstances I think we ought to know something more about you,
before we allow you to undertake so much responsibility. You seem a
bright, able young man, and I've no doubt you understand the work you're
about to undertake, but if we have no knowledge of your antecedents you
may cause us considerable future trouble."

Smith bowed his head and his cheeks flamed red.

"I have no knowledge of my antecedents to confide to you, sir," he said
in a low voice.

Uncle John sighed regretfully and turned away, but Patsy looked at the
man with new interest.

"Won't you please explain that a little more fully?" she gently
inquired.

"I am quite willing to tell all I know," said he; "but that is very
little, I assure you. Two years ago last May, on the morning of
Thursday, the twenty-second, I awoke to find myself lying in a ditch
beside a road. Of my life previous to that time I have no knowledge
whatever."

The three girls regarded him with startled eyes. Uncle John turned from
the window to examine the young man with new interest.

"Were you injured?" he asked.

"My right ankle was sprained and I had a cut under my left eye--you can
see the scar still."

"You have no idea how you came there?"

"Not the slightest. I did not recognize the surrounding country; I had
no clear impression as to who I was. There was a farmhouse a quarter of
a mile away; I limped to it and they gave me some breakfast. I found I
was fifty-six miles from New York. The farmer had heard of no accident;
there was no railway nearer than six miles; the highway was little
used. I told the good people my story and they suspected me of being
drunk or crazy, but did not credit a single word I said."

"That was but natural," said Uncle John.

"After breakfast I took stock of myself. In my pockets I found a
twenty-dollar bill and some silver. I wore a watch and chain and a ring
set with a good-sized diamond. My clothing seemed good, but the ditch
had soiled it. I had no hat, nor could the farmer find one when I sent
him back to look for it. My mind was not wholly a blank; I seemed to
have a fair knowledge of life, and when the farmer mentioned New York
the city seemed familiar to me. But in regard to myself, my past
history--even my name--I was totally ignorant. All personal
consciousness dated from the moment I woke up in the ditch."

"How wonderful!" exclaimed Louise.

"And you haven't solved the mystery yet, after two years?" asked Patsy.

"No, Miss Doyle. I hired the farmer to drive me to the railway station,
where I took the train to New York. I seemed to know the city, but no
recollection guided me to home or friends. I went to a small hotel,
took a room, and began to read all the newspapers, seeking to discover
if anyone was reported missing. The sight of automobiles led me to
conceive the theory that I had been riding in one of those machines
along a country road when something threw me out. My head might have
struck a stump or stone and the blow rendered me insensible. Something
in the nature of the thing, or in my physical condition, deprived me of
all knowledge of the past. Since then I have read of several similar
cases. The curious thing about my own experience was that I could find
no reference to my disappearance, in any way, nor could I learn of any
automobile accident that might account for it. I walked the streets day
after day, hoping some acquaintance would accost me. I waited patiently
for some impulse to direct me to my former haunts. I searched the
newspapers persistently for a clue; but nothing rewarded me.

"After spending all my money and the proceeds of my watch and diamond, I
began to seek employment; but no one would employ a man without
recommendations or antecedents. I did not know what work I was capable
of doing. So finally I left the city and for more than two years I have
been wandering from one part of the country to another, hoping that some
day I would recognize a familiar spot. I have done odd jobs, at times,
but my fortunes went from bad to worse until of late I have become no
better than the typical tramp."

"How did you secure employment as a book-keeper for Skeelty?" asked
Uncle John.

"I heard a new mill had started at Royal and walked up there to inquire
for work. The manager asked if I could keep books, and I said yes."

"Have you ever kept books before?"

"Not that I know of; but I did it very well. I seemed to comprehend the
work at once, and needed no instruction. Often during these two years I
have encountered similar curious conditions. I sold goods in a store and
seemed to know the stocks; I worked two weeks in a telegraph office and
discovered I knew the code perfectly; I've shod horses for a country
blacksmith, wired a house for electric lights and compounded
prescriptions in a drug store. Whatever I have undertaken to do I seem
able to accomplish, and so it is hard for me to guess what profession I
followed before my memory deserted me."

"You did not retain any position for long, it seems," remarked Uncle
John.

"No; I was always impatient to move on, always hoping to arrive at some
place so familiar that my lost memory would return to me. The work I
have mentioned was nearly all secured during the first year. After I
became seedy and disreputable in appearance people were more apt to
suspect me and work was harder to obtain."

"Why did you come to Millville?" asked Louise.

"You brought me here," he answered, with a smile. "I caught a ride on
your private car, when it left New York, not caring much where it might
take me. When I woke up the next morning the car was sidetracked at
Chazy Junction, and as this is a section I have never before explored I
decided to stay here for a time. That is all of my story, I believe."

"Quite remarkable!" declared Mr. Merrick, emphatically. The girls, too,
had been intensely interested in the strange recital.

"You seem educated," said Patsy thoughtfully; "therefore you must have
come from a good family."

"That does not seem conclusive," replied Thursday Smith, deprecatingly,
"although I naturally hope my family was respectable. I have been
inclined to resent the fact that none of my friends or relatives has
ever inquired what became of me."

"Are you sure they have not?"

"I have watched the papers carefully. In two years I have followed
several clues. A bricklayer disappeared, but his drowned body was
finally found; a college professor was missing, but he was sixty years
of age; a young man in New York embezzled a large sum and hid himself. I
followed that trail, although regretfully, but the real embezzler was
caught the day I presented myself in his place. Perhaps the most curious
experience was in the case of a young husband who deserted his wife and
infant child. She advertised for him; he had disappeared about the time
I had found myself; so I went to see her."

"What was the result?" asked Beth.

"She said I was not her husband, but if he failed to come back I might
take his place, provided I would guarantee to support her."

During the laugh that followed, Thursday Smith went back to his work and
an animated discussion concerning his strange story followed.

"He seems honest," said Louise, "but I blame a man of his ability for
becoming a mere tramp. He ought to have asserted himself and maintained
the position in which he first found himself."

"How?" inquired Patsy.

"At that time he was well dressed and had a watch and diamond ring. If
he had gone to some one and frankly told his story he could surely have
obtained a position to correspond with his personality. But instead of
this he wasted his time and the little capital he possessed in doing
nothing that was sensible."

"It is easy for us to criticise the man," remarked Beth, "and he may be
sorry, now, that he did not act differently. But I think, in his place,
I should have made the same attempt he did to unravel the mystery of his
lost identity. So much depended upon that."

"It's all very odd and incomprehensible," said Uncle John. "I wonder who
he can be."

"I suppose he calls himself Thursday because that was the day he first
found himself," observed Patsy.

"Yes; and Smith was the commonest name he could think of to go with it.
The most surprising thing," added their uncle, "is the fact that a man
of his standing was not missed or sought for."

"Perhaps," suggested Louise, "he had been insane and escaped from some
asylum."

"Then how did he come to be lying in a ditch?" questioned Patsy; "and
wouldn't an escaped maniac be promptly hunted down and captured?"

"I think so," agreed Mr. Merrick. "For my part, I'm inclined to accept
the man's theory that it was an automobile accident."

"Then what became of the car, or of the others in it?"

"It's no use," said Beth, shaking her head gravely. "If Thursday Smith,
who is an intelligent young man, couldn't solve the mystery himself, it
isn't likely we can do so."

"We know as much as he does, as far as that is concerned," said Patsy,
"and our combined intelligence ought at least to equal his. I'm sorry
for the poor man, and wish we might help him to come to his own again."

They all agreed to this sentiment and while the girls attended to their
editorial duties they had the amazing story of Thursday Smith uppermost
in their minds. When the last copy had been placed in the hands of Miss
Briggs and they were driving to the farm--at a little after six
o'clock--they renewed the interesting discussion.

Just before reaching the farm Hetty Hewitt came out of the wood just in
front of them. She was clothed in her short skirt and leggings and bore
a fishing rod and a creel.

"What luck?" asked Patsy, stopping the horse.

"Seven trout," answered the artist. "I might have caught more, but the
poor little creatures squirmed and struggled so desperately that I
hadn't the heart to destroy any more of them. Won't you take them home
for Mr. Merrick's breakfast?"

Patsy looked at the girl musingly.

"Jump in, Hetty," she said; "I'm going to take you with us for the
night. The day's fishing has tired you; there are deep circles under
your eyes; and that stuffy old hotel isn't home-like. Jump in."

Hetty flushed with pleasure, but hesitated to accept the invitation.

"I--I'm not dressed for--"

"You're all right," said Beth, supporting her cousin's proposition.
"We'll lend you anything you need."

"Do come, Miss Hewitt," added Louise.

Hetty sighed, then smiled and finally climbed into the surrey.

"In New York," she said, as they started on, "I've sometimes hobnobbed
with editors; but this is somewhat different."

"In what way?" asked Patsy casually.

"You're not real journalists, you know, and--"

"Why aren't we journalists?" asked Louise.

For a moment Hetty was puzzled how to reply.

"You are doing very good editorial work," she said mendaciously, "but,
after all, you are only playing at journalism. The real journalist--as I
know him--is a Bohemian; a font of cleverness running to waste; a
reckless, tender-hearted, jolly, careless ne'er-do-well who works like a
Trojan and plays like a child. He is very sophisticated at his desk and
very artless when he dives into the underworld for rest and recreation.
He lives at high tension, scintillates, burns his red fire without
discrimination and is shortly extinguished. You are not like that. You
can't even sympathize with that sort of person. But I can, for I'm cut
from a remnant of the same cloth."

"Scintillate all you want to, Hetty," cried Patsy with a laugh; "but
you're not going to be extinguished. For we, the imitation journalists,
have taken you under our wings. There's no underworld at Millville, and
the only excitement we can furnish just now is a night with us at the
old farm."

"That," replied Hetty, "is indeed a real excitement. You can't quite
understand it, perhaps; but it's so--so very different from what I'm
accustomed to."

Uncle John welcomed the girl artist cordially and under his hospitable
roof the waif soon felt at ease. At dinner the conversation turned upon
Thursday Smith and his peculiar experience. Beth asked Hetty if she knew
the man.

"Yes," replied the girl; "I've seen him at the office and we've
exchanged a word or two. But he boards with Thorne, the liveryman, and
not at the hotel."

"You have never seen him before you met him here?"

"Never."

"I wonder," said Louise musingly, "if he is quite right in his mind. All
this story may be an hallucination, you know."

"He's a very clever fellow," asserted Hetty, "and such a loss of memory
is by no means so uncommon as you think. Our brains are queer
things--mine is, I know--and it doesn't take much to throw their
machinery out of gear. Once I knew a reporter who was worried and
over-worked. He came to the office one morning and said he was George
Washington, the Commander of the Continental Army. In all other ways he
was sane enough, and we humored him and called him 'General.' At the end
of three months the idea quit him as suddenly as it had come on, and he
was not only normal but greatly restored in strength of intellect
through the experience. Perhaps some of the overworked brain cells had
taken a rest and renewed their energy. It would not surprise me if some
day Thursday Smith suddenly remembered who he was."

[Footnote: This anecdote is true.--_Author._]

"In the meantime," said Uncle John, "I'm going to make an effort to
discover his identity."

"In what way, Uncle?" asked Patsy.

"I'll set Fogerty, who is a clever detective, at work. No man can
disappear from his customary haunts without leaving some sort of a
record behind him, and Fogerty may be able to uncover the mystery in a
short time."

"Then we'll lose our pressman," declared Beth; "for I'm positive that
Thursday Smith was a person of some importance in his past life."




CHAPTER XI

THE HONER'BLE OJOY BOGLIN


One morning while Patsy was alone in her office, busied over her work,
the door softly opened and a curious looking individual stood before
her.

He was thin in form, leathery skinned and somewhat past the middle age
of life. His clothing consisted of a rusty black Prince Albert coat,
rusty trousers to match, which were carefully creased, cowhide shoes
brilliant with stove polish, a tall silk hat of antiquated design, and a
frayed winged collar decorated with a black tie on which sparkled a
large diamond attached to a chain. He had chin whiskers of a sandy gray
color and small gray eyes that were both shrewd and suspicious in
expression.

He stood in the doorway a moment, attentively eyeing the girl, while
she in turn examined him with an amusement she could not quite suppress.
Then he said, speaking in a low, diffident voice:

"I'm lookin' for the editor."

"I am the editor," asserted Patsy.

"Really?"

"It is quite true."

He seemed disconcerted a moment, striving to regain his assurance. Then
he took out a well-worn pocketbook and from its depths abstracted a
soiled card which, leaning forward, he placed carefully upon the table
before Patsy. She glanced at it and read: "Hon. Ojoy Boglin, Hooker's
Falls, Chazy County."

"Oh," said she, rather surprised; "are you Mr. Boglin?"

"I am the Honer'ble Ojoy Boglin, miss," he replied, dwelling lovingly
upon the "Honer'ble."

"I have not had the honor of your acquaintance," said she, deciding she
did not like her visitor. "What is your business, please?"

The Hon. Ojoy coughed. Then he suddenly remembered he was in the
presence of a lady and took off his hat. Next he slid slowly into the
vacant chair at the end of the table.

"First," he began, "I want to compliment you on your new paper. It's a
good thing, and I like it. It's what's been needed in these 'ere parts a
long time, and it's talked about all over Chazy County."

"Thank you," said the editor briefly, for the praise was given in a
perfunctory way that irritated her.

"The only other papers in this senatorial deestric', which covers three
counties," continued the visitor, in impressive tones, "air weeklies,
run by political mud-slingers that's bought up by the Kleppish gang."

"What is the Kleppish gang?" she asked, wonderingly.

"The supporters o' that rascal, Colonel Kleppish, who has been
occupyin' my berth for goin' on eight years," he said with fierce
indignation.

"I fear I do not understand," remarked Patsy, really bewildered. "What
was your berth, which Colonel Kleppish has--has usurped?"

"See that 'Honer'ble' on the card?"

"I do."

"That means I were senator--state senator--which makes any common man
honer'ble, accordin' to law, which it's useless to dispute. I were
elected fer this deestric', which covers three counties," he said
proudly, "an' I served my country in that capacity."

"Oh, I see. But you're not state senator now?"

"No; Kleppish beat me for the nomination, after I'd served only one
term."

"Why?"

"Eh? Why did he git the nomination? 'Cause he bought up the
newspapers--the country weeklies--and set them to yellin' 'graft.' He
made 'em say I went into office poor, and in two years made a fortune."

"Did you?" asked the girl.

He shuffled in his seat.

"I ain't used to talkin' politics with a girl," he admitted; "but seein'
as you're the editor of this paper--a daily, by Jupe!--you've probably
got a head on you and understand that a man don't get into office for
his health. There's a lot of bother in servin' your country, and a man
oughter be well paid for it. I did jest like the others do--like
Kleppish is doin' right now--but the reg'lar voters don't understand
politics, and when the howl went up about graft, backed by Kleppish's
bought-up newspapers, they turned me down cold. I've been eight years
watchin' for a chance to get in again, an' now I've got it."

"This is very interesting, I'm sure," remarked Patsy; "but our paper
doesn't go much into local politics, Mr. Boglin, and I'm very busy
to-day."

"Honer'ble Ojoy Boglin," he said, correcting her; but he did not take
the hint to leave.

Patsy picked up her pencil as if to resume her work, while he eyed her
with a countenance baffled and uncertain. Presently he asked:

"Has Kleppish got this paper too?"

"No," she coldly replied.

"I thought I'd likely head him off, you being so new. See here,
Editor--"

"I am Miss Doyle, sir."

"Glad to know you, Miss Doyle. What I was about to remark is this: The
election for senator comes up agin in September and I want this paper to
pull for me. Bein' as it's a daily it's got more power than all of
Kleppish's weeklies put together, and if you work the campaign proper
I'll win the nomination hands down. This is a strong Republican
deestric', and to git nominated on the Republican ticket is the same as
an election. So what I want is the nomination. What do you say?"

Patsy glared at him and decided that as far as appearances went he was
not a fit candidate for any office, however humble. But she answered
diplomatically:

"I will inquire into the condition of politics in this district, Mr.
Boglin, and try to determine which candidate is the most deserving.
Having reached a decision, the _Millville Tribune_ will espouse the
cause of the best man--if it mentions local politics at all."

The Hon. Ojoy gave a dissatisfied grunt.

"That means, in plain words," he suggested, "that you'll give Kleppish a
chance to bid against me. But I need this paper, and I'm willin' to pay
a big price for it. Let Kleppish go, and we'll make our dicker right
now, on a lib'ral basis. It's the only way you can make your paper pay.
I've got money, Miss Doyle. I own six farms near Hooker's Falls, which
is in this county, and six hundred acres of good pine forest, and I'm
director in the Bank of Huntingdon, with plenty of money out on
interest. Also I own half the stock in the new paper mill at Royal--"

"You do?" she exclaimed. "I thought Mr. Skeelty--"

"Skeelty's the head man, of course," he said. "He came to me about the
mill proposition and I went in with him. I own all the forest around
Royal. Bein' manager, and knowin' the business, Skeelty stood out for
fifty-one shares of stock, which is the controllin' interest; but I own
all the rest, and the mill's makin' good money. People don't know I'm in
that deal, and of course this is all confidential and not to be talked
about."

"Very well, sir. But I fear you have mistaken the character of our
paper," said Patsy quietly. "We are quite independent, Mr. Boglin, and
intend to remain so--even if we can't make the paper pay. In other
words, the _Millville Daily Tribune_ can't be bought."

He stared in amazement; then scratched his ear with a puzzled air.

"Such talk as that means somethin'," he asserted, gropingly, "but what
it means, blamed if I know! Newspapers never turn money down unless
they're a'ready bought, or have got a grouch of their own.... Say!" he
suddenly cried, as an inspiration struck him, "you ain't got anything
agin the mill at Royal, or agin Skeelty, have you?"

"I have, sir!" declared Patsy, raising her head to frown discouragingly
upon the Honer'ble Ojoy. "Mr. Skeelty is acting in a very disagreeable
manner. He has not only boycotted our paper and refused to pay for the
subscriptions he engaged, but I understand he is encouraging his workmen
to annoy the Millville people, and especially this printing office."

"Well--durn--Skeelty!" ejaculated Mr. Boglin, greatly discomposed by
this statement. "But I'll fix all that, Miss Doyle," he added, eagerly.
"Skeelty's my partner and he's got to do what I say or I'll make trouble
for him. You dicker with me for the support of your paper and I'll
guarantee a hundred subscriptions from Royal and get you an apology from
Skeelty and a promise he'll behave an' keep his men to home. And all
that's outside the price I'll agree to pay."

Patsy's eyes were full of scorn.

"I won't dicker with you an instant," she firmly declared. "I don't know
Colonel Kleppish, or what his character is, but I'm very sure he's the
better man and that the people have made no mistake in electing him in
your place. No respectable candidate for office would attempt to buy the
support of a newspaper, and I advise you to change the wording on your
card. Instead of 'Honorable' it should read 'Dishonorable' Ojoy Boglin.
Good day, sir!"

Mr. Boglin's face turned white with rage. He half rose from his seat,
but sat down again with a vicious snarl.

"I've coaxed, so far, young woman," he said grimly, "but I guess it's
time I showed my hand. You'll either run this paper in my interest or
I'll push Skeelty on to make the town too hot to hold you. I've got
power in this county, even if I ain't senator, and you'll feel that
power if you dare oppose me. Take your choice, girl--either to make good
money out o' this campaign, or be run out of town, neck an' crop! It's
up to you to decide."

"In thirty seconds," said Patsy, her face as white as was Boglin's, "I
shall ring this bell to summon my men to throw you out."

The Honer'ble Ojoy slowly rose and put on his hat.

"Look out!" he said warningly.

"I will," snapped Patsy.

"This ain't the end of it, girl!"

"There are ten seconds left," she said.

He picked up his card, turned his back and walked out, leaving his
opponent trembling betwixt agitation and righteous indignation. A few
moments later Bob West came in and looked at the girl editor curiously.

"Ojoy Boglin has been here," he said.

"The Honer'ble Ojoy, if you please," answered Patsy, with a laugh that
bordered on hysteria.

The hardware man nodded, his eyes reading her face.

"You were quite right to turn him down," he asserted.

"It was the only thing to do," responded the girl, wondering how he
knew.

"But Boglin is a dangerous man," resumed West. "Look out for him. Miss
Doyle."

"Yes; he told me to do that, and I will," said she, more quietly. "He is
Skeelty's partner."

"And you're not afraid of him?"

"Why should I be, Mr. West?"

He smiled.

"I'm justice of the peace here. If there's a hint of trouble from Boglin
or Skeelty, come directly to me."

"Thank you, Mr. West. I will."

With this he nodded cheerfully and went away.




CHAPTER XII

MOLLY SIZER'S PARTY


The people of Chazy County were very proud of the _Millville Tribune_,
the only daily paper in that section of the state. It was really a very
good newspaper, if small in size, and related the news of the day as
promptly as the great New York journals did.

Arthur Weldon had not been very enthusiastic about the paper at any
time, although he humored the girls by attending in a good-natured way
to the advertising, hiring some of the country folk to get
subscriptions, and keeping the books. He was a young man of considerable
education who had inherited a large fortune, safely invested, and
therefore had no need, through financial necessity, to interest himself
in business of any sort. He allowed the girls to print his name as
editor in chief, but he did no editorial work at all, amusing himself
these delightful summer days by wandering in the woods, where he
collected botanical specimens, or sitting with Uncle John on the lawn,
where they read together or played chess. Both the men were glad the
girls were happy in their work and enthusiastic over the success of
their audacious venture. Beth was developing decided talent as a writer
of editorials and her articles were even more thoughtful and dignified
than were those of Patsy. The two girls found plenty to occupy them at
the office, while Louise did the reportorial work and flitted through
Millville and down to Huntingdon each day in search of small items of
local interest. She grew fond of this work, for it brought her close to
the people and enabled her to study their characters and peculiarities.
Her manner of approaching the simple country folk was so gracious and
winning that they freely gave her any information they possessed, and
chatted with her unreservedly.

Sometimes Louise would make her rounds alone, but often Arthur would
join her for an afternoon drive to Huntingdon, and it greatly amused
him to listen to his girl-wife's adroit manner of "pumping the natives."

About halfway to Huntingdon was the Sizer Farm, the largest and most
important in that vicinity. Old Zeke Sizer had a large family--five boys
and three girls--and they were noted as quite the most aggressive and
disturbing element in the neighborhood. Old Zeke was rude and coarse and
swore like a trooper, so his sons could not be expected to excel him in
refinement. Bill Sizer, the eldest, was a hard drinker, and people who
knew him asserted that he "never drew a sober breath." The other sons
were all quarrelsome in disposition and many a free fight was indulged
in among them whenever disputes arose. They were industrious farmers,
though, and the three girls and their mother worked from morning till
night, so the farm prospered and the Sizers were reputed to be
"well-off."

Molly, the eldest girl, had attracted Louise, who declared she was
pretty enough to arrest attention in any place. Indeed, this girl was a
"raving beauty" in her buxom, countrified way, and her good looks were
the pride of the Sizer family and the admiration of the neighbors. The
other two were bouncing, merry girls, rather coarse in manner, as might
be expected from their environment; but Molly, perhaps fully conscious
of her prettiness, assumed certain airs and graces and a regal
deportment that brought even her big, brutal brothers to her feet in
adoration.

The Sizers were among the first subscribers to the _Millville Tribune_
and whenever Louise stopped at the farmhouse for news the family would
crowd around her, ignoring all duties, and volunteer whatever
information they possessed. For when they read their own gossip in the
local column it gave them a sort of proprietary interest in the paper,
and Bill had once thrashed a young clerk at Huntingdon for questioning
the truth of an item the Sizers had contributed.

One day when Louise and Arthur stopped at the farm, Mollie ran out with
an eager face to say that Friday was her birthday and the Sizers were to
give a grand party to celebrate it.

"We want you to come over an' write it up, Mrs. Weldon," said the girl.
"They're comin' from twenty mile around, fer the dance, an' we've got
the orchestry from Malvern to play for us. Pop's goin' to spend a lot of
money on refreshments an' it'll be the biggest blow-out Chazy County
ever seen!"

"I think I can write up the party without being present, Mollie,"
suggested Louise.

"No; you come over. I read once, in a novel, how an editor come to a
swell party an' writ about all the dresses an' things--said what
everybody wore, you know. I'm goin' to have a new dress, an' if
ever'thing's described right well we'll buy a lot of papers to send to
folks we know in Connecticut."

"Well," said Louise, with a sigh, "I'll try to drive over for a little
while. It is to be Saturday, you say?"

"Yes; the birthday's Friday and the dance Saturday night, rain or shine.
An' you might bring the chief editor, your husband, an' try a dance with
us. It wouldn't hurt our reputation any to have you folks mingle with us
on this festive occasion," she added airily.

They had a good laugh over this invitation when it was reported at Mr.
Merrick's dinner table, and Patsy insisted that Louise must write up
the party.

"It will be fun to give it a 'double head' and a big send-off," she
said. "Write it up as if it were a real society event, dear, and exhaust
your vocabulary on the gowns. You'll have to invent some Frenchy names
to describe those, I guess, for they'll be wonders; and we'll wind up
with a list of 'those present.'"

So on Saturday evening Arthur drove his wife over to the Sizer farm, and
long before they reached there they heard the scraping of fiddles,
mingled with shouts and boisterous laughter. It was a prohibition
district, to be sure, but old Sizer had imported from somewhere outside
the "dry zone" a quantity of liquors more remarkable for strength than
quality, and with these the guests had been plied from the moment of
their arrival. Most of them were wholly unused to such libations, so by
the time Arthur and Louise arrived, the big living room of the farmhouse
presented an appearance of wild revelry that was quite deplorable.

Molly welcomed them with wild enthusiasm and big Bill, her adoring
brother, demanded in a loud voice if Arthur did not consider her the
"Belle of Chazy County."

"They ain't a stunner in the state as kin hold a candle to our Molly,"
he added, and then with uncertain gait he left the "reporters" with the
promise to "bring 'em a drink."

"Come, Louise," said Arthur, quietly, "let's get out of here."

He drew her to the door and as a dance was just starting they managed to
escape without notice.

"What a disgraceful scene!" cried Louise, when they were on their way
home; "and to think of such a shocking carousal being held in good old
Chazy County, where morals are usually irreproachable! I shall not
mention the affair in the _Tribune_ at all."

But Patsy, who had a managing editor's respect for news of any sort,
combatted this determination and begged Louise to write up Molly Sizer's
party without referring to its deplorable features.

"It isn't policy to offend the Sizers," she said, "for although they
are coarse and common they have shown a friendly spirit toward the
paper. Moreover, the enmity of such people--which would surely result
from our ignoring the birthday party--would keep us in hot water."

So Louise, though reluctantly, wrote up the party and the manuscript was
sent over to Miss Briggs Sunday afternoon, so it would get a place in
Monday morning's _Tribune_.

Uncle John had the paper at breakfast on Monday, and he gave an amused
laugh as his eye caught the report of the Sizer party.

"This is a good one on you, Louise," he exclaimed. "You say that Miss
Molly, 'looking more lovely than ever in her handsome new gown, greeted
her guests with a roughish smile.'"

"A what?" demanded Louise, horrified.

"A 'roughish' smile."

"Oh; that's a mistake," she said, glancing at the item. "What I said was
a 'roguish' smile; but there's been a typographical error which Miss
Briggs must have overlooked in reading the proof."

"Nevertheless," remarked Arthur, "the statement isn't far wrong.
Everything was rough, including the smiles, as far as I noted that
remarkable gathering."

"But--see here!" cried Patsy; "that's a dreadful mistake. That spoils
all the nice things you said about the girl, Louise. I hope the Sizers
won't notice it."

But the Sizers did, and were frantic with rage over what they deemed was
a deliberate insult to Molly. Several young men who had come from
distances to attend the birthday party had stayed over Sunday at the
farmhouse, where the revelry still continued in a fitful way, due to
vain attempts to relieve racking headaches by further libations. Monday
morning found the dissipated crew still the guests of the Sizers, and
when big Bill slowly spelled out the assertion made by the _Tribune_
that his sister had "a roughish smile" loud cries of indignation arose.
Molly first cried and then had hysterics and screamed vigorously; Bill
swore vengeance on the _Millville Tribune_ and all connected with it,
while the guests gravely asserted it was "a low-down, measly trick"
which the Sizers ought to resent. They all began drinking again, to
calm their feelings, and after the midday dinner Bill Sizer grabbed a
huge cowhide whip and started to Millville to "lick the editor to a
standstill." A wagonload of his guests accompanied him, and Molly
pleaded with her brother not to hurt Mrs. Weldon.

"I won't; but I'll cowhide that fresh husband of hers," declared Bill.
"He's the editor--the paper says so--and he's the one I'm after!"




CHAPTER XIII

BOB WEST INTERFERES


It was unfortunate that at that time Thursday Smith had gone up the
electric line toward Royal, to inspect it. In the office were Patsy,
Hetty Hewitt--who was making a drawing--Arthur Weldon, engaged upon his
books, and finally, seated in an easy-chair from which he silently
watched them work, old Bob West, the hardware man. Louise and Beth had
driven over to the Junction to write up an accident, one of the trainmen
having caught his hand in a coupling, between two freight cars.

Bob West often dropped into the office, which was next door to his own
place of business, but he was a silent man and had little to say on
these visits. In his early days he had wandered pretty much over the
whole world, and he could relate some interesting personal adventures
if he chose. In this retired village West was the one inhabitant
distinguished above his fellows for his knowledge of the world. In his
rooms over the store, where few were ever invited, he had a fine library
of unusual books and a rare collection of curios gathered from foreign
lands. It was natural that such a man would be interested in so unique
an experiment as the _Millville Tribune_, and he watched its conduct
with curiosity but a constantly growing respect for the three girl
journalists. No one ever minded when he came into the office, nodded and
sat down. Sometimes he would converse with much freedom; at other times
the old gentleman remained an hour without offering a remark, and went
away with a brief parting nod.

It was West who first saw, through the window, the wagonload of men from
the Sizer farm come dashing up the street at a gallop. Instinctively,
perhaps, he knew trouble was brewing, but he never altered his
expression or his attitude, even when the wagon stopped at the printing
office and the passengers leaped out.

In marched Bill Sizer at the head of his following, cowhide in hand.
Patsy, her face flushing scarlet, stood up and faced the intruders.

"Stand back, girl!" cried Sizer in a fierce tone; "it's that coward
editor I'm after," pointing his whip with trembling hand at Arthur. "My
sister Molly may be rough, an' hev a rough smile, but I'll be dinged ef
I don't skin the man thet prints it in a paper!"

"Good fer you, Bill!" murmured his friends, approvingly.

Arthur leaned back and regarded his accuser in wonder. The big table,
littered with papers, was between them.

"Come out o' there, ye measly city chap, an' take yer medicine," roared
Bill, swinging his whip. "I'll larn ye to come inter a decent
neighborhood an' slander its women. Come outer there!"

West had sat quietly observing the scene. Now he inquired, in composed
tones:

"What's the trouble, Bill?"

"Trouble? Trouble, West? Why, this lyin' scroundrel said in his paper
thet our Molly had a rough smile. That's the trouble!"

"Did he really say that?" asked West.

"'Course he did. Printed it in the paper, for all to read. That's why
I've come to cowhide the critter within an inch o' his life!"

"Good fer you, Bill!" cried his friends, encouragingly.

"But--wait a moment!" commanded West, as the maddened, half drunken
young farmer was about to leap over the table to grasp his victim;
"you're not going at this thing right, Bill Sizer."

"Why ain't I, Bob West?"

"Because," answered West, in calm, even tones, "this insult is too great
to be avenged by a mere cowhiding. Nothing but blood will wipe away the
dreadful stain on your sister's character."

"Oh, Mr. West!" cried Patsy, horrified by such a statement.

"Eh? Blood?" said Bill, stupefied by the suggestion.

"Of course," returned West. "You mustn't thrash Mr. Weldon; you must
kill him."

A delighted chorus of approval came from Sizer's supporters.

"All right, then," said the bully, glaring around, "I--I'll kill the
scandler!"

"Hold on!" counselled West, seizing his arm. "This affair must be
conducted properly--otherwise the law might cause us trouble. No murder,
mind you. You must kill Weldon in a duel."

"A--a what? A duel!" gasped Sizer.

"To be sure. That's the way to be revenged. Hetty," he added, turning to
the artist, who alone of the observers had smiled instead of groaned at
the old gentleman's startling suggestion, "will you kindly run up to my
rooms and get a red leather case that lies under the shell cabinet?
Thank you, my dear."

Hetty was off like a flash. During her absence an intense silence
pervaded the office, broken only by an occasional hiccough from one of
Mr. Sizer's guests. Patsy was paralyzed with horror and had fallen back
into her chair to glare alternately at Bob West and the big bully who
threatened her cousin's husband. Arthur was pale and stern as he fixed a
reproachful gaze on the hardware merchant. From Miss Briggs' little
room could be heard the steady click-click of the telegraph instrument.

But the furious arrival of the Sizer party had aroused every inhabitant
of Millville and with one accord they dropped work and rushed to the
printing office. By this time the windows were dark with groups of eager
faces that peered wonderingly through the screens--the sashes being
up--and listened to the conversation within.

While Hetty was gone not a word was spoken, but the artist was absent
only a brief time. Presently she reentered and laid the red leather case
on the table before Bob West. The hardware man at once opened it,
displaying a pair of old-fashioned dueling pistols, with long barrels
and pearl handles. There was a small can of powder, some bullets and
wadding in the case, and as West took up one of the pistols and
proceeded to load it he said in an unconcerned voice:

"I once got these from an officer in Vienna, and they have been used in
more than a score of duels, I was told. One of the pistols--I can't
tell which it is--has killed a dozen men, so you are going to fight
with famous weapons."

Both Arthur and Bill Sizer, as well as the groups at the window, watched
the loading of the pistols with fascinated gaze.

"Bob's a queer ol' feller," whispered Peggy McNutt to the blacksmith,
who stood beside him. "This dool is just one o' his odd fancies. Much he
keers ef they kills each other er not!"

"Mr. West," cried Patsy, suddenly rousing from her apathy, "I'll not
allow this shameful thing! A duel is no better than murder, and I'm sure
there is a law against it."

"True," returned West, ramming the bullet into the second pistol; "it is
quite irregular and--er--illegal, I believe. Perhaps I shall go to jail
with whichever of the duelists survives; but you see it is a point of
honor with us all. Molly Sizer has seemingly been grossly maligned in
your paper, and the editor is responsible. Are you a good shot, Bill?"

"I--I guess so," stammered Sizer.

"That's good. Weldon, I hear, is an expert with the pistol."

Arthur did not contradict this statement, although he was positive he
could not hit a barn at twenty yards.

"Now, then, are we ready?" staid West, rising. "Come with me,
gentlemen."

"What ye goin' to do, Bob?" asked Sizer, anxiously.

"I'll explain," replied the hardware man, leading the way to the street.
Everyone followed him and the crowd at the windows joined the group
outside. "Of course you mustn't shoot in the main street, for you might
hit some one, or break windows; but back of this row of buildings is a
lane that is perfectly clear. You will stand back to back in the center
of the block and then, at my word, you will each march to the end of the
block and pass around the buildings to the lane. As soon as you come in
sight of one another you are privileged to fire, and I suppose Bill
Sizer will try to kill you, Mr. Weldon, on the spot, and therefore you
will try to kill him first."

"But--look a-here, Bob!" cried Sizer; "it ain't right fer him to take a
shot at me. You said fer me to kill him, but ye didn't say nuth'n about
_his_ shootin' at _me_."

"That's all right, Bill," returned West. "You're in the right, and the
right ought to win. But you must give the man a chance for his life, you
know."

"That weren't in the bargain."

"It is now, by the laws of dueling."

"He--he might shoot me," urged Bill.

"It isn't likely. Although he's a dead shot, you have right on your
side, and you must be sure to fire as soon as you get within good range.
It won't be considered murder; it will only be a duel, and the law will
deal lightly with you."

"That's right, Bill," asserted one of Sizer's friends. "Bob West's a
justice o' the peace himself, an' he orter know."

"I do know," declared West gravely.

He placed Arthur Weldon and Bill Sizer back to back in the middle of the
street and handed each a pistol.

"Now, then," said he, "you both understand the rules, which I have
explained, and the spectators will bear witness that, whatever happens,
this affair has been conducted in a regular manner, with no favor shown
to either. You are both brave men, and this duel will vindicate your
honor. If you are fortunate enough to survive, you will be heroes, and
all your differences will be wiped off the slate. But as one or both may
fall, we, the citizens of Millville, hereby bid you a solemn and sad
farewell."

Impressed by this speech, Sizer's friends began to shake hands with him.

"All ready!" called West. "One--two--three----go!"

At the word the two, back to back, started for the opposite ends of the
little street, and at once the crowd made a rush between the buildings
to gain the rear, where they might witness the shooting in the lane when
the duelists met. Arthur had been thinking seriously during these
proceedings and had made up his mind it was in no degree his duty to be
bored full of holes by a drunken countryman like Bill Sizer, just
because there had been a typographical error in the _Millville Tribune_.
So, when he got to the end of the street, instead of turning into the
lane he made for the farm, holding the long dueling pistol gingerly in
his hand and trotting at a good pace for home.

Footsteps followed him. In sudden panic he increased his run; but the
other was faster. A heavy hand grasped his shoulder and swung him
around, while old Bob West, panting for Breath, exclaimed:

"Stop, you fool--stop! The other one is running."

"The other one!" echoed Arthur, wonderingly.

"Of course. Bill Sizer was sure to run; he's a coward, as all bullies
are. Quick, Weldon, save the day and your reputation or I'll never stand
your friend again."

Arthur understood now. He turned and ran back faster than he had come,
swung into the lane where the crowd was cautiously peering from the
shelter of the buildings, and waving his pistol in a reckless way that
made Bob West shudder, he cried out:

"Where is he? Where's Sizer? Why don't he show up and be shot, like a
man?"

No Sizer appeared. He was even then headed cross-lots for home, leaving
his friends to bemoan his cowardice. As for Arthur, the crowd gave him a
cheer and condemned his opponent's conduct in no measured terms. They
were terribly disappointed by Big Bill's defection, for while not
especially bloodthirsty they hated to see the impending tragedy turn out
a farce.

In the printing office Patsy was laughing hysterically as her horror
dissolved and allowed her to discover the comic phase of the duel. She
literally fell on Arthur's neck as he entered, but the next moment
pushed him away to face the hardware merchant.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. West," said she with twinkling eyes. "I
suspected you of being a cold-blooded ruffian, when you proposed this
duel; but I now see that you understand human nature better than the
whole caboodle of us put together! Arthur, thank Mr. West for saving you
from a flogging."

"I do, indeed!" said Arthur fervently.




CHAPTER XIV

THE DANGER SIGNAL


By this time the _Tribune_ had become the pride of all Millville, yet
the villagers could not quite overcome their awe and wonder at it. Also
the newspaper was the pride of the three girl journalists, who under the
tutelage of Miss Briggs were learning to understand the complicated
system of a daily journal. Their amateurish efforts were gradually
giving way to more dignified and readable articles; Beth could write an
editorial that interested even Uncle John, her severest critic; Louise
showed exceptional talent for picking up local happenings and making
news notes of them, while Patsy grabbed everything that came to her
net--locals, editorials, telegraphic and telephone reports from all
parts of the world--and skillfully sorted, edited and arranged them for
the various departments of the paper. It was mighty interesting to them
all, and they were so eager each morning to get to work that they could
scarcely devote the proper time to old Nora's famous breakfasts.

"We made a mistake. Uncle," said Patsy to Mr. Merrick, "in starting the
_Tribune_ in the wrong place. In a few weeks we must leave it and go
back to the city, whereas, had we established our paper in New York--"

"Then it never would have been heard of," interrupted practical Beth.
"In New York, Patsy dear, we would become the laughing stock of the
town. I shudder when I think what a countrified paper we turned out that
first issue."

"But we are fast becoming educated," declared Patsy. "I'm not ashamed of
the _Tribune_ now, even in comparison with the best New York dailies."

Beth laughed, but Uncle John said judicially:

"For Millville, it's certainly a marvel. I get the world news more
concisely and more pleasantly from its four pages than when I wade
through twenty or thirty of the big pages of a metropolitan newspaper.
You are doing famously, my dears. I congratulate you."

"But we are running behind dreadfully," suggested Arthur, the
bookkeeper, "even since Thursday Smith enabled us to cut down expenses
so greatly. The money that comes in never equals what we pay out. How
long can you keep this up, girls?"

They made no reply, nor did Uncle John discuss the financial condition
of the newspaper. He was himself paying some heavy expenses that did not
appear on the books, such as the Associated Press franchise, the
telegraph bills and the electric power; but he was quite delighted to
take care of these items and regretted he had not assumed more of the
paper's obligations. He knew the expenses were eating big holes in the
incomes of his three nieces, yet they never complained nor allowed their
enthusiasm to flag.

Mr. Merrick, who had tested these girls in more ways than one, was
watching them carefully, and fully approved their spirit and courage
under such trying conditions. Major Doyle, Patsy's father, when the
first copy of the _Millville Tribune_ was laid on his desk in the city,
was astounded at the audacity of this rash venture. When he could
command his temper to write calmly he sent a letter to Mr. Merrick which
read: "Taken altogether, John, you're the craziest bunch of
irresponsibles outside an asylum. No wonder you kept this folly a secret
from me until you had accomplished your nefarious designs. The
_Millville Daily Tribune_ is a corker and no mistake, for our Patsy's at
the head of your lunatic gang. I'll go farther, and say the paper's a
wonder. I believe it is the first daily newspaper published in a town of
six inhabitants, that has ever carried the Associated Press dispatches,
But, allow me to ask, why? The lonely inhabitants of the desert of Chazy
County don't need a daily--or a weekly--or a monthly. A semi-annual
would about hit their gait, and be more than they deserve. So I've
decided it's merely a silly way to spend money--and an easy way, too,
I'll be bound. Oblige me by explaining this incomprehensible
eccentricity."

To this, a mild protest for the major, Uncle John replied: "Dear Major
Doyle: Yours received. Have you no business of your own to attend to?
Affectionately yours, John Merrick."

The major took the hint. He made no further complaint but read the paper
religiously every day, gloating over Patsy's name as managing editor and
preserving the files with great care. He really enjoyed, the _Millville
Tribune_, and as his summer vacation was shortly due he anticipated with
pleasure a visit to the farm and a peep at the workings of "our Patsy's"
famous newspaper. The other girls he ignored. If Patsy was connected
with the thing, her adoring parent was quite sure she was responsible
for all the good there was in it.

The paper printed no mention of the famous duel. But Hetty made a
cartoon of it, showing the lane, with its fringe of spectators, Arthur
Weldon standing manfully to await his antagonist and big Bill Sizer, in
the distance, sprinting across the fields in the direction of home. This
cartoon was highly prized by those who had witnessed the adventure and
Peggy McNutt pinned it on the wall of his real estate office beside the
one Hetty had made of himself. Bill Sizer promptly "stopped the paper,"
that being the only vengeance at hand, and when Bob West sent a boy to
him demanding the return of the pistol, Bill dispatched with the weapon
the following characteristic note, which he had penned with much labor:

"Bob west sir you Beet me out uv my Reeveng and Made me look like a bag
uv Beens. but I will skware this Thing sum da and yu and that edyter hed
better Watch out. i don't stand fer no Throwdown like that Wm. Sizer."

However, the bully received scant sympathy, even from his most intimate
friends, and his prestige in the community was henceforth destroyed.
Arthur did not crow, for his part. He told the girls frankly of his
attempt to run away and evade the meeting, which sensible intention was
only frustrated by Bob West's interference, and they all agreed he was
thoroughly justified. The young man had proved to them his courage years
before and none of the girls was disposed to accuse him of cowardice for
not wishing to shoot or be shot by such a person as Bill Sizer.

A few days following the duel another incident occurred which was of a
nature so startling that it drove the Sizer comedy from all minds. This
time Thursday Smith was the hero.

Hetty Hewitt, it seems, was having a desperate struggle to quell the
longings of her heart for the allurements of the great city. She had
been for years a thorough Bohemienne, frequenting cafes, theatres and
dance halls, smoking and drinking with men and women of her class and,
by degrees, losing every womanly quality with which nature had
generously endowed her. But the girl was not really bad. She was
essentially nervous and craved excitement, so she had drifted into this
sort of life because no counteracting influence of good had been
injected into her pliable disposition. None, that is, until the friendly
editor for whom she worked, anticipating her final downfall, had sought
to save her by sending her to a country newspaper. He talked to the girl
artist very frankly before she left for Millville, and Hetty knew he was
right, and was truly grateful for the opportunity to redeem herself. The
sweet girl journalists with whom she was thrown in contact were so
different from any young women she had heretofore known, and proved so
kindly sympathetic, that Hetty speedily became ashamed of her wasted
life and formed a brave resolution to merit the friendship so generously
extended her.

But it was hard work at first. She could get through the days easily
enough by wandering in the woods and taking long walks along the rugged
country roads; but in the evenings came the insistent call of the cafes,
the cheap orchestras, vaudeville, midnight suppers and the like. She
strenuously fought this yearning and found it was growing less and less
powerful to influence her. But her nights were yet restless and her
nerves throbbing from the effects of past dissipations. Often she would
find herself unable to sleep and would go out into the moonlight when
all others were in bed, and "prowl around with the cats," as she
expressed it, until the wee hours of morning. Often she told Patsy she
wished there was more work she could do. The drawings required by the
paper never occupied her more than a couple of hours each day.
Sometimes she made one of her cleverest cartoons in fifteen or twenty
minutes.

"Can't I do something else?" she begged. "Let me set type, or run the
ticker--I can receive telegrams fairly well--or even write a column of
local comment. I'm no journalist, so you'll not be envious."

But Patsy shook her head.

"Really, Hetty, there's nothing else you can do, and your pictures are
very important to us. Rest and enjoy yourself, and get strong and well.
You are improving wonderfully in health since you came here."

Often at midnight Hetty would wander into the pressroom and watch
Thursday Smith run off the edition on the wonderful press, which seemed
to possess an intelligence of its own, so perfectly did it perform its
functions. At such times she sat listlessly by and said little, for
Thursday was no voluble talker, especially when busied over his press.
But a certain spirit of comradeship grew up between these two, and it
was not unusual for the pressmen, after his work was finished and the
papers were neatly piled for distribution to the carriers at daybreak,
to walk with Hetty to the hotel before proceeding to his own lodgings in
the little wing of Nick Thorne's house, which stood quite at the end of
the street. To be sure, the hotel adjoined the printing office, with
only a vacant lot between, but Hetty seemed to appreciate this courtesy
and would exchange a brief good night with Smith before going to her own
room. Afterward she not infrequently stole out again, because sleep
would not come to her, and then the moon watched her wanderings until it
dipped behind the hills.

On the night we speak of, Hetty had parted from Thursday Smith at one
o'clock and crept into the hallway of the silent, barnlike hotel; but as
soon as the man turned away she issued forth again and walked up the
empty street like a shadow. Almost to Thompson's Crossing she strolled,
deep in thought, and then turned and retraced her steps. But when she
again reached the hotel she was wide-eyed as ever; so she passed the
building, thinking she would go on to Little Bill Creek and sit by the
old mill for a time.

The girl was just opposite the printing office when her attention was
attracted by a queer grating noise, as if one of the windows was being
pried up. She stopped short, a moment, and then crept closer to the
building. Two men were at a side window of the pressroom, which they had
just succeeded in opening. As Hetty gained her point of observation one
of the men slipped inside, but a moment later hastily reappeared and
joined his fellow. At once both turned and stole along the side of the
shed directly toward the place where the girl stood. Her first impulse
was to run, but recollecting that she wore a dark gown and stood in deep
shadow she merely flattened herself against the building and remained
motionless. The men were chuckling as they passed her, and she
recognized them as mill hands from Royal.

"Guess that'll do the job," said one, in a low tone.

"If it don't, nothin' will," was the reply.

They were gone, then, stealing across the road and beating a hasty
retreat under the shadows of the houses.

Hetty stood motionless a moment, wondering what to do. Then with sudden
resolve she ran to Thorne's house and rapped sharply at the window of
the wing where she knew Thursday Smith slept. She heard him leap from
bed and open the blind.

"What is it?" he asked.

"It's me, Thursday--Hetty," she said. "Two men have just broken into the
pressroom, through a window. They were men from Royal, and they didn't
steal anything, but ran away in great haste. I--I'm afraid something is
wrong, Thursday!"

Even while she spoke he was rapidly dressing.

"Wait!" he called to her. In a few moments he opened the door and joined
her.

Without hesitation he began walking rapidly toward the office, and the
girl kept step with him. He asked no questions whatever, but us soon as
she had led him to the open window he leaped through it and switched on
an electric light. An instant later he cried aloud, in a voice of fear:

"Get out, Hetty! Run--for your life!"

"Run yourself, Thursday, if there's danger," she coolly returned.

But he shouted "Run--run--run!" in such thrilling, compelling tones
that the girl shrank away and dashed across the vacant lot to the hotel
before she turned again in time to see Smith leap from the window and
make a dash toward the rear. He was carrying something--something
extended at arms' length before him--and he crossed the lane and ran far
into the field before stooping to set down his burden.

Now he was racing back again, running as madly as if a troop of demons
was after him. A flash cleft the darkness; a deep detonation thundered
and echoed against the hills; the building against which Hetty leaned
shook as if an earthquake had seized it, and Thursday Smith was thrown
flat on his face and rolled almost to the terrified girl's feet, where
he lay motionless. Only the building saved her from pitching headlong
too, but as the reverberations died away, to be followed by frantic
screams from the rudely wakened population of Millville, Hetty sank upon
her knees and turned the man over, so that he lay face up.

He opened his eyes and put up one hand. Then he struggled to his feet,
trembling weakly, and his white face smiled into the girl's anxious one.

"That was a close call, dear," he whispered; "but your timely discovery
saved us from a terrible calamity. I--I don't believe there is much harm
done, as it is."

Hetty made no reply. She was thinking of the moments he had held that
deadly Thing in his hands, while he strove to save lives and property
from destruction.

The inevitable crowd was gathering now, demanding in terrified tones
what had happened. Men, women and children poured from the houses in
scant attire, all unnerved and fearful, crying for an explanation of the
explosion.

"Keep mum, Hetty," said Smith, warningly. "It will do no good to tell
them the truth."

She nodded, realizing it was best the villagers did not suspect that an
enemy of the newspaper had placed them all in dire peril.

"Dynamite?" she asked in a whisper.

"Yes; a bomb. But for heaven's sake don't mention it."

Suddenly a man with a lantern discovered a great pit in the field
behind the lane and the crowd quickly surrounded it. From their limited
knowledge of the facts the explosion seemed unaccountable, but there was
sufficient intelligence among them to determine that dynamite had caused
it and dug this gaping hole in the stony soil. Bob West glanced at the
printing office, which was directly in line with the explosion; then he
cast a shrewd look into the white face of Thursday Smith; but the old
hardware merchant merely muttered under his breath something about Ojoy
Boglin and shook his head determinedly when questioned by his fellow
villagers.

Interest presently centered in the damage that had been done. Many
window panes were shattered and the kitchen chimney of the hotel had
toppled over; but no person had been injured and the damage could easily
be repaired. While the excitement was at its height Thursday Smith
returned to his room and went to bed; but long after the villagers had
calmed down sufficiently to seek their homes Hetty Hewitt sat alone by
the great pit, staring reflectively into its ragged depths. Quaint and
curious were the thoughts that puzzled the solitary girl's weary brain,
but prominent and ever-recurring was the sentence that had trembled upon
Thursday Smith's lips: "It was a close call, _dear_!"

The "close call" didn't worry Hetty a particle; it was the last word of
the sentence that amazed her. That, and a new and wonderful respect for
the manliness of Thursday Smith, filled her heart to overflowing.




CHAPTER XV

A CLEVER IDEA


Neither Thursday nor Hetty allowed a word to escape concerning the
placing of the bomb in the _Tribune_ office, but the explosion was
public knowledge and many were bothering their heads to explain its
meaning.

John Merrick, when he heard the news, looked very grave and glanced
uneasily into the unconscious faces of his three beloved nieces. A man
of much worldly experience, in spite of his simple, ingenuous nature,
the little man began carefully piecing together parts of the puzzle.
Thursday Smith's defense of the girl journalists, whereby he had
severely pounded some of the workmen who had insulted them, had caused
the man to be denounced by the colony at Royal. Mr. Skeelty, the
manager, had demanded that Smith be discharged by Mr. Mirrick, and
being refused, had threatened to shut off the power from the newspaper
plant. Skeelty dared not carry out this threat, for fear of a lawsuit,
but his men, who had urged the matter of Smith's discharge upon their
manager, were of the class that seeks revenge at any cost. At this
juncture Ojoy Boglin, Skeelty's partner and the owner of all the pine
forest around Royal, had become the enemy of the newspaper and was aware
of the feeling among the workmen. A word from Boglin, backed by
Skeelty's tacit consent, would induce the men to go to any length in
injuring the _Millville Tribune_ and all concerned in its welfare.

Considering these facts, Mr. Merrick shrewdly suspected that the
dynamite explosion had been the work of the mill hands, yet why it was
harmlessly exploded in a field was a factor that puzzled him
exceedingly. He concluded, from what information he possessed, that they
had merely intended this as a warning, which if disregarded might be
followed by a more serious catastrophe.

The idea that such a danger threatened his nieces made the old
gentleman distinctly nervous.

There were ways to evade further molestation from the lawless element at
the mill. The Hon. Ojoy could be conciliated; Thursday Smith discharged;
or the girls could abandon their journalistic enterprise altogether.
Such alternatives were mortifying to consider, but his girls must be
protected from harm at any cost.

While he was still considering the problem, the girls and Arthur having
driven to the office, as usual, Joe Wegg rode over from Thompson's
Crossing on his sorrel mare for a chat with his old friend and
benefactor. It was this same young man--still a boy in years--who had
once owned the Wegg Farm and disposed of it to Mr. Merrick.

Joe was something of a mechanical genius and, when his father died,
longed to make his way in the great world. But after many vicissitudes
and failures he returned to Chazy County to marry Ethel Thompson, his
boyhood sweetheart, and to find that one of his father's apparently
foolish investments had made him rich.

Ethel was the great-granddaughter of the pioneer settler of Chazy
County--Little Bill Thompson--from whom the Little Bill Creek and Little
Bill Mountain had been named. It was he who first established the mill
at Millville; so, in marrying a descendant of Little Bill Thompson, Joe
Wegg had become quite the most important resident of Chazy County, and
the young man was popular and well liked by all who knew him.

After the first interchange of greetings Joe questioned Mr. Merrick
about the explosion of the night before, and Uncle John frankly stated
his suspicions.

"I'm sorry," said Joe, "they ever started that mill at Royal Falls. Most
of the workmen are foreigners, and all of them rude and reckless. They
have caused our quiet, law-abiding people no end of trouble and anxiety
already. It is becoming a habit with them to haunt Millville on Saturday
nights, when they are partly intoxicated, and they've even invaded some
of the farmhouses and frightened the women and children. I've talked to
Bob West about it and he has promised to swear in Lon Taft and Seth
Davis as special constables, to preserve order; but he admits we are
quite helpless to oppose such a gang of rowdies. I've also been to see
Mr. Skeelty, to ask him to keep his men at home, but he answered gruffly
that he had no authority over his employees except during working hours,
and not much authority even then."

"Skeelty doesn't seem the right man to handle those fellows," observed
Mr. Merrick thoughtfully; "but as he owns the controlling interest in
his company, and Boglin is fully as unreasonable, we cannot possibly
oust him from control. If the men determined to blow up all Millville
with dynamite I'm sure Skeelty would not lift a finger to prevent it."

"No; he's deathly afraid of them, and that's a fact," said Joe.

They sat in silence a while.

"Your report of Skeelty's threat to cut off your electric power," said
young Wegg, "reminds me of a plan I've had in mind for some time. I find
I've too much time on my hands, Mr. Merrick, and I cannot be thoroughly
happy unless I'm occupied. Ethel's farms are let on shares and I'm a
drone in the world's busy hive. But we're anchored here at Millville, so
I've been wondering what I could do to improve the place and keep myself
busy. It has seemed to me that the same rush of water in Little Bill
Creek that runs the dynamos at Royal is in evidence--to a lesser
extent--at the old milldam. What would you think of my putting in an
electric plant at the mill, and lighting both Millville and Huntingdon,
as well as all the farmhouses?"

"Not a bad idea, Joe," said Uncle John approvingly.

"Electric lights have a civilizing influence," continued the young man.
"I'm quite sure all the farmers between here and Huntingdon would use
them, at a reasonable price. I can also run a line to Hooker's Falls,
and one to Chazy Junction. Plenty of poles can be cut from our pine
forests and the wires will be the chief expense. I may not make money,
at first, but I'll play pretty nearly even and have something to do."

"Do you think you could furnish enough power for our printing office?"
asked Mr. Merrick.

"Yes; and a dozen factories, besides. I've an idea the thing may bring
factories to Millville."

"Then get at it, Joe, and build it quick. I've a notion we shall have an
open rupture with Skeelty before long."

Joe Wegg smiled.

"You're going to accuse me, sir, of asking advice after I've made up my
mind," said he; "but the fact is, I have bought the mill of Silas
Caldwell already. He's been wanting to dispose of the property for some
time."

"Good!" exclaimed Uncle John.

"Also I--I've ordered a dynamo and machinery. It all ought to be here in
a few days."

"Better yet!" cried Mr. Merrick. "You've relieved my mind of a great
weight, Joe."

"Now about Thursday Smith," said the young man. "Don't you think it
would be policy for you to let him go, Mr. Merrick?"

"No."

"He's a clever fellow. I can use him at my lighting plant."

"Thank you, Joe; but that wouldn't help any. As long as he's in
Millville he will be an object of vengeance to those anarchistic mill
hands. The only way to satisfy them in to drive Smith out of town,
and--I'll be hanged if I'll do it! He hasn't done anything wrong, and
I'm interested in the fellow's curious history. I've put his case in the
hands of a famous New York detective--Fogerty--with instructions to
discover who he is, and I can't let a lot of rowdies force me to abandon
the man for no reasonable cause."

"Don't blame you, sir," said Joe. "If it wasn't this Thursday Smith,
some other would incur the hatred of the Royal workmen, and as they're
disposed to terrorize us we may as well fight it out on this line as any
other. The whole county will stand by you, sir."

"The only thing I dread is possible danger to my girls."

"Keep 'em away from the office evenings," advised Joe. "During the day
they are perfectly safe. If anything happens, it will be at night, and
while the newspaper office may some time go flying skyward the girls
will run no personal danger whatever."

"Maybe so, Joe. How queer it is that such a condition should exist in
Millville--a little forgotten spot in the very heart of civilization and
the last place where one might expect excitement of this sort. But I
won't be cowed; I won't be driven or bullied by a pack of foreign
hounds, I assure you! If Skeelty can't discipline his men, I will."

In furtherance of which assertion, Mr. Merrick went to town and wired a
message to the great Fogerty.




CHAPTER XVI

LOCAL CONTRIBUTION


We hear considerable of the "conventional people" of this world, but
seldom meet with them; for, as soon as we begin to know a person, we
discover peculiarities that quite remove him from the ranks of the
conventional--if such ranks exist at all. The remark of the old Scotch
divine to his good wife: "Everybody's queer but thee and me, Nancy, and
sometimes I think _thee_ a little queer," sums up human nature
admirably. We seldom recognize our own queerness, but are prone to mark
the erratic temperaments of others, and this is rather more comfortable
than to be annoyed by a consciousness of our personal deficits.

The inhabitants of a country town are so limited in their experiences
that we generally find their personal characteristics very amusing. No
amount of scholastic learning could have rendered the Millville people
sophisticated, for contact with the world and humanity is the only true
educator; but, as a matter of fact, there was little scholastic learning
among them, with one or two exceptions, and the villagers as a rule were
of limited intelligence. Every one was really a "character," and Uncle
John's nieces, who all possessed a keen sense of humor, enjoyed the
oddities of the Millvillites immensely.

A humorous situation occurred through a seemingly innocent editorial of
Beth on authorship. In the course of her remarks she said: "A prominent
author is stated to have accumulated a large fortune by writing short
stories for the newspapers and magazines. He is said to receive ten
cents a word, and this unusual price is warranted by the eager demand
for his stories, of which the reading public is very fond. However, the
unknown author does not fare so badly. The sum of from thirty to fifty
dollars usually remitted for a short story pays the beginner a better
recompense, for the actual time he is engaged upon the work, than any
other occupation he might undertake."

This was seriously considered the morning it appeared in the _Tribune_
by Peggy McNutt and Skim Clark, as they sat in the sunshine on the
former's little front porch. Peggy had read it aloud in his laborious,
halting way, and Skim listened with growing amazement.

"Thirty dollars!" he cried; "thirty to fifty fer a short story! Great
Snakes, Peggy, I'm goin' into it."

"Heh? Goin' into what?" asked Peggy, raising his eyes from the paper.

"I kin write a story," declared Skim confidently.

"Ye kin, Skim?"

"It's a cinch, Peggy. Mother keeps all the magazines an' paper novils,
an' we allus reads 'em afore we sells 'em. I've read the gol-durndest
lot o' truck ye ever heard of, so I'm posted on stories in gen'ral. I'll
write one an' sell it to the _Millville Tribune_. Do ye s'pose they'll
give me the thirty, er the fifty, Peggy?"

"Anywheres between, they says. But one feller gits ten cents a word.
Whew!"

"I know; but he's a big one, which I ain't--just now. I'll take even the
thirty, if I hev to."

"I would, Skim," advised Peggy, nodding approval. "But make 'em put yer
photygraf in the paper, besides. Say, it'll be a big thing fer Millville
to turn out a author. I didn't think it were in you, Skim."

"Why, it hadn't struck me afore," replied the youth, modestly. "I've ben
hankerin' to make money, without knowin' how to do it. I tell ye, Peggy,
it pays to read the newspapers. This one's give me a hint how to carve
out a future career, an' I'll write a story as'll make them girl edyturs
set up an' take notice."

"Make it someth'n' 'bout Injuns," suggested Peggy. "I ain't read a Injun
story fer years."

"No; they're out o' fashion," observed Skim loftily. "What folks want
now is a detective story. Feller sees a hole in a fence an' says, 'Ha!
there's ben a murder!' Somebody asks what makes him think so, an' the
detective feller says, takin' out a magnifie-in' glass, 'Thet hole's a
bullet-hole, an' the traces o' blood aroun' the edges shows the bullet
went through a human body afore it went through the fence.' 'Then,' says
some one, 'where's the body?' 'That,' says the detective, 'is what we
mus' diskiver.' So the story goes on to show how the body were
diskivered an' who did the murderin'."

"By Jupe, thet's great!" cried Peggy admiringly. "Skim, ye're a wonder!"

"Ma allus said I were good fer somethin', but she couldn't tell what."

"It's story-writin'," declared Peggy "Say, Skim, I put ye onter this
deal; don't I git a rake-off on thet fifty dollars?"

"Not a cent!" said Skim indignantly. "Ye didn't tell me to write a
story; I said myself as I could do it. An' I know where to use the
money, Peggy, ev'ry dollar of it, whether it's thirty er fifty."

Peggy sighed.

"I writ a pome once," he said. "Wonder ef they'd pay fer a pome?"

"What were it like?" asked Skim curiously.

"It went someth'n' this way," said Peggy:

        "I sigh
        Ter fly
        Up high
        In the sky.
        But my
        Wings is shy,
        So I mus' cry
        Good-bye
        Ter fly-
            in'."

"Shoo!" said Skim disdainfully. "Thet ain't no real pome, Peggy."

"It makes rhymes, don't it? All but the las' line."

"Mebbe it does," replied Skim, with assumption of superior wisdom; "but
it don't mean nuth'n'."

"It would ef I got paid fer it," observed Peggy.

Skim went home to his mother's tiny "Emporium," took some note paper out
of stock, opened a new bottle of ink and sat down at the sitting room
table to write his story. The Widow Clark looked in and asked what he
meant by "squanderin' profits that way."

"Shet up, mar. Gi' me elbow room," said her dutiful son. "I'm writin' a
fifty dollar story fer the _Tribune_."

"Fifty dollars!"

"Thirty, anyhow; mebbe fifty," replied Skim. "What's a good name fer a
detective, mar?"

The widow sat down and wiped her damp hands on her apron, looking upon
her hopeful with an expression of mingled awe and pride.

"Kin ye do it, Skim?" she asked softly.

"I s'pose I kin turn out one a day, by hard work," he said confidently.
"At thirty a day, the lowes' price, thet's a hunderd 'n' eighty a week,
seven hunderd 'n' twenty a month, or over eight thousan' dollars a year.
I got it all figgered out. It's lucky fer me the nabobs is rich, or they
couldn't stan' the strain. Now, mar, ef ye want to see yer son a nabob
hisself, some day, jes' think up a good name fer a detective."

"Sherholmes Locke," she said after some reflection.

"No; this 'ere story's got ter be original. I thought o' callin' him
Suspectin' Algernon. Detectives is allus suspectin' something."

"Algernon's high-toned," mused the widow. "Let it go at that, Skim."

All that day and far into the evening he sat at his task, pausing now
and then for inspiration, but most of the time diligently pushing his
pen over the strongly lined note paper and hopelessly straying from the
lines. Meantime, Mrs. Clark walked around on tiptoe, so as not to
disturb him, and was reluctant even to call him to his meals in the
kitchen. When Skim went to bed his story had got into an aggravating
muddle, but during the next forenoon he managed to bring it to a
triumphant ending.

"When I git used to the thing, mar," he said, "I kin do one a day, easy.
I had to be pertickler over this one, it bein' the first."

The widow read the story carefully, guessing at the words that were
hopelessly indistinct.

"My! but it's a thriller, Skim," she said with maternal enthusiasm; "but
ye don't say why he killed the girl."

"That don't matter, so long's he did it."

"The spellin' don't allus seem quite right," she added doubtfully.

"I guess the spellin's as good as the readin'll be," he retorted, with
evident irritation. "I bet I spell as well as any o' the folks thet
takes the paper."

"And some words I can't make out."

"Oh, the edytur'll fix that. Say, air ye tryin' to queer my story, mar?
Do ye set up to know more'n I do about story writin'?"

"No," she said; "I ain't talented, Skim, an' you be."

"What I orter hev," he continued, reflectively, "is a typewriter. When I
git two er three hunderd ahead perhaps I'll buy one--secondhand."

"Kin ye buy one thet'll spell, Skim?" she asked, as she made a neat roll
of the manuscript and tied a pink hair ribbon around it.

Skim put on a collar and necktie and took his story across to the
newspaper office.

"I got a conter-bution fer the paper," he said to Patsy, who asked him
his business.

"What, something original, Skim?" she asked in surprise.

"Ye've hit it right, Miss Doyle; it's a story."

"Oh!"

"A detective story."

"Dear me! Then you'll have to see Mrs. Weldon, who is our literary
editor."

Louise, who was sitting close by, looked up and held out her hand for
the beribboned roll.

"I don't jes' know," remarked Skim, as he handed it across the table,
"whether it's a thirty dollar deal, er a fifty."

Having forgotten Beth's editorial, Louise did not understand this
remark, but she calmly unrolled Skim's manuscript and glanced at the
scrawled heading with an amused smile.

"'Suspecting Algernon,'" she read aloud.

"'It were a dark and teedjus night in the erly springtime while the snow
were falling soft over the moon litt lanskape.' Why, Skim, how came you
to write this?"

"It were the money," he said boldly. "I kin do one a day like this, at
thirty dollers apiece, an' never feel the wear an' tear."

Patsy giggled, but Louise stared with a wondering, puzzled expression at
the crabbed writing, the misspelled words and dreadful grammar. Indeed,
she was a little embarrassed how to handle so delicate a situation.

"I'm afraid we cannot use your story, Mr. Clark," she said gently, and
remembering the formula that usually accompanied her own rejected
manuscripts she added: "This does not necessarily imply a lack of merit
in your contribution, but is due to the fact that it is at present
unavailable for our use."

Skim stared at her in utter dismay.

"Ye mean ye won't take it?" he asked with trembling lips.

"We have so much material on hand, just now, that we cannot possibly
purchase more," she said firmly, but feeling intensely sorry for the
boy. "It may be a good story--"

"It's the bes' story I ever heard of!" declared Skim.

"But we have no place for it in the _Millville Tribune,_" she added,
handing him back the roll.

Skim was terribly disappointed. Never, for a single moment, had he
expected "sech a throwdown as this."

"Seems to me like a bunco game," he muttered savagely. "First ye say in
yer blamed ol' paper a story's wuth thirty to fifty dollars, an' then
when I bring ye a story ye won't pay a red cent fer it!"

"Stories," suggested Louise, "are of various qualities, depending on the
experience and talent of the author. An excellent story is often refused
because the periodical to which it is offered is overstocked with
similar material. Such conditions are often trying, Skim; I've had a
good many manuscripts rejected myself."

But the boy would not be conciliated.

"I'll send it to Munsey's, thet's what I'll do; an' then you'll be durn
sorry," he said, almost ready to cry.

"Do," urged Louise sweetly. "And if they print it, Mr. Clark, I'll agree
to purchase your next story for fifty dollars."

"All right; the fifty's mine. I got witnesses, mind ye!" and he flounced
out of the room like an angry schoolboy.

"Oh, Louise," exclaimed Patsy, reproachfully, "why didn't you let me
see the thing? It would have been better than a circus."

"Poor boy!" said the literary editor, with a sigh. "I didn't want to
humiliate him more than I could help. I wonder if he really will have
the audacity to send it to Munsey's?"

And now the door opened to admit Peggy McNutt, who had been watching his
chance to stump across to the printing office as soon as Skim left
there. For Peggy had reasoned, not unjustly, that if Skim Clark could
make a fortune as an author he, Marshall McMahon McNutt, had a show to
corral a few dollars in literature himself. After lying awake half the
night thinking it over, he arose this morning with the firm intention of
competing with Skim for the village laurels. He well knew he could not
write a shuddery detective story, such as Skim had outlined, but that
early poem of his, which the boy had seemed to regard so disdainfully,
was considered by Peggy a rather clever production. He repeated it over
and over to himself, dwelling joyously on its perfect rhyme, until he
was convinced it was a good poem and that Skim had enviously slandered
it. So he wrote it out in big letters on a sheet of foolscap and
determined to offer it to "them newspaper gals."

"I got a pome, Miss Patsy," he said, with unusual diffidence, for he was
by no means sure the "gals" would not agree with Skim's criticism.

"What! Another contributor?" she exclaimed playfully. "Has the whole
town suddenly turned literary, Peggy?"

"No; jest me 'n' Skim. Skim says my pome's no good; but I sort o' like
it, myself."

"Let me see it," said Patsy, ignoring this time the literary editor, who
was glad to be relieved of the responsibility of disappointing another
budding author.

Peggy handed over the foolscap, and Patsy eagerly read the "pome."

"Listen, Louise! Listen, Beth!" she called, delightedly. "Here is
certainly a real 'pome,' and on aviation--the latest fad:

               "'SKY HIGH
        BY MARSHALL MCMAHON MCNUTT
               of Millville
  dealer in Real Estate Spring Chickens &c.

               1.
        I sigh
        Too fly
        Up high
        In the sky.

               2.
        But my
        Wings air shy
        And so I cry
        A sad goodby
        Too fly-
            Ing.'"

A chorus of hilarious laughter followed the reading, and then Patsy
wiped her eyes and exclaimed:

"Peggy, you are not only a poet but a humorist. This is one of the best
short poems I ever read."

"It's short 'cause I run out o' rhymes," admitted Peggy.

"But it's a gem, what there is of it."

"Don't, dear," remonstrated Louise; "don't poke fun at the poor man."

"Poke fun? Why, I'm going to print that poem in the _Tribune_, as sure
as my name's Patricia Doyle! It's too good for oblivion."

"I dunno," remarked Peggy, uncertainly, "whether it's wuth fifty
dollars, er about--"

"About forty-nine less," said Patsy. "A poem of that length brings about
fifty cents in open market, but I'll be liberal. You shall have a whole
dollar--and there it is, solid cash."

"Thank ye," returned Peggy, pocketing the silver. "It ain't what I
expected, but--"

"But what, sir?"

"But it's like findin' it, for I didn't expect nuth'n'. I wish I could
do more of 'em at the same price; but I did thet pome when I were young
an' hed more ambition. I couldn't think of another like it to save my
neck."

"I am glad of that, Peggy. One of this kind is all a paper dare print.
We mustn't get too popular, you know."

"I s'pose you'll print my name as the one what did it?" he inquired
anxiously.

"I shall print it just as it's written, advertisement and all."

She did, and Peggy bought two extra copies, at a cent apiece. He framed
all three and hung one in his office, one in the sitting room and a
third in his bedroom, where he could see it the first thing when he
wakened each morning. His fellow villagers were very proud of him, in
spite of the "knocking" of the Clarks. Skim was deeply mortified that
Peggy's "bum pome" had been accepted and his own masterly composition
"turned down cold." The widow backed her son and told all the neighbors
that "Peggy never hed the brains to write thet pome, an' the chances air
he stole it from the 'Malvern Weekly Journal.' Them gal edyturs wouldn't
know," she added scornfully; "they's as ignerunt as Peggy is, mostly."

A few days later McNutt entered the printing office with an air of great
importance.

"Goodness me! I hope you haven't done it again, Peggy," cried Patsy, in
alarm.

"No; I got fame enough. What I want is to hev the wordin' on my business
cards changed," said he. "What'll it cost?"

"What change do you wish made?" asked Patsy, examining the sample card.

"Instead of 'Marshall McMahon McNutt, dealer in Real Estate an' Spring
Chickens,' I want to make it read: 'dealer in Real Estate, Spring
Chickens an' Poetry.' What'll it cost. Miss Patsy?"

"Nothing," she said, her eyes dancing; "We'll do that job free of
charge, Peggy!"




CHAPTER XVII

THE PENALTIES OF JOURNALISM


Two strange men appeared in Millville--keen, intelligent looking
fellows--and applied to Joe Wegg for jobs. Having received a hint from
Mr. Merrick, Joe promptly employed the strangers to prepare the old mill
for the reception of the machinery for the lighting plant, and both of
them engaged board at the hold.

"Thursday," said Hetty, as she watched the pressman that night, "there's
a New York detective here--two of them, I think."

"How do you know?"

"I recognized one of them, who used to prowl around the city looking for
suspicious characters. They say they've come to work on the new electric
plant, but I don't believe it."

Thursday worked a while in silence.

"Mr. Merrick must have sent for them," he suggested.

"Yes. I think he suspects about the bomb."

"He ought to discharge me," said Thursday.

"No; he's man enough to stand by his guns. I like Mr. Merrick. He didn't
become a millionaire without having cleverness to back him and I imagine
he is clever enough to thwart Skeelty and all his gang."

"Perhaps I ought to go of my own accord," said Thursday.

"Don't do that. When you've found a friend like Mr. Merrick, stick to
him. I imagine those detectives are here to protect you, as well as the
printing plant. It won't be so easy to set a bomb the next time."

Smith looked at her with a smile. There was a glint of admiration in his
eyes.

"You're not a bad sleuth yourself, Hetty," he remarked. "No detective
could have acted more wisely and promptly than you did that night."

"It was an accidental discovery, Thursday. Sometimes I sleep."

That was a good deal of conversation for these two to indulge in. Hetty
was talkative enough, at times, and so was Thursday Smith, when the
humor seized him; but when they were together they said very little. The
artist would stroll into the pressroom after the compositors had
finished their tasks and watch the man make up the forms, lock them,
place them on the press and run off the edition. Then he would glance
over the paper while Thursday washed up and put on his coat, after which
he accompanied her to the door of her hotel and with a simple "good
night" proceeded up the street to his own lodging.

There are surprises in the newspaper business, as our girl journalists
were fast discovering. It was a real calamity when Miss Briggs, who had
been primarily responsible for getting the _Millville Daily Tribune_
into proper working order, suddenly resigned her position. They had
depended a great deal on Miss Briggs, so when the telegraph editor
informed them she was going back to New York, they were positively
bewildered by her loss. Questions elicited the fact that the woman was
nervous over the recent explosion and looked for further trouble from
the mill hands. She also suspected the two recent arrivals to be
detectives, and the town was so small and so absolutely without police
protection that she would not risk her personal safety by remaining
longer in it.

"Perhaps I'm homesick," she added. "It's dreadfully lonely here when I'm
not at work, and for that reason I've tried to keep busy most of the
time. Really, I'm astonished to think I've stood this isolation so long;
but now that my mind is made up, I'm going, and it is useless to ask me
to remain."

They offered her higher wages, and Mr. Merrick himself had a long talk
with her, but all arguments were unavailing.

"What shall we do, Thursday?" asked Patsy in despair. "None of us
understands telegraphy."

"Hetty Hewitt does," he suggested.

"Hetty! I'm afraid if I asked her to assume this work she also would
leave us."

"No; she'll stay," he said positively.

"But she can't edit the telegraph news. Suppose she took the messages,
who would get the night news in shape for the compositors? My uncle
would not like to have me remain here until midnight, but even if he
would permit it I have not yet mastered the art of condensing the
dispatches and selecting just such items as are suitable for the
_Tribune_."

"I'll do that, Miss Doyle," promised Smith.

"I've been paying especial attention to the work of Miss Briggs, for I
had an idea she was getting uneasy. And I can take all the day messages,
too. If Hetty will look after the wires evenings I can do the rest of
the telegraph editor's work, and my own, too."

"Good gracious, Thursday!" exclaimed Patsy; "you'll be running the whole
paper, presently."

"No; I can't do the typesetting. But if the Dwyer girls stick to their
job--and they seem quite contented here--I'll answer for the rest of the
outfit."

"I'm glad the Dwyer girls seem contented," she answered; "but I'm
afraid to depend upon anyone now--except you."

He liked that compliment, but said nothing further. After consulting
with Louise and Beth, Patsy broached the subject to Hetty, and the
artist jumped at the opportunity to do something to occupy her leisure
time. The work brought her in contact with Thursday Smith more than
ever, and when Miss Briggs departed bag and baggage for New York, the
paper suffered little through her defection.

"Newspaper folk," remarked Major Doyle, who was now at the farm enjoying
his vacation and worshipping at the shrine of the managing editor in the
person of his versatile daughter, "are the most unreliable of any class
in the world. So I've often been told, and I believe it. They come and
go, by fits and starts, and it's a wonder the erratic rascals never put
a paper out of business. But they don't. You never heard of a newspaper
that failed to appear just because the mechanical force deserted and
left it in the lurch. By hook or crook the paper must be printed--and
it always is. So don't worry, mavourneen; when your sallow-faced artist
and your hobo jack-of-all-trades desert you, there'll still be a way to
keep the _Millville Tribune_ going, and therefore the world will
continue to whirl on its axis."

"I don't believe Thursday will ever desert, and Hetty likes us too well
to leave us in the lurch; but suppose those typesetters take a notion to
flit?"

"Then," said matter-of-fact Beth, "we'll fill the paper with ready-made
plate stuff and telegraph for more compositors."

"That's it," agreed the major, "Those people are always to be had. But
don't worry till the time comes. As me grandfather, the commodore, once
said: 'Never cross a bridge till ye come to it.'"

"It wasn't your grandfather who originated that remark," said Uncle
John.

"It was, sir! I defy you to prove otherwise."

"I'm not certain you ever had a grandfather; and he wasn't a commodore,
anyhow."

"Sir!" cried the major, glaring at his brother-in-law, "I have his
commission, somewhere--laid away."

"Never mind," said Patsy, cheerfully, for these fierce arguments between
her father and uncle--who were devotedly attached to one another--never
disturbed her in the least, "the _Tribune's_ running smoothly just now,
and the work is keeping us delightfully busy. I think that never in my
life have I enjoyed myself more than since I became a journalist."

"Is the thing paying dividends?" inquired the major.

Arthur laughed.

"I've just been figuring up the last month's expenditures and receipts,"
said he. "The first month didn't count, for we were getting started."

"And what's the result?" asked the Major.

"Every paper we send out--for one cent--costs us eighty-eight cents to
manufacture."

There was a painful silence for a time, broken by the major's suggestive
cough.

"I hope," said the old soldier, solemnly, "that the paper's circulation
is very small."

"The smallest of any daily paper in all the civilized word, sir,"
declared the bookkeeper.

"Of course," remarked Louise, with dignity; "that is what distinguishes
it. We did not undertake this publication to make money, and it does not
cost us more than we are willing to pay for the exceptional experiences
we are gaining."

The major raised his eyebrows; Arthur whistled softly; Uncle John
smiled; but with one accord they dropped the disagreeable subject.




CHAPTER XVIII

OPEN WARFARE


Joe Wegg's machinery and dynamos arrived promptly and the electric plant
was speedily installed at the old mill. So energetically had the young
man supervised his work that poles and wires were all in place as far up
the road as Thompson's Crossing and a branch line run to the Wegg Farm,
by the time the first test was made.

All Millville celebrated that first night when its streets shone
resplendent under the glare of electric lights. There was a public
bonfire near the mill, speeches were made, and afterward Mr. Merrick
served a free supper to the villagers, in the hall over Sam Cotting's
General Store, where the girls assisted in waiting upon the guests, and
everybody was happy and as hilarious as the fumes of good coffee could
make them.

More speeches were made in the hall, and one of these was by Peggy
McNutt, who had painted his wooden foot blue with red stripes in honor
of the occasion. He said, according to the report afterward printed in
the Tribune:

"Feller Citizens! This 'ere town's bloomin' like a new mown rose. I'll
bet anybody anything there ain't another town in Ameriky what's gone
ahead like we hev in the past few months that's jest past. (Applause.)
If I do say it myself, we're the mos'--eh--the mos'--eh--progressioning
community in--in--this community. Our community hes put out a daily
paper what's a credit to--to--our community, especially the poetry;
we've got a paper mill at Royal what makes paper fer New Yoruk; an' now,
to cap the climate, our community hes lighted our community with
'lectric lights fit fer Lundon, New Yoruk, Canada or--or--or--our
community. (Laughter and cries of "Cut out the community, Peggy!") No!
Never, feller citizens, will I cut out a community what's done so much
fer our--our community. If I do say it myself, the eyes of the com--of
the world is upon us, an' I'm proud of the things that's ben did by our
feller citizens, with my full approval, in this 'ere--this
'ere--er--community!" (Cheers and a sandwich, which last offering was
received by Mr. McNutt in his back hair as he turned to descend from the
rostrum.)

Joe Wegg is reported to have said: "Neighbors, this electric plant is no
plaything. It is going to give you all better light, at no more cost to
you than kerosene. But it will do more than that: it will run machinery
of all kinds better than steam will. You've seen electricity running the
newspaper press, and the same current has operated the big paper mills
at Royal. Here in this audience is a gentleman from Connecticut who has
accepted my invitation to look over our village with a view to building
a factory here, using the power I shall hereafter be able to furnish. I
am in correspondence with two other manufacturers, whom I hope to induce
to locate in Millville. (Enthusiastic cheers.) Job Fisher, who used to
live at Malvern, is planning to start a lumber mill, to cut the pine
just north of here; so you see we are about to arouse from our long
sleep and have a great future before us if we keep wide awake. Another
item of news merits your attention. Bartlett has sold sixty acres of his
farm to Dr. Adam Matthews, for many years a prominent physician of
Boston, who is going to build a good house on the land and become a
citizen of Millville. We've always had to go to Huntingdon for a doctor,
but now Dr. Matthews has promised to look after the health of the
Millville people, although he has retired from city practice. More
people will come here from time to time, attracted by our enterprise and
the rugged beauty of our county; real estate will become more valuable,
trade will prosper and every one of the old inhabitants will find
opportunities to make money." (Great applause.)

A general discussion followed concerning the "doin's of Joe Wegg" and
the prophecies he had made. Opinion seemed divided as to whether the
promised "boom" was desirable for Millville or not. Some of the good
villagers were averse to personal activity and feared the new order of
things might disturb their comfort; in others a mild ambition had been
awakened. But while they feasted at Mr. Merrick's expense and gravely
canvassed the situation, the newly installed electric lights suddenly
failed. Darkness fell upon the assemblage and there was an awed hush
until Sam Cotting lighted the old reliable kerosene lamps.

Joe Wegg was as much astonished as anyone.

"There has been an accident to the machinery," he said to Mr. Merrick.
"I'll run over to the mill and see what has happened."

"I will go with you," said Arthur Weldon, and Major Doyle also decided
to accompany the young man.

Uncle John and his three nieces remained in the hall, and Mr. Merrick
took occasion to make a little speech in which he explained that a hitch
in the working of the electric plant was liable to happen at first, but
after a few days the dynamos could be fully depended upon.

He had scarcely finished this explanation when Arthur came running back
into the hall in much excitement. He approached Mr. Merrick and said in
a low voice:

"The machinery is all right, sir. Some one has cut the wires."

"Cut the wires!"

"Yes. Joe thinks it's the work of the mill hands. The wires are cut in
all directions, and several of the men from Royal have been seen
loitering around by Cox and Booth, the detectives."

The girls overheard this assertion, and Patsy exclaimed:

"I'm going to the office, to make sure our power hasn't been tampered
with."

The meeting broke up at once and the villagers trooped out to
investigate. Mr. Merrick and Arthur walked with the girls to the
printing office, where they found Thursday Smith and Hetty working by
the light of tallow candles.

"The power is off," said Smith quietly.

"Then the wire from Royal has also been cut," said Patsy. "What shall we
do? His paper must come out to-morrow morning, in spite of anything and
everything!"

"Do you know who cut the wires?" inquired Thursday.

"We think the mill hands must have done it."

"Not with Skeelty's consent, I'll be bound," said Mr. Merrick. "The
manager is too fearful of a damage suit to play any tricks."

"A cut wire may be repaired," suggested the pressman, and even as he
spoke Joe Wegg came in, accompanied by the two detectives and the major.

"Cox has interviewed one of the workmen from Royal," said Joe, "and the
fellow says there's a strike at the mill and everything is closed down.
Skeelty is barricaded in his office building, wild with fear, for the
men have captured the company's store and helped themselves to the stock
of liquors. The man Cox spoke with, who seems to be a well disposed
fellow, predicts all kinds of trouble, and perhaps rioting, before this
thing is ended."

They listened to this report in amazement.

"I conjecture," said the major, "that the rascally manager has given his
men too much leeway. He's encouraged them in mischief until they've
taken the bit between their teeth and turned against even their master.
I have no personal acquaintance with the villain, but I imagine it
serves him right."

"But, dear me!" cried Patsy, wringing her hands; "what'll become of the
paper? It's nearly ten o'clock now."

Thursday turned to Joe Wegg.

"Can't we connect our supply wire with your new plant, so as to use your
power?" he asked.

"Easily. An hour's work will serve to make the connection. But unless we
watch the wire every minute those fellows will cut it again. The town's
full of the rascals, and they're not exactly sober, either."

"Watch the wire; that's the idea," said Uncle John. "It's only a short
distance to the mill, and I'm sure the villagers will volunteer for this
duty."

"Of course," said Joe. "Major Doyle, will you mount guard over my men at
the dynamos, to see they're not interfered with, while I look after the
wire?"

"Sure enough; it'll remind me of the old war times," said the major
readily.

"Where is Arthur?" asked Louise.

"We left him at the mill."

They left the office at once, Joe to get his line-men at work, and the
major to join Weldon in guarding the dynamos. One of the detectives went
with Mr. Wegg, but the other, whose name was Booth, remained to guard
the printing office. Mr. Merrick now proposed that he take the girls
home. Patsy and Beth refused to leave until the emergency was past, when
the major and Arthur could drive them to the farm, but Louise was tired
and went with Uncle John in his buggy, the surrey being left for the
rest of the party to use. Arthur ran over for a moment to say everything
was quiet at the mill and he did not think there would be any further
trouble, and the report considerably reassured them.




CHAPTER XIX

A MERE MATTER OF REVENGE


Hetty and Thursday continued to work on the paper.

"We'll have everything ready by the time the line is connected," said
the artist. "Then it will be but a few moments' work to run off the
edition."

Patsy and Beth held candles for them, for the electric lights had been
cut off with the power; so, seeing them all busily engaged, Arthur
Weldon decided to return to the mill to join the Major. Booth sat in the
front office, near the door, and in the darkness Arthur nearly stumbled
over him.

"Going away, sir?" asked the man.

"Yes; I'll see if I can be of any assistance at the mill."

"Be careful. Those workmen have been drifting into town in squads, the
last few minutes, and most of them are reckless with drink."

"I'll watch out," said Arthur.

In the middle of the road a group of mill hands conversed excitedly in
some foreign tongue; but they paid no attention to Weldon as he passed
them. Others joined them, presently, and one began a harangue in a loud
voice, to which they listened eagerly. Then Bob West slipped across from
the hardware store and ran against the detective in the doorway of the
printing office.

"Who's this?" he demanded, holding the man in a firm grip.

"Booth, sir."

"Good. I could not recognize you in this darkness. Are you armed?"

"Yes."

"Then you and I will defend this door. Who is inside?"

"The pressman--Thursday Smith--and three of the girls."

"The compositors?"

"No; they've gone to the hotel. Miss Doyle, Miss DeGraf, and--Hetty
Hewitt."

West went into the hack room, which was faintly illumined by candles
stuck here and there. The girls and Smith were all bending over the
imposing stone, where the forms of the paper were being made up.

"Here," said West, taking a revolver from his pocket and laying it on
the table; "I'm afraid there may be an attack on this office in a few
minutes, for I understand the language of those strikers and have been
listening to them. If any of the mill hands attempt to break into this
room don't be afraid to shoot."

"Why should the men wish to attack us, sir?" asked Patsy wonderingly.

"There are several reasons. They're after Smith, for one thing. They've
an old grudge against him to settle. Aside from the mere matter of
revenge I overheard one of them telling his friends to smash the press
and keep the paper from coming out, and Mr. Boglin would pay them well
for the job."

Smith carelessly thrust the revolver into his hip pocket.

"The paper will come out if Mr. Wegg gives us the power," he said.

"Can you let me have a revolver, Mr. West?" asked Hetty.

"Could you use it?"

"I think so."

He looked at her a moment and then took a second revolver from his
pocket.

"I've robbed my hardware stock," he said with a smile. "But I advise you
girls to keep your hands off the thing unless a crisis arises. I don't
imagine the gang will get past me and Booth at the entrance, but if any
stragglers come your way Smith has authority to drive them back. I'm
justice of the peace, and I hereby appoint you all special officers of
the law."

He said this lightly, fearing to alarm the girls unnecessarily, and then
passed through the doorway and joined Booth at the front.

The telephone rang and Patsy answered it.

"How soon will the forms be ready?" asked Arthur's voice.

"In ten minutes--perhaps five," she answered.

"We'll have the power on in ten minutes more. Tell Smith not to lose an
instant's time in running off the edition, for we don't know how long we
can keep the line open. The strikers are threatening us, even now."

"All right," called Patsy; "just give us the power for a few minutes,
and we'll be through for to-night."

She went back to Thursday and reported.

"There may be a few typographical errors, and I'm afraid it's a bad
make-up," he remarked; "but I'll have the thing on the press in five
minutes."

With mallet and shooting-stick he tightened the quoins, then lifted the
heavy iron frames filled with type and slid them onto the bed of the
press. They gave him all the light the flickering candles afforded as he
adjusted the machinery, and all were bending over the press when a low,
distant growl was heard, rising slowly to a frenzied shout. A revolver
popped--another--followed by wild cries from the street.

The girls grew a little pale, but Thursday Smith put his hand on the
lever of the press and said:

"All right. The moment they give us the current we're ready to run."

Patsy straightened up with a sigh of relief, then gave a low cry as the
screens of the two windows of the pressroom were smashed in and through
the openings men began to tumble into the room. At once Hetty confronted
them with leveled revolver and the sight caused them to hesitate.

"Out o' the way, you women!" called a burly fellow who wore a green
sweater and an oilskin hat; "we don't want to hurt you if we can help.
There's the one we're after!" He pointed a finger at Thursday Smith.

"You can't have him," retorted Beth, half shielded behind the militant
Hetty. "This is private property, and you're trespassing. Unless you go
away at once you will suffer the consequences."

This defense seemed to surprise them, for they fell back a little toward
the windows. At that moment, with a low rumble, the press started,
moving slowly at first but gradually acquiring speed. The sight aroused
the resentment of the invaders.

"Stop that press!" yelled their spokesman excitedly. "Stop it, Smith, or
we'll put both you and the machine out of business."

Thursday paid no attention to anything but his press. The huge cylinder
of white paper was unrolling, passing under the platen and emerging at
the other end as neatly folded copies of the Millville Daily Tribune.

With a roar of rage the big fellow leaped forward, but at the action a
shot rang out and he fell headlong almost at the foot of the press.

Beth and Patsy turned their heads an instant to glance at Hetty. The
artist's face was white and set; her eyes sparkled brilliantly; she held
the still smoking weapon in readiness for another shot.

But the men were awed by the fall of their leader. They watched Beth
leap to the platform beside Thursday Smith and draw his revolver from
his pocket, where he had placed it. Hetty's courage had inspired her,
and Beth had handled pistols before. The men read the determined eyes
fixed upon them; they noted Smith's indifference to their threats. The
defenders of the press and pressman were only girls, but they were girls
evidently not afraid to shoot.

No advance was made and the tableau was dramatic. Smith watched his
press with undivided attention and it clattered away at full speed until
the frail building shook with its powerful, steady motion. Then suddenly
it began to slow down. The power was off, and the machine came to an
abrupt stop.

Thursday stepped from the platform and looked at the index of the
counter.

"Four hundred and sixty-three. Twenty-two short, Miss Doyle," he
announced.

"That'll do, Thursday."

He came to her side, then, facing the sullen, glowering group of mill
hands.

"Boys," said he, "it won't do you any good to interfere with us
to-night. The paper for to-morrow morning is already printed, and Ojoy
Boglin isn't a big enough man to stop it, now or ever. Better go back
to Royal and settle your troubles with Skeelty, for if you stay here the
citizens of Millville are in the mood to shoot you down like dogs."

They stood undecided a moment, but the argument had evidently struck
home.

"What's the matter with Harris?" asked one, pointing to the motionless
form of the man in the green sweater. "Is he dead?"

"I suppose so," answered Thursday coolly; but he stooped to examine
Hetty's victim, rolling him over so that his face was upward. "No; he
isn't hurt much, I'm sorry to say. The bullet glanced off his forehead
and stunned him, that's all. Take the brute, if you want him, and go."

They obeyed in silence. Several stepped forward and raised the
unconscious Harris, bearing him to the window, where they passed him to
those without. Then they also retreated through the windows and the room
was cleared.

Only then did Hetty and Beth venture to lower their weapons.

"Oh, dear!" cried Patsy, in a low, agitated voice; "I'm so glad you
didn't kill him, Hetty."

"I'm not," returned the artist doggedly. "He deserved death, at the
least, and by killing him I'd have cheated the gallows."

Then she glanced around at the horrified faces of her friends and burst
into tears.




CHAPTER XX

DEFENDING THE PRESS


In the front room Bob West and the detective were having a busy time. At
the first rush they each fired a shot over the heads of the mob, merely
to let them know the place was guarded. In the darkness it was
impossible for the strikers to tell how many armed men confronted them,
so they fell back a little, but formed a cordon around the entire
building. From the printing office to the old mill was a distance of
only a few hundred feet, and every able-bodied inhabitant of Millville
except Peggy McNutt and Sara Cotting--who had discreetly disappeared at
the first sign of danger--was assisting Joe Wegg to protect the electric
cable he was trying to connect. The men from Royal were scattered all
along the line, peering through the dim light to discover a vulnerable
point of attack but deterred from interfering by the determination of
the stalwart defenders. Mobs are invariably cowardly, and this one,
composed of the lowest strata of mixed American and foreign laborers,
was no exception to the general rule. However, when word was finally
passed along from the mill that the dynamo was running and supplying
power to the printing press, a howl of rage went up and a sudden rush
was made for the line, the attack concentrating at one point.

The defenders promptly grouped themselves in front of the threatened
pole and Seth Davis, the blacksmith, wielding a heavy sledge hammer, did
valiant service, clearing a space around him with little difficulty. Joe
Wegg, Arthur Weldon, Cox the detective, Lon Taft, Nick Thome and even
little Skim Clark were all in the melee, fighting desperately for time
to enable Thursday Smith to work his press, using whatever cudgels they
had been able to pick up to keep the assailants from the pole. Slowly,
however, they were forced back by superior numbers until finally one of
the mill hands clambered up the pole and cut the wire.

"Never mind," said Arthur to Joe, as they retreated fighting toward the
printing office; "I think they've had time to run off the edition,
provided Smith was ready with the forms."

The mob was by this time in an ugly mood and the nearer Joe and Arthur
edged toward the printing office the more numerous their enemies became.
The Millville people were getting rather the worst of the scrimmage when
out rushed Thursday Smith, swinging a stout iron bar he had taken from
the press, and with this terrible weapon he struck out so vigorously
that the diversion in their favor enabled the retreating villagers to
gain the office, where Booth and Bob West fired several shots that
effectually checked the mob.

"Stand back, ye villains!" cried a loud voice, as Major Doyle marched
calmly down the road from the mill; "how dare ye interfere with a
gentleman?"

One of the leaders confronted him menacingly. The major slapped his face
with the flat of his hand and then kicked the fellow in the shins.

"Didn't I say to get out o' my way?" he roared, and to the surprise of
everyone--even the major, perhaps--they fell hack and allowed him to
walk leisurely into the printing office.

Having succeeded in their primary attempt to cut the wire, and finding
the determined band of defenders more dangerous than they had thought,
the workmen retreated in the direction of Royal, where there was more to
be gained by rioting than in Millville.

When at last the town was clear of them, Arthur, who was considerably
battered and bruised but pleased with the triumphant ending of the
adventure, drove the girls and the major to the farm. They urged Hetty
to accompany them, but she declared she was not a bit nervous and
preferred to sleep at the hotel.

"I think the trouble is over for to-night," said West, and all agreed
with him. Cox and Booth decided to sleep in the printing office, and
after the girls had driven away with their escorts and the villagers had
dispersed to their homes, Thursday put on his coat and walked to the
hotel with Hetty.

"All that row was about me," he remarked disconsolately.

"But they didn't get you," said Hetty, triumph in her voice.

"No."

He did not mention her bravery, or the loyal support of Beth and Patsy,
but after a moment he added: "I'm not worth defending."

"How do you know?" asked Hetty. "It occurs to me, Mr. Smith, that you
are as much a stranger to yourself as to us."

"That is true."

"And in emergencies you are not averse to defending others. Of course
Miss DeGraf and her cousin wanted the paper printed, at all hazards. I
don't blame them for that; but I--"

She hesitated.

"You simply stood by a comrade. Thank you, Hetty."

"Good night, Thursday."

"Will you be able to sleep to-night?"

"I'm going straight to bed. The rumpus has quieted my nerves."

"Good night, then."

In the early morning Mr. Merrick was awakened by a red glare that
flooded his bedroom. Going to the window he found the sky at the north
full of flame. He threw on his bathrobe and went to the door of Arthur
Weldon's room, arousing the young man with a rap on the panels.

"The settlement at Royal is burning," he reported.

Arthur came out, very weary and drowsy, for he had not been asleep long
and the strenuous work of the night had tired him.

"Let it burn," he said, glancing through a window at the lurid light of
the conflagration. "We couldn't be of any use going over there and,
after all, it isn't our affair to relieve Skeelty."

Then he told Uncle John of the riot in the village, for the old
gentleman had been sound asleep when the party returned to the farm.

"The blaze is the work of those crazy strikers, I suppose," said Mr.
Merrick. "It looks from here as if they had set fire to their own
homes, as well as to the paper mills and office and store buildings. It
will be fortunate if the forest does not also burn."

"Don't worry, sir," advised Arthur. "We'll discover the extent of the
fire by daylight. For my part, I'm going back to bed, and it will be
well for you to follow my example."

"Another item for the paper," whispered a soft voice, and there was
Patsy beside them at the window.

Mr. Merrick sighed.

"I had no idea so much excitement could possibly happen at Millville,"
said he. "If this keeps on we'll have to go back to New York for quiet.
But let us get to bed, my dear, for to-morrow is likely to be a busy day
for us all."




CHAPTER XXI

THE COMING OF FOGERTY


The homeless mill hands flocked to Chazy Junction next day, from whence
a freight train distributed them over other parts of the country. The
clearing at Royal Falls was now a heap of charred embers, for every one
of the cheap, rough-board buildings had been consumed by the fire.

Skeelty had watched the destruction of his plant with feelings of
mingled glee and disgust. He was insured against loss, and his rash
workmen, who had turned upon him so unexpectedly, had accidentally
settled the strike and their own future by starting the fire during
their drunken orgies. There being no longer a mill to employ them they
went elsewhere for work, rather glad of the change and regretting
nothing. As for the manager, he stood to lose temporary profits but was
not wholly displeased by the catastrophe. Transportation of his
manufactured products had been so irregular and undefendable that even
while he watched the blaze he determined to rebuild his plant nearer the
main line of a railway, for many such locations could be found where the
pine was as plentiful as here.

At dawn he entered the hotel at Millville with his arms full of books
and papers which he had succeeded in saving from the fire, and securing
a room went directly to bed. It was afternoon when he awoke and after
obtaining a meal he strolled out into the village and entered the
newspaper office.

"Here's an item for your paper," he said to Patsy, who was busy at her
desk. "The mills at Royal will never be rebuilt, and Millville has lost
the only chance it ever had of becoming a manufacturing center. The
whole settlement, which belonged to Boglin and myself, went up in smoke,
and I'm willing to let it go at that. I shall collect the insurance,
make myself good, and if anything's left over, that fool Boglin is
welcome to it. I admit I made a mistake in ever allowing him to induce
me to build at Royal. Boglin owned the land and I used his money, so I
gave up to him; but I'm through with the _honer'ble_ ass now. Put it all
in the paper; it'll make him feel good. You might add that I'm taking
the evening train for New York, shaking the dust of your miserable
village from my feet for good and all."

"Thank you, sir," said Patsy, brightly; "the Millville people will
appreciate their good luck, I'm sure."

Skeelty hung around the town for awhile, sneering at the new electric
light plant and insolently railing at any of the natives who would
converse with him. Then he hired Nick Thorne to drive him over to Chazy
Junction, and that was the last Millville ever saw of him.

During this day Joe Wegg's men succeeded in repairing all the wires
which had been tampered with and in making a proper and permanent
connection of the cable to the printing office. That evening the village
was again brilliantly lighted and thereafter the big dynamos whirled
peacefully and without interruption.

The girls had a busy day, as Uncle John had predicted, for all the
exciting incidents of the evening and night before had to be written up
and the next day's paper teemed with "news" of a character to interest
all its readers. Beth's editorial declared the neighborhood well rid of
the paper mill, which had been of little advantage but had caused no end
of annoyance because of the rough and mischievous character of the
workmen employed. In this statement nearly everyone agreed with her.

Several had been wounded in the riot of the eventful evening, but none
seriously injured. The workmen took away their damaged comrades and Lon
Taft drove over to Huntingdon and had his head sewed up by the doctor.
Other villagers suffered mere bruises, but all who engaged in the fight
posed as heroes and even Peggy McNutt, who figured as "not present,"
told marvelous tales of how he had worsted seven mill hands in a
stand-up fight, using only his invincible fists.

The following forenoon the liveryman at the Junction brought to
Millville a passenger who had arrived by the morning train--a quiet,
boyish-looking man with a shock of brick-red hair and a thin, freckled
face. He was driven directly to the Merrick farm, where Uncle John
received him cordially, but with surprise, and at once favored the new
arrival with a long interview in his private room.

The girls, who had not yet gone to the office, awaited somewhat
impatiently the result of this conference, for they already knew the
red-headed youth to be the great Fogerty--admitted by even his would-be
rivals, the king of New York detectives. Also they knew that Uncle John
had employed him some time ago to ferret out the mystery of the identity
of Thursday Smith, and the fact of Fogerty's presence indicated he had
something to report.

However, when Mr. Merrick came out of the private room his usually
cheery countenance wore a troubled expression. Fogerty was invariably
placid and inscrutable, so no explanation could be gleaned from his
demeanor.

"Ready for town, my dears?" asked Uncle John.

"Yes; the surrey is waiting," answered Louise.

"Then go along, and Fogerty and I will join you at the office presently.
I want to confer with the major and Arthur before--before taking any
steps to--"

"What's the news, Uncle?" demanded Patsy, impatiently.

"You shall know in good time."

"Who is Thursday Smith?"

"By and by, dear. Don't bother me now. But that reminds me; you are to
say nothing to--to--Thursday about Mr. Fogerty's arrival. Treat
him--Thursday, you know--just as you have always done, for the present,
at least. Whatever we determine on in regard to this man, during our
conference, we must not forget that he has acted most gallantly since he
came to Millville. We really owe him a debt of gratitude."

With this somewhat incomprehensible statement the girls were forced to
content themselves. Feeling quite helpless, they drove to the office
and left the men to settle the fate of Thursday Smith.

The "pressman" was now the man-of-all-work about the modest but trim
little publishing plant. He attended to whatever job printing came in,
made the etchings from Hetty's drawings, cast the stereotypes, made up
the forms and operated the press. But aside from this mechanical work
Smith took the telegraphic news received by Hetty, edited and condensed
it and wrote the black-letter headings over the various items. All this,
with a general supervision over the girl compositors, kept the man busy
from daybreak to midnight.

In spite of this, the Tribune was essentially a "girls' paper," since
Thursday Smith was the only man employed on it--not counting the "dummy"
editor, Arthur Weldon, who did nothing but keep the books, and found
this not an arduous task. Hetty, at Miss Briggs' desk, attended the
telegraph instrument and long-distance telephone, receiving news over
both wires, and still found time to draw her daily cartoons and
additional humorous sketches which she "worked in" whenever the mood
seized her. The typesetting was done by the Dwyer sisters--a colorless
pair but quite reliable--while the reportorial and editorial work was
divided between Louise, Beth and Patsy, none of whom shirked a single
duty. Indeed, they had come to love this work dearly and were
enthusiastic over the _Tribune_, which they fondly believed was being
watched with envious admiration by all the journalistic world.

This belief was not wholly due to egotism. Their "exchanges," both city
and country, had shown considerable interest in the "Millville
Experiment," as they called it, and only a few days before the leading
journal of a good-sized city had commented at length on the "girls'
newspaper" and, after indulging in some humorous remarks, concluded
quite seriously with the statement that "its evident sincerity, clean
contents and typographical neatness render the _Millville Daily Tribune_
worthy a better setting than the somnolent country village whose census
is too low to be officially recorded."

"But that's all right," said Patsy, smiling at the praise; "we'd never
have dared to start a newspaper anywhere else, because a journal that
will do for Millville might not make a hit if it bumped against
experienced competition."

"We were woefully ignorant when we began, a few weeks ago," commented
Beth, glancing with pride at her latest editorial, which she thought had
caught the oracular tone of the big city newspapers.

"And we're not expert journalists, even yet," added Louise, with a sigh.
"We've improved, to be sure; but I imagine there is still lots of room
for improvement."

"One trouble," said Patsy, "is that every inhabitant of Millville wants
to see his or her name in print every day, whether he or she has done
anything worthy of publication or not. If the name isn't printed, we've
made an enemy; and, if it is, the paper is sure to suffer more or less
ridicule."

"That is quite true, my dear," responded Louise, the reporter. "I've
said everything, about every one of them, that has ever happened, or
threatened to happen, since we started the paper, and it is driving me
crazy to discover anything more about these stupid natives that will do
to print."

Hetty had overheard this conversation and now looked up with a smile.

"Has your 'local happenings' column been prepared for to-morrow, Mrs.
Weldon?" she inquired.

"No; I'm about to start out to unearth some items," replied Louise,
wearily.

"Let me do it for you. I've an hour or so to spare and I won't need to
leave my desk," suggested the artist.

"It is my duty, you know, Hetty, and I've no right to evade it."

"Evade it for to-day. Go home and rest. I'll do your column for
to-morrow, and after the vacation you can tackle the thrilling
situations with better courage."

"Thank you, Hetty. But I won't go home. I'll wait here to see Fogerty."

"Fogerty!" exclaimed the artist, with a start of surprise. "Do you mean
the detective?"

"Yes," said Louise, regretting she had inadvertently mentioned the
name.

"But what is there now to detect?" asked Hetty suspiciously. "Our
troubles seem ended with the burning of the mill and the flitting of
Skeelty and his workmen."

Louise hardly knew how to reply; but Patsy, who trusted the queer girl
artist, said quite frankly:

"There remains the mystery of Thursday Smith to fathom, you know."

Hetty flushed and an indignant look swept over her face.

"What right has anyone to solve that mystery?" she asked defiantly.
"Isn't that Thursday Smith's own business?"

"Perhaps," returned Patsy, somewhat amused; "but Smith hasn't been able
to discover who he is--or was, rather--and seems really anxious to
know."

Hetty bent over her desk for a time. Then she looked up and her thin
features were white and drawn with anxiety.

"When you discover who Thursday Smith is," said she, "the Millville
Tribune will lose its right bower."

"Why?"

"Before his accident, or whatever it was that made him lose his memory,
he was an unusual man, a man of exceptional ability. You know that."

"We are all inclined to admit it," answered Patsy. "But what then?"

"Men of ability," declared Hetty slowly, "are of two classes: the very
successful, who attain high and honorable positions, or the clever
scoundrels who fasten themselves like leeches on humanity and bleed
their victims with heartless unconcern. What will you gain if you unmask
the past of Thursday Smith? You uncover a rogue or a man of affairs, and
in either case you will lose your pressman. Better leave the curtain
drawn, Miss Doyle, and accept Thursday Smith as he is."

There was so much good sense in this reasoning that all three girls were
impressed and began to regret that Uncle John had called Fogerty to
untangle the skein. But it was now too late for such repentance and,
after all, they were curious to discover who their remarkable employee
really was.

Even while the awkward silence that had fallen upon the group of girls
continued, the door opened to admit Uncle John, Fogerty, Major Doyle and
Arthur Weldon. Except for the detective they were stern-faced and
uncompromising.




CHAPTER XXII

UNMASKED


Quintus Fogerty was as unlike the typical detective as one could
imagine. Small in size, slight and boyish, his years could not readily
be determined by the ordinary observer. His face was deeply furrowed and
lined, yet a few paces away it seemed the face of a boy of eighteen. His
cold gray eyes were persistently staring but conveyed no inkling of his
thoughts. His brick-red hair was as unkempt as if it had never known a
comb, yet the attire of the great detective was as fastidiously neat as
if he had dressed for an important social function. Taken altogether
there was something mistrustful and uncanny about Fogerty's looks, and
his habit of eternally puffing cigarettes rendered his companionship
unpleasant. Yet of the man's professional ability there was no doubt;
Mr. Merrick and Arthur Weldon had had occasion to employ him before,
with results that justified their faith in him.

The detective greeted the young ladies with polite bows, supplemented by
an aimless compliment on the neatness of their office.

"Never would have recognized it as a newspaper sanctum," said he in his
thin, piping voice. "No litter, no stale pipes lying about, no cursing
and quarreling, no excitement whatever. The editorial room is the index
to the workshop; I'll see if the mechanical department is kept as
neatly."

He opened the door to the back room, passed through and closed it softly
behind him. Mr. Merrick made a dive for the door and followed Fogerty.

"What's the verdict, Arthur?" asked Louise curiously.

"Why, I--I believe the verdict isn't rendered yet," he hastily replied,
and followed Mr. Merrick into the pressroom.

"Now, then," cried Patsy, grabbing the major firmly, "you'll not stir a
step, sir, until you tell us the news!"

"What news, Patricia?" Inquired the old gentleman blandly.

"Who was Thursday Smith?"

"The identical individual he is now," said the Major.

"Don't prevaricate, sir! Who was he? What did he do? What is his right
name?"

"Is it because you are especially interested in this man, my dear, or
are ye simply consumed with feminine curiosity?"

"Be good, Daddy! Tell us all about it," said Patsy coaxingly.

"The man Thursday, then, was likely enough the brother of Robinson
Crusoe's man Friday."

"Major, you're trifling!"

"Or mayhap an ex-president of the United States, or forby the senator
from Oklahoma. Belike he was once minister to Borneo, an' came home in a
hurry an' forgot who he was. But John Merrick will be wanting me."

He escaped and opened the door. Then, with his hand on the knob, he
turned and added:

"Why don't ye come in, me journalistic investigators, and see the fun
for yerselves? I suspect there's an item in store for ye."

Then he went in, and they took the hint and entered the pressroom in a
fluttering group. Fogerty stood with his hands in his pockets intently
watching the Dwyer girls set type, while at his elbow Mr. Merrick was
explaining in a casual voice how many "m's" were required to make a
newspaper column. In another part of the long room Arthur Weldon was
leaning over a table containing the half-empty forms, as if critically
examining them. Smith, arrayed in overalls and jumper, was cleaning and
oiling the big press.

"A daily newspaper," said the major, loudly, as he held up a warning
finger to the bevy of nieces, behind whom Hetty's pale face appeared,
"means a daily grind for all concerned in it. There's no vacation for
the paper, no hyphens, no skipping a day or two if it has a bad cold;
it's the tyrant that leads its slaves by the nose, metaphorically, and
has no conscience. Just as regularly as the world rolls 'round the press
rolls out the newspaper, and human life or death makes little
difference to either of the revolutionists."

While he spoke the Major led the way across the room to the stereotyping
plant, which brought his party to a position near the press. Smith
glanced at them and went on with his work. It was not unusual to have
the pressroom thus invaded.

Presently Fogerty strolled over, smoking his eternal cigarette, and
stood watching the pressman, as if interested in the oiling of the
complicated machine. Smith, feeling himself under observation, glanced
up again in an unconcerned way, and as he faced the detective Fogerty
gave a cleverly assumed start and exclaimed:

"Good God!"

Instantly Thursday Smith straightened up and looked at the man
questioningly. Fogerty stretched out his hand and said, as if in wonder:

"Why, Melville, old man, what are you doing here? We wondered what had
become of you, all these months. Shake hands, my boy! I'm glad I've
found you."

Smith leaned against the press and stared at him with dilated eyes.
Everyone in the room was regarding the scene with intense but repressed
excitement.

"What's wrong, Harold?" continued Fogerty, as if hurt by the other's
hesitation to acknowledge their acquaintance. "You haven't forgotten me,
have you? I'm McCormick, you know, and you and I have had many a good
time together in the past."

Smith passed his hand across his forehead with a dazed gesture.

"What name did you call me, sir?" he asked.

"Melville; Harold Melville, of East Sixty-sixth street. I'm sure I'm
right. There can't be two like you in the world, you know."

Thursday Smith stepped down from the platform and with a staggering gait
walked to a stool, on which he weakly sank. He wiped the beads of
perspiration from his forehead and looked at Fogerty with a half
frightened air.

"And you--are--McCormick?" he faltered.

"Of course."

Smith stared a moment and then shook his head.

"It's no use," he said despairingly; "I can't recall a single memory of
either Harold Melville or--or his friend McCormick. Pardon me, sir; I
must confess my mind is absolutely blank concerning all my life previous
to the last two years. Until this moment I--I could not recall my own
name."

"H'm," muttered Fogerty; "you recall it now, don't you?"

"No. You tell me my name is Melville, and you seem to recognize me as a
man whom you once knew. I accept your statement in good faith, but I
cannot corroborate it from my own knowledge."

"That's queer," retorted Fogerty, his cold eyes fixed upon the man's
face.

"Let me explain, please," said Smith, and related his curious experience
in practically the same words he had employed when confiding it to Mr.
Merrick. "I had hoped," he concluded, "that if ever I met one who knew
me formerly, or heard my right name mentioned, my memory would come
back to me; but in this I am sorely disappointed. Did you know me well,
sir?"

"Pretty well," answered the detective, after a slight hesitation.

"Then tell me something about myself. Tell me who I was."

"Here--in public?" asked Fogerty, with a suggestive glance at the
spectators, who had involuntarily crowded nearer.

Smith flushed, but gazed firmly into the faces surrounding him.

"Why not?" he returned. "These young ladies and Mr. Merrick accepted me
without knowledge of my antecedents. They are entitled to as full an
explanation as--as I am."

"You place me, Melville, in a rather embarrassing position," declared
Fogerty. "This is a queer case--the queerest in all my experience.
Better let me post you in a private interview."

Smith trembled a bit, from nervousness; but he persisted in his demand.

"These people are entitled to the truth," said he. "Tell us frankly all
you know about me, and do not mince words--whatever the truth may be."

"Oh, it's not so bad," announced the detective, with a shrug; "or at
least it wouldn't be in New York, among your old aristocratic haunts.
But here, in a quiet country town, among these generous and
simple-hearted folks who have befriended you, the thing is rather
difficult to say."

"Say it!" commanded Smith.

"I will. Many New Yorkers remember the firm of Melville & Ford, the
cleverest pair of confidence men who ever undertook to fleece the
wealthy lambs of the metropolis."

"Confidence men!" gasped Smith, in a voice of horror.

"Yes, putting it mildly. You were both jolly good fellows and made a
host of friends. You were well-groomed, rode in automobiles, frequented
good clubs and had a stunning establishment on Sixty-sixth street where
you entertained lavishly. You could afford to, for there was where you
fleeced your victims. But it wasn't so very bad, as I said. You chose
the wealthy sons of the super-rich, who were glad to know such popular
men-about-town as Harold Melville and Edgar Ford. When one set of
innocents had been so thoroughly trimmed that they compared notes and
began to avoid you, you had only to pick up another bunch of lambs, for
New York contains many distinct flocks of the species. As they could
afford to lose, none of them ever complained to the police, although the
Central Office had an eye on you and knew your methods perfectly.

"Finally you made a mistake--or rather Ford did, for he was not as
clever as you were. He brought an imitation millionaire to your house; a
fellow who was putting up a brazen front on the smallest sort of a roll.
You won his money and he denounced you, getting away with a pack of
marked cards for evidence. At this you both took fright and decided on a
hasty retreat. Gathering together your plunder--which was a royal sum,
I'm convinced--you and Ford jumped into a motor car and--vanished from
New York.

"The balance of your history I base on premise. Ford has been located in
Chicago, where, with an ample supply of money, he is repeating his New
York operations; but Harold Melville has never been heard of until this
day. I think the true explanation is easily arrived at. Goaded by
cupidity--and perhaps envy of your superior talents--Ford took advantage
of the situation and, finding the automobile speeding along a deserted
road, knocked you on the head, tumbled you out of the car, and made off
with your combined winnings. The blow had the effect--not so uncommon as
you think--of destroying your recollection of your past life, and you
have for two years been wandering in total ignorance of what caused your
affliction."

During this recital Smith sat with his eyes eagerly fixed upon the
speaker's face, dwelling upon every word. At the conclusion of the story
he dropped his face in his hands a moment, visibly shuddering. Then
again he looked up, and after reading the circle of pitying faces
confronting him he bravely met Mr. Merrick's eyes.

"Sir," he said in a voice that faltered in spite of his efforts to
render it firm, "you now know who I am. When I first came to you I was a
mere irresponsible hobo, a wandering tramp who had adopted the name of
Thursday Smith because he was ignorant of his own, but who had no cause
to be ashamed of his manhood. To-day I am discovered in my true guise.
As Harold Melville, the disreputable trickster, I am not fit to remain
in your employ--to associate with honest men and women. You will forgive
my imposition, I think, because you know how thoroughly ignorant I was
of the truth; but I will impose upon you no longer. I am sorry, sir, for
I have been happy here; but I will go, thanking you for the kindly
generosity that prompted you to accept me as I seemed to be, not as I
am."

He rose, his face showing evidence of suffering, and bowed gravely.
Hetty Hewitt walked over and stood by his side, laying her hand gently
upon his arm.

But Thursday Smith did not know John Merrick very well. The little
gentleman had silently listened, observing meanwhile the demeanor of the
accused, and now he smiled in his pleasant, whimsical way and caught
Smith's hand in both his own.

"Man, man!" he cried, "you're misjudging both me and yourself, I don't
know this fellow Melville. You don't know him, either. But I do know
Thursday Smith, who has won my confidence and by his manly acts, and
I'll stand by him through thick and thin!"

"I am Harold Melville--the gambler--the confidence man."

"You're nothing of the sort, you're just Thursday Smith, and no more
responsible for Harold Melville than I am."

"Hooray!" exclaimed Patsy Doyle enthusiastically. "Uncle's right,
Thursday. You're our friend, and the mainstay of the _Millville Daily
Tribune_. We shall not allow you to desert us just because you've
discovered that your--your--ancestor--wasn't quite respectable."

"That's it, exactly," asserted Beth. "It's like hearing a tale of an
ancestor, Thursday, or of some member of your family who lived before
you. You cannot be responsible, in any way, for another man's
wickedness."

"As I look at it," said Louise reflectively, "you are just two years
old, Thursday, and innocent of any wrongdoing before that day you first
found yourself."

"There's no use our considering Melville at all," added Uncle John
cheerfully. "I'm sorry we ever heard of him, except that in one way it
clears up a mystery. Thursday Smith, we like you and trust you. Do not
doubt yourself because of this tale. I'll vouch for your fairness and
integrity. Forget Melville, who has never really existed so far as any
of us are concerned; be yourself, and count on our friendship and
regard, which Thursday Smith has fairly won."

Hetty was crying softly, her cheek laid against Thursday's sleeve. The
man stood as if turned to stone, but his cheeks were flushed, his eyes
sparkling, and his head proudly poised.

Fogerty lighted a fresh cigarette, watching the scene with an
imperturbable smile.

Suddenly Smith awoke to life. He half turned, looked wonderingly at
Hetty, and then folded her thin form in his arms and pressed a kiss on
her forehead.

Fogerty coughed. Uncle John jerked out his handkerchief and blew his
nose like a bugle call.

The major's eyes were moist, for the old soldier was sympathetic as a
child. But Patsy, a little catch in her voice, impulsively put her arms
around the unashamed pair and murmured: "I'm so glad, Hetty! I'm so
glad, Thursday! But--dear me--aren't we going to have any paper
to-morrow morning?"

That relieved the tension and everybody laughed. Thursday released Hetty
and shook Uncle John's hand most gratefully. Then they all wanted to
shake hands, and did until it came to Fogerty's turn. But now Smith drew
back and looked askance at the detective.

"I do not know you, Mr. McCormick," he said with dignity.

"My name's not McCormick; it's Fogerty," said the other, without malice.
"I was simply testing your memory by claiming to be an old friend.
Personally I never knew Harold Melville, but I'm mighty glad to make
Thursday Smith's acquaintance and will consider it an honor if you'll
shake my hand."

Smith was too happy to refuse. He took Fogerty's hand.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE JOURNALISTS ABDICATE


Mr. Merrick told Thursday Smith, in an apologetic way, how he had hired
Fogerty to unravel the mystery of his former life, and how the great
detective had gone to work so intelligently and skillfully that, with
the aid of a sketch Hetty had once made of the pressman, and which Mr.
Merrick sent on, he had been able to identify the man and unearth the
disagreeable details of his history.

Thursday was too humble, by this time, and too grateful, besides, to
resent Uncle John's interference. He admitted that, after all, it was
better he should know the truth.

"I've nothing to bother me now but the future," he said, "and with God's
help I mean to keep the name of Thursday Smith clean and free from any
reproach."

After the interview he went about his duties as before and Hetty sat
down at her desk and took the telegraphic news that came clicking over
the wire as if nothing important in her life had occurred. But the girl
journalists were all excitement and already were beginning to plan the
things they might do to Make Hetty and Thursday happier. Cox and Booth
had gone away and Mr. Merrick thanked Fogerty for his skillful service
and gave him a fat check.

"It's a mighty interesting case, sir," declared the detective, "and I'm
as glad as any of you that it has ended so comfortably. Whatever
Melville might have been--and his record is a little worse than I
related it--there's no doubt of Thursday Smith's honesty. He's a mighty
fine fellow, and Fate played a proper trick when she blotted out his
unscrupulous mind and left him as innocent as an unborn babe. He will do
well in his new life, I'm sure, and that girl of his, Hetty Hewitt--I've
know of her reckless ways for years--has also redeemed herself and
turned out a regular brick! All of which, Mr. Merrick is unusual in real
life, more's the pity, and therefore it makes even a cold-blooded
detective feel good to witness it."

Mr. Merrick smiled benignantly and Fogerty drove over to the Junction to
catch his train.

After luncheon, Patsy, while arranging her galley proofs, inquired of
Louise for the local column.

"Hetty said she'd attend to it," was the reply; "but we are all upset
to-day and things are at sixes and sevens."

"The column is all prepared, Miss Doyle," announced Hetty.

"Where is it?"

"Thursday has made it ready for the press. It's--illustrated," she
confessed. "I'd rather you wouldn't see it until the paper is out, if
you can trust me."

"To be sure," said Patsy. "That's one responsibility I'm relieved of,
anyhow."

The paper was a bit uneven in appearance next morning, but when Patsy
came down to breakfast she found both Uncle John and the major roaring
with laughter over Hetty's locals.

The first item stated that "Mrs. Thorne took tea at Sam Cotting's last
evening," (the Cottings being notoriously inhospitable) and the picture
showed Mrs. Thorne, a sour-faced woman, departing from the store with a
package of tea. Then came the announcement that "Eph Hildreth got shot
at West's hardware store," and there was a picture of West weighing out
a pound of buckshot for his customer. The next item said: "Our
distinguished fellow citizen, Marshall Peggy McNutt, was discovered
unconscious on his front porch at 3 p.m." The drawing of McNutt was one
of the best of the series. It was his habit to "snooze" in an easy chair
on his porch every afternoon, and Hetty depicted the little man with
both feet--meat and wood--on the rail, his mouth open and eyes shut,
while lusty snores were indicated by radiating lines and exclamation
points. The Widow Clark's cow occupied the next square, being tethered
to a stake while Skim approached the animal with pail and milking-stool.
Below the drawing were the words: "Mr. Skimton Clark, cowward." A few
other local hits were concluded by a picture of Hon. Ojoy Boglin shaking
his fist at Mr. Skeelty, who held a package of money in his grasp
labeled "insurance." Below was the simple legend: "O Joy!"

The artist's cleverness became the subject of conversation at the
breakfast table, and Arthur remarked:

"You won't be able to hold Hetty in Millville long. Her talent enables
her to draw big salaries in New York and it isn't likely she will
consent to bury herself in this little town."

"I'm not so sure," said Patsy. "If we can hold Thursday Smith we can
hold Hetty, you know."

"We won't need to hold either of them for long," observed Beth; "for in
another three weeks or so we must leave here and return to the city,
when of course the _Millville Daily Tribune_ must suspend publication."

"I've been thinking of that," said Uncle John.

"So have I," declared Patsy. "For a long time I was puzzled what to do,
for I hated dreadfully to kill our dear _Tribune_ after we've made it
such a nice paper. Yet I knew very well we couldn't stay here all winter
and run it. But last night I had an inspiration. Thursday will marry
Hetty, I suppose, and they can both stay here and run the Tribune. They
are doing most of the work now. If Uncle John agrees, we will sell out
to them on 'easy terms.'"

"Good gracious, Patsy!" chuckled the major, "wherever can the poor
things borrow money to keep going? Do you want to load onto an innocent
bride an' groom the necessity of meeting a deficit of a couple of
hundred dollars every week?"

Patsy's face fell.

"They have no money, I know," she said, "except what they earn."

"And their wages'll be cut off when they begin hiring themselves," added
the major. "No; you can't decently thrust such an incubus on Hetty and
Thursday--or on anyone else. You've been willing to pay the piper for
the sake of the dance, but no one else would do it."

"Quite true," agreed Arthur. "The days of the _Millville Tribune_ are
numbered."

"Let us not settle that question just yet," proposed Mr. Merrick, who
had been deep in thought. "I'll consider Patsy's proposition for awhile
and then talk with Thursday. The paper belongs to the girls, but the
outfit is mine, and I suppose I may do what I please with it when my
nieces retire from journalism."

Even the major could not demur at this statement and so the conversation
dropped. During the next few days Uncle John visited the printing office
several times and looked over the complete little plant with speculative
eyes. Then one day he made a trip to Malvern, thirty miles up the
railway line from the Junction, where a successful weekly paper had long
been published. He interviewed the editor, examined the outfit
critically, and after asking numerous questions returned to Millville in
excellent spirits.

Then he invited Thursday Smith and Hetty to dine at the farm on Saturday
evening, which was the one evening in the week they were free, there
being no Sunday morning paper. Thursday had bought a new suit of clothes
since he came to the _Tribune_, and Hetty, after much urging, finally
prevailed upon him to accept the invitation. When the young man appeared
at the farm he wore his new suit with an air of perfect ease that
disguised its cheapness, and it was noticed that he seemed quite at home
in the handsome living-room, where the party assembled after dinner.

"I am in search of information, Thursday," said Uncle John in his
pleasant way. "Will you permit me to question you a bit?"

"Certainly, sir."

"And you, Hetty?"

"Ask anything you like, sir."

"Thank you. To begin with, what are your future plans? I understand, of
course, you are to be married; but--afterward?"

"We haven't considered that as yet, sir," replied Thursday thoughtfully.
"Of course we shall stay with the _Tribune_ as long as you care to
employ our services; but--"

"Well?"

"I have been given to understand the young ladies plan to return to New
York at the end of September, and in that case of course the paper will
suspend."

"My nieces will be obliged to abandon journalism, to be sure," said Mr.
Merrick; "but I see no reason why the paper should suspend. How would
you and Hetty like to remain in Millville and run it?"

Both Thursday and Hetty smiled, but it was the man who answered;

"We cannot afford such a luxury, sir."

"Would you care to make your future home in Millville?"

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Hetty. "I love the quaint little town dearly, and
the villagers are all my friends. I'm sure Thursday doesn't care to go
back to New York, where--where Harold Melville once lived. But, as he
truly says, we couldn't make a living with the _Tribune_, even if you
gave us the use of the plant."

"Let us see about that," said Uncle John. "I will admit, in advance,
that a daily paper in such a place is absurd. None of us quite
understood that when we established the _Tribune_. My nieces thought a
daily the only satisfactory sort of newspaper, because they were used to
such, but it did not take long to convince me--and perhaps them--that in
spite of all our efforts the _Millville Daily Tribune_ would never
thrive. It is too expensive to pay its own way and requires too much
work to be a pleasant plaything. Only unbounded enthusiasm and energy
have enabled my clever nieces to avoid being swamped by the monster
their ambition created."

"That," said Patsy, with a laugh, "is very clearly and concisely put, my
dear Uncle."

"It was never intended to be a permanent thing, anyhow," continued Mr.
Merrick; "yet I must express my admiration for the courage and talent my
nieces have displayed in forcing a temporary success where failure was
the logical conclusion. Shortly, however, they intend to retire
gracefully from the field of journalism, leaving me with a model country
newspaper plant on my hands. Therefore it is I, Thursday and Hetty, and
not my nieces, who have a proposition to place before you.

"While a daily paper is not appropriate in Millville, a weekly paper,
distributed throughout Chazy County, would not only be desirable but
could be made to pay an excellent yearly profit. Through the enterprise
of Joe Wegg, Millville is destined to grow rapidly from this time on,
and Chazy County is populous enough to support a good weekly paper, in
any event. Therefore, my proposition is this: To turn the plant over to
Mr. and Mrs. Thursday Smith, who will change the name to the _Millville
Weekly Tribune_ and run it as a permanent institution. Your only expense
for labor will be one assistant to set type and do odd jobs, since you
are so competent that you can attend to all else yourselves. We will cut
out the expensive news service we have heretofore indulged in and
dispense with the private telegraph wire. Joe Wegg says he'll furnish
you with what power you need free of all charge, because the paper will
boost Millville's interests, with which his own interests are
identified. Now, then, tell me what you think of my proposal."

Hetty and Thursday had listened attentively and their faces proved they
were enthusiastic over the idea. They said at once they would be glad to
undertake the proposition.

"However," said Thursday, after a little reflection, "there are two
things that might render our acceptance impossible. I suppose you will
require rent for the outfit; but for a time, until we get well started,
we could not afford to pay as much as you have a right to demand."

"I have settled on my demands," replied Mr. Merrick, "and hope you will
agree to them. You must pay me for the use of the outfit twenty per cent
of your net profits, over and above all your operating and living
expenses. When this sum has reimbursed me for my investment, the outfit
will belong to you."

Thursday Smith looked his amazement.

"That seems hardly business-like, sir," he protested.

"You are right; but this isn't entirely a business deal. You are saving
my nieces the humiliation of suspending the paper they established and
have labored on so lovingly. Moreover, I regard you and Hetty as friends
whom I am glad to put in the way of a modest but--I venture to
predict--a successful business career. What is your second objection?"

"I heard Mr. West say the other day that he would soon need the building
we occupy to store his farm machinery in."

"True; but I have anticipated that. I have completed plans for the
erection of a new building for the newspaper, which will be located on
the vacant lot next to the hotel. I purchased the lot a long time ago.
The new building, for which the lumber is already ordered, will be a
better one than the shed we are now in, and on the second floor I intend
to have a cozy suite of rooms where you and Hetty can make a home of
your own. Eh? How does that strike you, my children?"

Their faces were full of wonder and delight.

"The new building goes with the outfit, on the same terms," continued
Mr. Merrick. "That is I take one-fifth of your net profits for the whole
thing."

"But, sir," suggested Thursday, "suppose no profits materialize?"

"Then I have induced you to undertake a poor venture and must suffer the
consequences, which to me will be no hardship at all. In that case I
will agree to find some better business for you, but I am quite positive
you will make a go of the _Millville Weekly Tribune_."

"I think so, too, Mr. Merrick, or I would not accept your generous
offer," replied Smith.

"What do you think, Hetty?"

"The idea pleases me immensely," she declared. "It is a splendid
opportunity for us, and will enable us to live here quietly and forget
the big outside world. New York has had a bad influence on both you and
me, Thursday, and here we can begin a new life of absolute
respectability."

"When do you intend to be married?" asked Patsy.

"We have scarcely thought of that, as yet, for until this evening we did
not know what the future held in store for us."

"Couldn't you arrange the wedding before we leave?" asked Beth. "It
would delight us so much to be present at the ceremony."

"I think we owe the young ladies that much, Thursday," said Hetty, after
a brief hesitation.

"Nothing could please me better," he asserted eagerly.

So they canvassed the wedding, and Patsy proposed they transfer the
paper to Thursday and Hetty--to become a weekly instead of a daily--in
a week's time, and celebrate the wedding immediately after the second
issue, so as to give the bridal couple a brief vacation before getting
to work again. Neither of them wished to take a wedding trip, and Mr.
Merrick promised to rush the work on the new building so they could move
into their new rooms in the course of a few weeks.




CHAPTER XXIV

A CHEERFUL BLUNDER


"We would like to ask your advice about one thing, sir," said Thursday
Smith to Mr. Merrick, a little later that same evening. "Would it be
legal for me to marry under the name of Thursday Smith, or must I use my
real name--Harold Melville?"

Uncle John could not answer this question, nor could the major or
Arthur. Hetty and her fianc had both decided to cling to the name of
Thursday Smith thereafter, and they disliked to be married under any
other--especially the detestable one of Harold Melville.

"An act of legislature would render your new name legal, I believe,"
said Mr. Merrick; "but such an act could not be passed until after the
date you have planned to be married."

"But if it was made legal afterward it wouldn't matter greatly,"
suggested the major.

"I do not think it matters at all," asserted Hetty. "It's the man I'm
marrying, not his name. I don't much care what he calls himself."

"Oh, but it must be legal, you know!" exclaimed Patsy. "You don't care
now, perhaps, but you might in the future. We cannot be certain, you
know, that Thursday is entirely free from his former connection with
Harold Melville."

"Quite true," agreed the major.

"Then," said Smith, with evident disappointment, "I must use the hateful
name of Melville for the wedding, and afterward abandon it for as long
as possible."

The nieces were greatly pleased with Uncle John's arrangement, which
relieved them of the newspaper and also furnished Thursday and Hetty, of
whom they had grown really fond, with a means of gaining a livelihood.

Millville accepted the new arrangement with little adverse comment, the
villagers being quite satisfied with a weekly paper, which would cost
them far less than the daily had done. Everyone was pleased to know
Thursday Smith had acquired the business, for both he and Hetty had won
the cordial friendship of the simple-hearted people and were a little
nearer to them than "the nabob's girls" could ever be.

Preparations were speedily pushed forward for the wedding, which the
nieces undertook to manage themselves, the prospective bride and groom
being too busy at the newspaper office to devote much attention to the
preliminaries of the great event.

The ceremony was to take place at the farmhouse of Mr. Merrick, and
every inhabitant of Millville was invited to be present. The minister
would drive over from Hooker's Falls, and the ceremony was to be
followed by a grand feast, for which delicacies were to be imported from
New York.

The girls provided a complete trousseau for Hetty, as their wedding
present, while Arthur and the major undertook to furnish the new
apartments, which were already under construction. Uncle John's gift was
a substantial check that would furnish the newly married couple with
modest capital to promote their business or which they could use in case
of emergencies.

It was the very day before the wedding that Fogerty gave them so great
and agreeable a surprise that Uncle John called it "Fogerty's Wedding
Present" ever afterward. In its physical form it was merely a telegram,
but in its spiritual and moral aspect it proved the greatest gift
Thursday and Hetty were destined to receive. The telegram was dated from
New York and read as follows:

"Harold Melville just arrested here for passing a bogus check under an
assumed name. Have interviewed him and find he is really Melville, so
Thursday Smith must be some one else, and doubtless a more respectable
character. Shall I undertake to discover his real identity?"

Uncle John let Thursday and Hetty answer this question, and their reply
was a positive "no!"

"The great Fogerty made such a blunder the first time," said Hetty, who
was overjoyed at the glorious news, "that he might give poor Thursday
another dreadful scare if he tackled the job again. Let the mystery
remain unfathomable."

"But, on the contrary, my dear, Fogerty might discover that Thursday was
some eminent and good man--as I am firmly convinced is the truth,"
suggested Mr. Merrick.

"He's that right now," asserted Hetty. "For my part, I prefer to know
nothing of his former history, and Thursday says the present situation
thoroughly contents him."

"I am more than contented," said Thursday, with a happy smile. "Hetty
has cured me of my desire to wander, and no matter what I might have
been in the past I am satisfied to remain hereafter a country editor."




CHAPTER I.

BETH RECEIVES AN INVITATION.


Professor De Graf was sorting the mail at the breakfast table.

"Here's a letter for you, Beth," said he, and tossed it across the
cloth to where his daughter sat.

The girl raised her eyebrows, expressing surprise. It was something
unusual for her to receive a letter. She picked up the square envelope
between a finger and thumb and carefully read the inscription, "Miss
Elizabeth De Graf, Cloverton, Ohio." Turning the envelope she found on
the reverse flap a curious armorial emblem, with the word "Elmhurst."

Then she glanced at her father, her eyes big and somewhat startled
in expression. The Professor was deeply engrossed in a letter from
Benjamin Lowenstein which declared that a certain note must be paid at
maturity. His weak, watery blue eyes stared rather blankly from behind
the gold-rimmed spectacles. His flat nostrils extended and compressed
like those of a frightened horse; and the indecisive mouth was
tremulous. At the best the Professor was not an imposing personage.
He wore a dressing-gown of soiled quilted silk and linen not too
immaculate; but his little sandy moustache and the goatee that
decorated his receding chin were both carefully waxed into sharp
points--an indication that he possessed at least one vanity. Three
days in the week he taught vocal and instrumental music to the
ambitious young ladies of Cloverton. The other three days he rode to
Pelham's Grove, ten miles away, and taught music to all who wished to
acquire that desirable accomplishment. But the towns were small and
the fees not large, so that Professor De Graf had much difficulty in
securing an income sufficient for the needs of his family.

The stout, sour-visaged lady who was half-hidden by her newspaper at
the other end of the table was also a bread-winner, for she taught
embroidery to the women of her acquaintance and made various articles
of fancy-work that were sold at Biggar's Emporium, the largest store
in Cloverton. So, between them, the Professor and Mrs. DeGraf managed
to defray ordinary expenses and keep Elizabeth at school; but there
were one or two dreadful "notes" that were constantly hanging over
their heads like the sword of Damocles, threatening to ruin them at
any moment their creditors proved obdurate.

Finding her father and mother both occupied, the girl ventured to open
her letter. It was written in a sharp, angular, feminine hand and read
as follows:

"My Dear Niece: It will please me to have you spend the months of July
and August as my guest at Elmhurst. I am in miserable health, and
wish to become better acquainted with you before I die. A check for
necessary expenses is enclosed and I shall expect you to arrive
promptly on the first of July.

"Your Aunt,

"JANE MERRICK."

A low exclamation from Elizabeth caused her father to look in her
direction. He saw the bank check lying beside her plate and the sight
lent an eager thrill to his voice.

"What is it, Beth?"

"A letter from Aunt Jane."

Mrs. De Graf gave a jump and crushed the newspaper into her lap.

"What!" she screamed.

"Aunt Jane has invited me to spend two months at Elmhurst" said
Elizabeth, and passed the letter to her mother, who grabbed it
excitedly.

"How big is the check, Beth?" enquired the Professor, in a low tone.

"A hundred dollars. She says it's for my expenses.

"Huh! Of course you won't go near that dreadful old cat, so we can use
the money to better advantage."

"Adolph!"

The harsh, cutting voice was that of his wife, and the Professor
shrank back in his chair.

"Your sister Jane is a mean, selfish, despicable old female," he
muttered. "You've said so a thousand times yourself, Julia."

"My sister Jane is a very wealthy woman, and she's a Merrick,"
returned the lady, severely. "How dare you--a common De Graf--asperse
her character?"

"The De Grafs are a very good family," he retorted.

"Show me one who is wealthy! Show me one who is famous!"

"I can't," said the Professor. "But they're decent, and they're
generous, which is more than can be said for your tribe."

"Elizabeth must go to Elmhurst," said Mrs. De Graf, ignoring her
husband's taunt.

"She shan't. Your sister refused to loan me fifty dollars last year,
when I was in great trouble. She hasn't given you a single cent since
I married you. No daughter of mine shall go In Elmhurst to be bullied
and insulted by Jane Merrick."

"Adolph, try to conceal the fact that you're a fool," said his wife.
"Jane is in a desperate state of health, and can't live very long at
the best. I believe she's decided to leave her money to Elizabeth, or
she never would have invited the child to visit her. Do you want to
fly in the face of Providence, you doddering old imbecile?"

"No," said the Professor, accepting the doubtful appellation without a
blush. "How much do you suppose Jane is worth?"

"A half million, at the very least. When she was a girl she inherited
from Thomas Bradley, the man she was engaged to marry, and who was
suddenly killed in a railway accident, more than a quarter of a
million dollars, besides that beautiful estate of Elmhurst. I don't
believe Jane has even spent a quarter of her income, and the fortune
must have increased enormously. Elizabeth will be one of the
wealthiest heiresses in the country!"

"If she gets the money, which I doubt," returned the Professor,
gloomily.

"Why should you doubt it, after this letter?"

"You had another sister and a brother, and they both had children,"
said he.

"They each left a girl. I admit. But Jane has never favored them
any more than she has me. And this invitation, coming; when Jane is
practically on her death bed, is a warrant that Beth will get the
money."

"I hope she will," sighed the music teacher. "We all need it bad
enough, I'm sure."

During this conversation Elizabeth, who might be supposed the one most
interested in her Aunt's invitation, sat silently at her place, eating
her breakfast with her accustomed calmness of demeanor and scarcely
glancing at her parents.

She had pleasant and quite regular features, for a girl of fifteen,
with dark hair and eyes--the "Merrick eyes," her mother proudly
declared--and a complexion denoting perfect health and colored with
the rosy tints of youth. Her figure was a bit slim and unformed,
and her shoulders stooped a little more than was desirable; but in
Cloverton Elizabeth had the reputation of being "a pretty girl," and a
sullen and unresponsive one as well.

Presently she rose from her seat, glanced at the clock, and then went
into the hall to get her hat and school-books. The prospect of being
an heiress some day had no present bearing on the fact that it was
time to start for school.

Her father came to the door with the check in his hand.

"Just sign your name on the back of this, Beth," said he, "and I'll
get it cashed for you."

The girl shook her head.

"No, father," she answered. "If I decide to go to Aunt Jane's I must
buy some clothes; and if you get the money I'll never see a cent of
it."

"When will you decide?" he asked.

"There's no hurry. I'll take time to think it over," she replied. "I
hate Aunt Jane, of course; so if I go to her I must be a hypocrite,
and pretend to like her, or she never will leave me her property.

"Well, Beth?"

"Perhaps it will be worth while; but if I go into that woman's house
I'll be acting a living lie."

"But think of the money!" said her mother.

"I do think of it. That's why I didn't tell you at once to send the
check back to Aunt Jane. I'm going to think of everything before I
decide. But if I go--if I allow this money to make me a hypocrite--I
won't stop at trifles, I assure you. It's in my nature to be
dreadfully wicked and cruel and selfish, and perhaps the money isn't
worth the risk I run of becoming depraved."

"Elizabeth!"

"Good-bye; I'm late now," she continued, in the same quiet tone, and
walked slowly down the walk.

The Professor twisted his moustache and looked into his wife's eyes
with a half frightened glance.

"Beth's a mighty queer girl," he muttered.

"She's very like her Aunt Jane," returned Mrs. De Graf, thoughtfully
gazing after her daughter. "But she's defiant and wilful enough for
all the Merricks put together. I do hope she'll decide to go to
Elmhurst."




CHAPTER II.

MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.


In the cosy chamber of an apartment located in a fashionable quarter
of New York Louise Merrick reclined upon a couch, dressed in a
dainty morning gown and propped and supported by a dozen embroidered
cushions.

Upon a taboret beside her stood a box of bonbons, the contents of
which she occasionally nibbled as she turned the pages of her novel.

The girl had a pleasant and attractive face, although its listless
expression was singular in one so young. It led you to suspect that
the short seventeen years of her life had robbed her of all the
anticipation and eagerness that is accustomed to pulse in strong young
blood, and filled her with experiences that compelled her to accept
existence in a half bored and wholly matter-of-fact way.

The room was tastefully though somewhat elaborately furnished; yet
everything in it seemed as fresh and new as if it had just come from
the shop--which was not far from the truth. The apartment itself
was new, with highly polished floors and woodwork, and decorations
undimmed by time. Even the girl's robe, which she wore so gracefully,
was new, and the books upon the center-table were of the latest
editions.

The portiere was thrust aside and an elderly lady entered the room,
seating herself quietly at the window, and, after a single glance at
the form upon the couch, beginning to embroider patiently upon some
work she took from a silken bag. She moved so noiselessly that the
girl did not hear her and for several minutes absolute silence
pervaded the room.

Then, however, Louise in turning a leaf glanced up and saw the head
bent over the embroidery. She laid down her book and drew an open
letter from between the cushions beside her, which she languidly
tossed into the other's lap.

"Who is this woman, mamma?" she asked.

Mrs. Merrick glanced at the letter and then read it carefully through,
before replying.

"Jane Merrick is your father's sister," she said, at last, as she
thoughtfully folded the letter and placed it upon the table.

"Why have I never heard of her before?" enquired the girl, with a
slight accession of interest in her tones.

"That I cannot well explain. I had supposed you knew of your poor
father's sister Jane, although you were so young when he died that it
is possible he never mentioned her name in your presence."

"They were not on friendly terms, you know. Jane was rich, having
inherited a fortune and a handsome country place from a young man whom
she was engaged to marry, but who died on the eve of his wedding day."

"How romantic!" exclaimed Louise.

"It does seem romantic, related in this way," replied her mother. "But
with the inheritance all romance disappeared from your aunt's life.
She became a crabbed, disagreeable woman, old before her time and
friendless because she suspected everyone of trying to rob her of her
money. Your poor father applied to her in vain for assistance, and I
believe her refusal positively shortened his life. When he died, after
struggling bravely to succeed in his business, he left nothing but his
life-insurance."

"Thank heaven he left that!" sighed Louise.

"Yes; we would have been beggared, indeed, without it," agreed Mrs.
Merrick. "Yet I often wonder, Louise, how we managed to live upon the
interest of that money for so many years."

"We didn't live--we existed," corrected the girl, yawning. "We
scrimped and pinched, and denied ourselves everything but bare
necessities. And had it not been for your brilliant idea, mater dear,
we would still be struggling in the depths of poverty."

Mrs. Merrick frowned, and leaned back in her chair.

"I sometimes doubt if the idea was so brilliant, after all," she
returned, with a certain grimness of expression. "We're plunging,
Louise; and it may be into a bottomless pit."

"Don't worry, dear," said the girl, biting into a bonbon. "We are
only on the verge of our great adventure, and there's no reason to
be discouraged yet, I assure you. Brilliant! Of course the idea
was brilliant, mamma. The income of that insurance money was
insignificant, but the capital is a very respectable sum. I am just
seventeen years of age--although I feel that I ought to be thirty, at
the least--and in three years I shall be twenty, and a married woman.
You decided to divide our capital into three equal parts, and spend a
third of it each year, this plan enabling us to live in good style and
to acquire a certain social standing that will allow me to select a
wealthy husband. It's a very brilliant idea, my dear! Three years is a
long time. I'll find my Croesus long before that, never fear."

"You ought to," returned the mother, thoughtfully. "But if you fail,
we shall be entirely ruined."

"A strong incentive to succeed." said Louise, smiling. "An ordinary
girl might not win out; but I've had my taste of poverty, and I don't
like it. No one will suspect us of being adventurers, for as long as
we live in this luxurious fashion we shall pay our bills promptly and
be proper and respectable in every way. The only chance we run lies in
the danger that eligible young men may prove shy, and refuse to take
our bait; but are we not diplomats, mother dear? We won't despise a
millionaire, but will be content with a man who can support us in good
style, or even in comfort, and in return for his money I'll be a very
good wife to him. That seems sensible and wise, I'm sure, and not at
all difficult of accomplishment."

Mrs. Merrick stared silently out of the window, and for a few moments
seemed lost in thought.

"I think, Louise," she said at last, "you will do well to cultivate
your rich aunt, and so have two strings to your bow."

"You mean that I should accept her queer invitation to visit her?"

"Yes."

"She has sent me a check for a hundred dollars. Isn't it funny?"

"Jane was always a whimsical woman. Perhaps she thinks we are quite
destitute, and fears you would not be able to present a respectable
appearance at Elmhurst without this assistance. But it is an evidence
of her good intentions. Finding death near at hand she is obliged to
select an heir, and so invites you to visit her that she may study
your character and determine whether you are worthy to inherit her
fortune."

The girl laughed, lightly.

"It will be easy to cajole the old lady," she said. "In two days I can
so win her heart that she will regret she has neglected me so long."

"Exactly."

"If I get her money we will change our plans, and abandon the
adventure we were forced to undertake. But if, for any reason, that
plan goes awry, we can fall back upon this prettily conceived scheme
which we have undertaken. As you say, it is well to have two strings
to one's bow; and during July and August everyone will be out of town,
and so we shall lose no valuable time."

Mrs. Merrick did not reply. She stitched away in a methodical manner,
as if abstracted, and Louise crossed her delicate hands behind her
head and gazed at her mother reflectively. Presently she said:

"Tell me more of my father's family. Is this rich aunt of mine the
only relative he had?"

"No, indeed. There were two other sisters and a brother--a very
uninteresting lot, with the exception, of your poor father. The eldest
was John Merrick, a common tinsmith, if I remember rightly, who went
into the far west many years ago and probably died there, for he was
never heard from. Then came Jane, who in her young days had some
slight claim to beauty. Anyway, she won the heart of Thomas Bradley,
the wealthy young man I referred to, and she must have been clever to
have induced him to leave her his money. Your father was a year or so
younger than Jane, and after him came Julia, a coarse and
disagreeable creature who married a music-teacher and settled in some
out-of-the-way country town. Once, while your father was alive, she
visited us for a few days, with her baby daughter, and nearly drove us
all crazy. Perhaps she did not find us very hospitable, for we were
too poor to entertain lavishly. Anyway, she went away suddenly after
you had a fight with her child and nearly pulled its hair out by the
roots, and I have never heard of her since."

"A daughter, eh," said Louise, musingly. "Then this rich Aunt Jane has
another niece besides myself."

"Perhaps two," returned Mrs. Merrick; "for her youngest sister, who
was named Violet, married a vagabond Irishman and had a daughter
about a year younger than you. The mother died, but whether the child
survived her or not I have never learned."

"What was her name?" asked Louise.

"I cannot remember. But it is unimportant. You are the only Merrick of
them all, and that is doubtless the reason Jane has sent for you."

The girl shook her blonde head.

"I don't like it," she observed.

"Don't like what?"

"All this string of relations. It complicates matters."

Mrs. Merrick seemed annoyed.

"If you fear your own persuasive powers," she said, with almost a
sneer in her tones, "you'd better not go to Elmhurst. One or the
other of your country cousins might supplant you in your dear aunt's
affections."

The girl yawned and took up her neglected novel.

"Nevertheless, mater dear," she said briefly, "I shall go."




CHAPTER III.

PATSY.


"Now, Major, stand up straight and behave yourself! How do you expect
me to sponge your vest when you're wriggling around in that way?"

"Patsy, dear, you're so sweet this evening, I just had to kiss your
lips."

"Don't do it again, sir," replied Patricia, severely, as she scrubbed
the big man's waistcoat with a damp cloth. "And tell me, Major, how
you ever happened to get into such a disgraceful condition."

"The soup just shpilled," said the Major, meekly.

Patricia laughed merrily. She was a tiny thing, appearing to be no
more than twelve years old, although in reality she was sixteen. Her
hair was a decided red--not a beautiful "auburn," but really red--and
her round face was badly freckled. Her nose was too small and her
mouth too wide to be beautiful, but the girl's wonderful blue eyes
fully redeemed these faults and led the observer to forget all else
but their fascinations. They could really dance, these eyes, and send
out magnetic, scintillating sparks of joy and laughter that were
potent to draw a smile from the sourest visage they smiled upon.
Patricia was a favorite with all who knew her, but the big,
white-moustached Major Doyle, her father, positively worshipped her,
and let the girl rule him as her fancy dictated.

"Now, sir, you're fairly decent again," she said, after a few vigorous
scrubs. "So put on your hat and we'll go out to dinner."

They occupied two small rooms at the top of a respectable but
middle-class tenement building, and had to descend innumerable flights
of bare wooden stairs before they emerged upon a narrow street
thronged with people of all sorts and descriptions except those who
were too far removed from the atmosphere of Duggan street to know that
it existed.

The big major walked stiffly and pompously along, swinging his
silver-trimmed cane in one hand while Patricia clung to his other arm.
The child wore a plain grey cloak, for the evening was chill. She had
a knack of making her own clothes, all of simple material and fashion,
but fitting neatly and giving her an air of quiet refinement that made
more than one passer-by turn to look back at her curiously.

After threading their way for several blocks they turned in at the
open door of an unobtrusive restaurant where many of the round white
tables were occupied by busy and silent patrons.

The proprietor nodded to the major and gave Patricia a smile. There
was no need to seat them, for they found the little table in the
corner where they were accustomed to eat, and sat down.

"Did you get paid tonight?" asked the girl.

"To be sure, my Patsy."

"Then hand over the coin," she commanded.

The major obeyed. She counted it carefully and placed it in her
pocketbook, afterwards passing a half-dollar back to her father.

"Remember, Major, no riotous living! Make that go as far as you can,
and take care not to invite anyone to drink with you."

"Yes, Patsy."

"And now I'll order the dinner."

The waiter was bowing and smiling beside her. Everyone smiled at
Patsy, it seemed.

They gave the usual order, and then, after a moment's hesitation, she
added:

"And a bottle of claret for the Major."

Her father fairly gasped with amazement.

"Patsy!"

People at the near-by tables looked up as her gay laugh rang out, and
beamed upon her in sympathy.

"I'm not crazy a bit. Major," said she, patting the hand he had
stretched toward her, partly in delight and partly in protest. "I've
just had a raise, that's all, and we'll celebrate the occasion."

Her father tucked the napkin under his chin then looked at her
questioningly.

"Tell me, Patsy."

"Madam Borne sent me to a swell house on Madison Avenue this morning,
because all her women were engaged. I dressed the lady's hair in
my best style, Major, and she said it was much more becoming than
Juliette ever made it. Indeed, she wrote a note to Madam, asking her
to send me, hereafter, instead of Juliette, and Madam patted my head
and said I would be a credit to her, and my wages would be ten dollars
a week, from now on. Ten dollars. Major! As much as you earn yourself
at that miserable bookkeeping!"

"Sufferin' Moses!" ejaculated the astonished major, staring back into
her twinkling eyes, "if this kapes on, we'll be millionaires, Patsy."

"We're millionaires, now." responded Patsy, promptly, "because we've
health, and love, and contentment--and enough money to keep us from
worrying. Do you know what I've decided, Major, dear? You shall go to
make that visit to your colonel that you've so long wanted to have.
The vacation will do you good, and you can get away all during July,
because you haven't rested for five years. I went to see Mr. Conover
this noon, and he said he'd give you the month willingly, and keep the
position for you when you returned."

"What! You spoke to old Conover about me?"

"This noon. It's all arranged, daddy, and you'll just have a glorious
time with the old colonel. Bless his dear heart, he'll be overjoyed to
have you with him, at last."

The major pulled out his handkerchief, blew his nose vigorously, and
then surreptitiously wiped his eyes.

"Ah, Patsy, Patsy; it's an angel you are, and nothing less at all, at
all."

"Rubbish, Major. Try your claret, and see if it's right. And eat your
fish before it gets cold. I'll not treat you again, sir, unless you
try to look happy. Why, you seem as glum as old Conover himself!"

The major was positively beaming.

"Would it look bad for me to kiss you, Patsy?"

"Now?"

"Now and right here in this very room!"

"Of course it would. Try and behave, like the gentleman you are, and
pay attention to your dinner!"

It was a glorious meal. The cost was twenty-five cents a plate, but
the gods never feasted more grandly in Olympus than these two simple,
loving souls in that grimy Duggan street restaurant.

Over his coffee the major gave a sudden start and looked guiltily into
Patricia's eyes.

"Now, then," she said, quickly catching the expression, "out with it."

"It's a letter," said the major. "It came yesterday, or mayhap the day
before. I don't just remember."

"A letter! And who from?" she cried, surprised.

"An ould vixen."

"And who may that be?"

"Your mother's sister Jane. I can tell by the emblem on the flap of
the envelope," said he, drawing a crumpled paper from his breast
pocket.

"Oh, _that_ person," said Patsy, with scorn. "Whatever induced her to
write to _me?_" "You might read it and find out," suggested the major.

Patricia tore open the envelope and scanned the letter. Her eyes
blazed.

"What is it, Mavoureen?"

"An insult!" she answered, crushing the paper in her hand and then
stuffing it into the pocket of her dress. "Light your pipe, daddy,
dear. Here--I'll strike the match."




CHAPTER IV.

LOUISE MAKES A DISCOVERY.


"How did you enjoy the reception, Louise?"

"Very well, mamma. But I made the discovery that my escort. Harry
Wyndham, is only a poor cousin of the rich Wyndham family, and will
never have a penny he doesn't earn himself."

"I knew that," said Mrs. Merrick. "But Harry has the entree into some
very exclusive social circles. I hope you treated him nicely, Louise.
He can be of use to us."

"Oh, yes, I think I interested him; but he's a very stupid boy. By the
way, mamma, I had an adventure last evening, which I have had no time
to tell you of before."

"Yes?"

"It has given me quite a shock. You noticed the maid you ordered to
come from Madam Borne to dress my hair for the reception?"

"I merely saw her. Was she unsatisfactory?"

"She was very clever. I never looked prettier, I am sure. The maid is
a little, demure thing, very young for such a position, and positively
homely and common in appearance. But I hardly noticed her until she
dropped a letter from her clothing. It fell just beside me, and I saw
that it was addressed to no less a personage than my rich aunt, Miss
Jane Merrick, at Elmhurst. Curious to know why a hair-dresser should
be in correspondence with Aunt Jane, I managed to conceal the letter
under my skirts until the maid was gone. Then I put it away until
after the reception. It was sealed and stamped, all ready for the
post, but I moistened the flap and easily opened it. Guess what I
read?"

"I've no idea," replied Mrs. Merrick.

"Here it is," continued Louise, producing a letter and carefully
unfolding it. "Listen to this, if you please: 'Aunt Jane.' She doesn't
even say 'dear' or 'respected,' you observe."

'Your letter to me, asking me to visit you, is almost an insult
after your years of silence and neglect and your refusals to assist
my poor mother when she was in need. Thank God we can do without
your friendship and assistance now, for my honored father, Major
Gregory Doyle, is very prosperous and earns all we need. I return your
check with my compliments. If you are really ill, I am sorry for you,
and would go to nurse you were you not able to hire twenty nurses,
each of whom would have fully as much love and far more respect for
you than could ever

'Your indignant niece,

'Patricia Doyle.'

"What do you think of that, mamma?'"

"It's very strange, Louise. This hair-dresser is your own cousin."

"So it seems. And she must be poor, or she wouldn't go out as a sort
of lady's maid. I remember scolding her severely for pulling my hair
at one time, and she was as meek as Moses, and never answered a word."

"She has a temper though, as this letter proves," said Mrs. Merrick;
"and I admire her for the stand she has taken."

"So do I," rejoined Louise with a laugh, "for it removes a rival from
my path. You will notice that Aunt Jane has sent her a check for the
same amount she sent me. Here it is, folded in the letter. Probably my
other cousin, the De Graf girl, is likewise invited to Elmhurst? Aunt
Jane wanted us all, to see what we were like, and perhaps to choose
between us."

"Quite likely," said Mrs. Merrick, uneasily watching her daughter's
face.

"That being the case," continued Louise, "I intend to enter the
competition. With this child Patricia out of the way, it will be a
simple duel with my unknown De Graf cousin for my aunt's favor, and
the excitement will be agreeable even if I am worsted."

"There's no danger of that," said her mother, calmly. "And the stakes
are high, Louise. I've learned that your Aunt Jane is rated as worth a
half million dollars."

"They shall be mine," said the daughter, with assurance. "Unless,
indeed, the De Graf girl is most wonderfully clever. What is her
name?"

"Elizabeth, if I remember rightly. But I am not sure she is yet alive,
my dear. I haven't heard of the De Grafs for a dozen years.'"

"Anyway I shall accept my Aunt Jane's invitation, and make the
acceptance as sweet as Patricia Doyle's refusal is sour. Aunt Jane
will be simply furious when she gets the little hair-dresser's note."

"Will you send it on?"

"Why not? It's only a question of resealing the envelope and mailing
it. And it will be sure to settle Miss Doyle's chances of sharing the
inheritance, for good and all."

"And the check?"

"Oh, I shall leave the check inside the envelope. It wouldn't be at
all safe to cash it, you know."

"But if you took it out Jane would think the girl had kept tit money,
after all, and would be even more incensed against her."

"No," said Louise, after a moment's thought, "I'll not do a single act
of dishonesty that could ever by any chance be traced to my door. To
be cunning, to be diplomatic, to play the game of life with the best
cards we can draw, is every woman's privilege. But if I can't win
honestly, mater dear, I'll quit the game, for even money can't
compensate a girl for the loss of her self-respect."

Mrs. Merrick cast a fleeting glance at her daughter and smiled.
Perhaps the heroics of Louise did not greatly impress her.




CHAPTER V.

AUNT JANE.


"Lift me up, Phibbs--no, not that way! Confound your awkwardness--do
you want to break my back? There! That's better. Now the pillow at my
head. Oh--h. What are you blinking at, you old owl?"

"Are you better this morning, Miss Jane?" asked the attendant, with
grave deference.

"No; I'm worse."

"You look brighter, Miss Jane."

"Don't be stupid, Martha Phibbs. I know how I am, better than any
doctor, and I tell you I'm on my last legs."

"Anything unusual, Miss?"

"Of course. I can't be on my last legs regularly, can I?"

"I hope not, Miss."

"What do you mean by that? Are you trying to insult me, now that I'm
weak and helpless? Answer me, you gibbering idiot!"

"I'm sure you'll feel better soon, Miss. Can't I wheel you into the
garden? It's a beautiful day, and quite sunny and warm already."

"Be quick about it, then; and don't tire me out with your eternal
doddering. When a thing has to be done, do it. That's my motto."

"Yes, Miss Jane."

Slowly and with care the old attendant wheeled her mistress's invalid
chair through the doorway of the room, along a stately passage,
and out upon a broad piazza at the back of the mansion. Here were
extensive and carefully tended gardens, and the balmy morning air was
redolent with the odor of flowers.

Jane Merrick sniffed the fragrance with evident enjoyment, and her
sharp grey eyes sparkled as she allowed them to roam over the gorgeous
expanse of colors spread out before her.

"I'll go down, I guess, Phibbs. This may be my last day on earth,
and I'll spend an hour with my flowers before I bid them good-bye
forever."

Phibbs pulled a bell-cord, and a soft faraway jingle was heard. Then
an old man came slowly around the corner of the house. His bare
head was quite bald. He wore a short canvas apron and carried
pruning-shears in one hand. Without a word of greeting to his mistress
or scarce a glance at her half recumbent form, he mounted the steps of
the piazza and assisted Phibbs to lift the chair to the ground.

"How are the roses coming on, James?"

"Poorly, Miss," he answered, and turning his back returned to his work
around the corner. If he was surly, Miss Jane seemed not to mind it.
Her glance even softened a moment as she followed his retreating form.

But now she was revelling amongst the flowers, which she seemed to
love passionately. Phibbs wheeled her slowly along the narrow paths
between the beds, and she stopped frequently to fondle a blossom or
pull away a dead leaf or twig from a bush. The roses were magnificent,
in spite of the old gardener's croaking, and the sun was warm and
grateful and the hum of the bees musical and sweet.

"It's hard to die and leave all this, Phibbs," said the old woman, a
catch in her voice. "But it's got to be done."

"Not for a while yet, I hope, Miss Jane."

"It won't be long, Phibbs. But I must try to live until my nieces
come, and I can decide which of them is most worthy to care for the
old place when I am gone."

"Yes, Miss."

"I've heard from two of them, already. They jumped at the bait I held
out quickly enough; but that's only natural. And the letters are very
sensible ones, too. Elizabeth DeGraf says she will be glad to come,
and thanks me for inviting her. Louise Merrick is glad to come, also,
but hopes I am deceived about my health and that she will make me more
than one visit after we become friends. A very proper feeling; but I'm
not deceived, Phibbs. My end's in plain sight."

"Yes, Miss Jane."

"And somebody's got to have my money and dear Elmhurst when I'm
through with them. Who will it be, Phibbs?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Miss."

"Nor do I. The money's mine, and I can do what I please with it; and
I'm under no obligation to anyone."

"Except Kenneth," said a soft voice behind her.

Jane Merrick gave a start at the interruption and turned red and angry
as, without looking around, she answered:

"Stuff and nonsense! I know my duties and my business, Silas Watson."

"To be sure," said a little, withered man, passing around the chair
and facing the old woman with an humble, deprecating air. He was
clothed in black, and his smooth-shaven, deeply lined face was
pleasant of expression and not without power and shrewd intelligence.
The eyes, however, were concealed by heavy-rimmed spectacles, and his
manner was somewhat shy and reserved. However, he did not hesitate to
speak frankly to his old friend, nor minded in the least if he aroused
her ire.

"No one knows better than you, dear Miss Jane, her duties and
obligations; and no one performs them more religiously. But your
recent acts, I confess, puzzle me. Why should you choose from a lot
of inexperienced, incompetent girls a successor to Thomas Bradley's
fortune, when he especially requested you in his will to look after
any of his relatives, should they need assistance? Kenneth Forbes, his
own nephew, was born after Tom's death, to be sure; but he is alone in
the world now, an orphan, and has had no advantages to help him along
in life since his mother's death eight years ago. I think Tom Bradley
must have had a premonition of what was to come even though his sister
was not married at the time of his death, and I am sure he would want
you to help Kenneth now."

"He placed me under no obligations to leave the boy any money,"
snapped the old woman, white with suppressed wrath, "you know that
well enough, Silas Watson, for you drew up the will."

The old gentleman slowly drew a pattern upon the gravelled walk with
the end of his walking-stick.

"Yes, I drew up the will," he said, deliberately, "and I remember that
he gave to you, his betrothed bride, all that he possessed--gave it
gladly and lovingly, and without reserve. He was very fond of you,
Miss Jane. But perhaps his conscience pricked him a bit, after all,
for he added the words: 'I shall expect you to look after the welfare
of my only relative, my sister. Katherine Bradley--or any of her
heirs.' It appears to me, Miss Jane, that that is a distinct
obligation. The boy is now sixteen and as fine a fellow as one often
meets."

"Bah! An imbecile--an awkward, ill-mannered brat who is only fit for a
stable-boy! I know him, Silas, and I know he'll never amount to a hill
of beans. Leave _him_ my money? Not if I hadn't a relative on earth!"

"You misjudge him, Jane. Kenneth is all right if you'll treat him
decently. But he won't stand your abuse and I don't think the less of
him for that."

"Why abuse? Haven't I given him a home and an education, all because
Thomas asked me to look after his relatives? And he's been rebellious
and pig-headed and sullen in return for my kindness, so naturally
there's little love lost between us."

"You resented your one obligation, Jane; and although you fulfilled it
to the letter you did not in the spirit of Tom Bradley's request. I
don't blame the boy for not liking you."

"Sir!"

"All right, Jane; fly at me if you will," said the little man, with a
smile; "but I intend to tell you frankly what I think of your actions,
just as long as we remain friends."

Her stern brows unbent a trifle.

"That's why we are friends, Silas; and it's useless to quarrel with
you now that I'm on my last legs. A few days more will end me, I'm
positive; so bear with me a little longer, my friend."

He took her withered hand in his and kissed it gently.

"You're not so very bad, Jane," said he, "and I'm almost sure you
will be with us for a long time to come. But you're more nervous and
irritable than usual, I'll admit, and I fear this invasion of your
nieces won't be good for you. Are they really coming?"

"Two of them are, I'm sure, for they've accepted my invitation," she
replied.

"Here's a letter that just arrived," he said, taking it from his
pocket. "Perhaps it contains news from the third niece."

"My glasses, Phibbs!" cried Miss Jane, eagerly, and the attendant
started briskly for the house to get them.

"What do you know about these girls?" asked the old lawyer curiously.

"Nothing whatever. I scarcely knew of their existence until you hunted
them out for me and found they were alive. But I'm going to know them,
and study them, and the one that's most capable and deserving shall
have my property."

Mr. Watson sighed.

"And Kenneth?" he asked.

"I'll provide an annuity for the boy, although it's more than he
deserves. When I realized that death was creeping upon me I felt a
strange desire to bequeath my fortune to one of my own flesh and
blood. Perhaps I didn't treat my brothers and sisters generously in
the old days, Silas."

"Perhaps not," he answered.

"So I'll make amends to one of their children. That is, if any one of
the three nieces should prove worthy."

"I see. But if neither of the three is worthy?"

"Then I'll leave every cent to charity--except Kenneth's annuity."

The lawyer smiled.

"Let us hope," said he, "that they will prove all you desire. It would
break my heart, Jane, to see Elmhurst turned into a hospital."

Phibbs arrived with the spectacles, and Jane Merrick read her letter,
her face growing harder with every line she mastered. Then she
crumpled the paper fiercely in both hands, and a moment later smoothed
it out carefully and replaced it in the envelope.

Silas Watson had watched her silently.

"Well," said he, at last, "another acceptance?"

"No, a refusal," said she. "A refusal from the Irishman's daughter,
Patricia Doyle."

"That's bad," he remarked, but in a tone of relief.

"I don't see it in that light at all," replied Miss Jane. "The girl
is right. It's the sort of letter I'd have written myself, under the
circumstances. I'll write again, Silas, and humble myself, and try to
get her to come."

"You surprise me!" said the lawyer.

"I surprise myself," retorted the old woman, "but I mean to know more
of this Patricia Doyle. Perhaps I've found a gold mine, Silas Watson!"




CHAPTER VI.

THE BOY.


Leaving the mistress of Elmhurst among her flowers, Silas Watson
walked slowly and thoughtfully along the paths until he reached the
extreme left wing of the rambling old mansion. Here, half hidden by
tangled vines of climbing roses, he came to a flight of steps leading
to an iron-railed balcony, and beyond this was a narrow stairway to
the rooms in the upper part of the wing.

Miss Merrick, however ungenerous she might have been to others, had
always maintained Elmhurst in a fairly lavish manner. There were
plenty of servants to look after the house and gardens, and there were
good horses in the stables. Whenever her health permitted she dined in
state each evening in the great dining-room, solitary and dignified,
unless on rare occasions her one familiar, Silas Watson, occupied the
seat opposite her. "The boy," as he was contemptuously called, was
never permitted to enter this room. Indeed, it would be difficult to
define exactly Kenneth Forbes' position at Elmhurst. He had lived
there ever since his mother's death, when, a silent and unattractive
lad of eight, Mr. Watson had brought him to Jane Merrick and insisted
upon her providing a home for Tom Bradley's orphaned nephew.

She accepted the obligation reluctantly enough, giving the child a
small room in the left wing, as far removed from her own apartments as
possible, and transferring all details of his care to Misery Agnew,
the old housekeeper. Misery endeavored to "do her duty" by the boy,
but appreciating the scant courtesy with which he was treated by her
mistress, it is not surprising the old woman regarded him merely as a
dependent and left him mostly to his own devices.

Kenneth, even in his first days at Elmhurst, knew that his presence
was disagreeable to Miss Jane, and as the years dragged on he grew shy
and retiring, longing to break away from his unpleasant surroundings,
but knowing of no other place where he would be more welcome. His only
real friend was the lawyer, who neglected no opportunity to visit the
boy and chat with him, in his cheery manner. Mr. Watson also arranged
with the son of the village curate to tutor Kenneth and prepare him
for college; but either the tutor was incompetent or the pupil did not
apply himself, for at twenty Kenneth Forbes was very ignorant, indeed,
and seemed not to apply himself properly to his books.

He was short of stature and thin, with a sad drawn face and manners
that even his staunch friend, Silas Watson, admitted were awkward and
unprepossessing. What he might have been under different conditions or
with different treatment, could only be imagined. Slowly climbing the
stairs to the little room Kenneth inhabited, Mr. Watson was forced to
conclude, with a sigh of regret, that he could not blame Miss Jane
for wishing to find a more desirable heir to her estate than this
graceless, sullen youth who had been thrust upon her by a thoughtless
request contained in the will of her dead lover--a request that she
seemed determined to fulfil literally, as it only required her to
"look after" Tom's relatives and did not oblige her to leave Kenneth
her property.

Yet, strange as it may seem, the old lawyer was exceedingly fond of
the boy, and longed to see him the master of Elmhurst. Sometimes, when
they were alone, Kenneth forgot his sense of injury and dependence,
and spoke so well and with such animation that Mr. Watson was
astonished, and believed that hidden underneath the mask of reserve
was another entirely different personality, that in the years to come
might change the entire nature of the neglected youth and win for him
the respect and admiration of the world. But these fits of brightness
and geniality were rare. Only the lawyer had as yet discovered them.

Today he found the boy lying listlessly upon the window-seat, an open
book in his hand, but his eyes fixed dreamily upon the grove of huge
elm trees that covered the distant hills.

"Morning, Ken," said he, briefly, sitting beside his young friend and
taking the book in his own hand. The margins of the printed pages were
fairly covered with drawings of every description. The far away trees
were there and the near-by rose gardens. There was a cat spitting at
an angry dog, caricatures of old Misery and James, the gardener, and
of Aunt Jane and even Silas Watson himself--all so clearly depicted
that the lawyer suddenly wondered if they were not clever, and an
evidence of genius. But the boy turned to look at him, and the next
moment seized the book from his grasp and sent it flying through
the open window, uttering at the same time a rude exclamation of
impatience.

The lawyer quietly lighted his pipe.

"Why did you do that, Kenneth?" he asked. "The pictures are clever
enough to be preserved. I did not know you have a talent for drawing."

The boy glanced at him, but answered nothing, and the lawyer thought
best not to pursue the subject After smoking a moment in silence he
remarked:

"Your aunt is failing fast." Although no relative, Kenneth had been
accustomed to speak of Jane Merrick as his aunt.

Getting neither word nor look in reply the lawyer presently continued:

"I do not think she will live much longer."

The boy stared from the window and drummed on the sill with his
fingers.

"When she dies," said Mr. Watson, in a musing tone, "there will be a
new mistress at Elmhurst and you will have to move out."

The boy now turned to look at him, enquiringly.

"You are twenty, and you are not ready for college. You would be of no
use in the commercial world. You have not even the capacity to become
a clerk. What will you do, Kenneth? Where will you go?"

The boy shrugged his shoulders.

"When will Aunt Jane die?" he asked.

"I hope she will live many days yet. She may die tomorrow."

"When she does, I'll answer your question." said the boy, roughly.
"When I'm turned out of this place--which is part prison and part
paradise--I'll do something. I don't know what, and I won't bother
about it till the time comes. But I'll do something."

"Could you earn a living?" asked the old lawyer.

"Perhaps not; but I'll get one. Will I be a beggar?"

"I don't know. It depends on whether Aunt Jane leaves you anything in
her will."

"I hope she won't leave me a cent!" cried the boy, with sudden
fierceness. "I hate her, and will be glad when she is dead and out of
my way!"

"Kenneth--Kenneth, lad!"

"I hate her!" he persisted, with blazing eyes. "She has insulted me,
scorned me, humiliated me every moment since I have known her. I'll be
glad to have her die, and I don't want a cent of her miserable money."

"Money," remarked the old man, knocking the ashes from his pipe, "is
very necessary to one who is incompetent to earn his salt. And the
money she leaves you--if she really does leave you any--won't be
her's, remember, but your Uncle Tom's."

"Uncle Tom was good to my father," said the boy, softening.

"Well, Uncle Tom gave his money to Aunt Jane, whom he had expected
to marry; but he asked her to care for his relatives, and she'll
doubtless give you enough to live on. But the place will go to some
one else, and that means you must move on."

"Who will have Elmhurst?" asked the boy.

"One of your aunt's nieces, probably. She has three, it seems, all of
them young girls, and she has invited them to come here to visit her."

"Girls! Girls at Elmhurst?" cried the boy, shrinking back with a look
of terror in his eyes.

"To be sure. One of the nieces, it seems, refuses to come; but there
will be two of them to scramble for your aunt's affection."

"She has none," declared the boy.

"Or her money, which is the same thing. The one she likes the best
will get the estate."

Kenneth smiled, and with the change of expression his face lighted
wonderfully.

"Poor Aunt!" he said. "Almost I am tempted to be sorry for her. Two
girls--fighting one against the other for Elmhurst--and both fawning
before a cruel and malicious old woman who could never love anyone but
herself."

"And her flowers," suggested the lawyer.

"Oh, yes; and perhaps James. Tell me, why should she love James, who
is a mere gardener, and hate me?"

"James tends the flowers, and the flowers are Jane Merrick's very
life. Isn't that the explanation?"

"I don't know."

"The girls need not worry you, Kenneth. It will be easy for you to
keep out of their way."

"When will they come?"

"Next week, I believe."

The boy looked around helplessly, with the air of a caged tiger.

"Perhaps they won't know I'm here," he said.

"Perhaps not. I'll tell Misery to bring all your meals to this room,
and no one ever comes to this end of the garden. But if they find you,
Kenneth, and scare you out of your den, run over to me, and I'll keep
you safe until the girls are gone."

"Thank you, Mr. Watson," more graciously than was his wont. "It isn't
that I'm afraid of girls, you know; but they may want to insult me,
just as their aunt does, and I couldn't bear any more cruelty."

"I know nothing about them," said the lawyer, "so I can't vouch in any
way for Aunt Jane's nieces. But they are young, and it is probable
they'll be as shy and uncomfortable here at Elmhurst as you are
yourself. And after all, Kenneth boy, the most important thing just
now is your own future. What in the world is to become of you?"

"Oh, _that_," answered the boy, relapsing into his sullen mood; "I
can't see that it matters much one way or another. Anyhow, I'll not
bother my head about it until the time comes and as far as you're
concerned, it's none of your business."




CHAPTER VII.

THE FIRST WARNING.


For a day or two Jane Merrick seemed to improve in health. Indeed,
Martha Phibbs declared her mistress was better than she had been for
weeks. Then, one night, the old attendant was awakened by a scream,
and rushed to her mistress' side.

"What is it, ma'am?" she asked, tremblingly.

"My leg! I can't move my leg," gasped the mistress of Elmhurst. "Rub
it, you old fool! Rub it till you drop, and see if you can bring back
the life to it."

Martha rubbed, of course, but the task was useless. Oscar the groom
was sent on horseback for the nearest doctor, who came just as day
was breaking. He gave the old woman a brief examination and shook his
head.

"It's the first warning," said he; "but nothing to be frightened
about. That is, for the present."

"Is it paralysis?" asked Jane Merrick.

"Yes; a slight stroke."

"But I'll have another?"

"Perhaps, in time."

"How long?"

"It may be a week--or a month--or a year. Sometimes there is
never another stroke. Don't worry, ma'am. Just lie still and be
comfortable."

"Huh!" grunted the old woman. But she became more composed and obeyed
the doctor's instructions with unwonted meekness. Silas Watson arrived
during the forenoon, and pressed her thin hand with real sympathy,
for these two were friends despite the great difference in their
temperaments.

"Shall I draw your will, Jane?" he asked. "No!" she snapped. "I'm not
going to die just yet, I assure you. I shall live to carry out my
plans, Silas."

She did live, and grew better as the days wore on, although she never
recovered the use of the paralyzed limb.

Each day Phibbs drew the invalid chair to the porch and old James
lifted it to the garden walk, where his mistress might enjoy the
flowers he so carefully and skillfully tended. They seldom spoke
together, these two; yet there seemed a strange bond of sympathy
between them.

At last the first of July arrived, and Oscar was dispatched to the
railway station, four miles distant, to meet Miss Elizabeth De
Graf, the first of the nieces to appear in answer to Jane Merrick's
invitation.

Beth looked very charming and fresh in her new gown, and she greeted
her aunt with a calm graciousness that would have amazed the professor
to behold. She had observed carefully the grandeur and beauty of
Elmhurst, as she drove through the grounds, and instantly decided the
place was worth an effort to win.

"So, this is Elizabeth, is it?" asked Aunt June, as the girl stood
before her for inspection. "You may kiss me, child."

Elizabeth advanced, striving to quell the antipathy she felt to kiss
the stern featured, old woman, and touched her lips to the wrinkled
forehead.

Jane Merrick laughed, a bit sneeringly, while Beth drew back, still
composed, and looked at her relative enquiringly.

"Well, what do you think of me?" demanded Aunt Jane, as if embarrassed
at the scrutiny she received.

"Surely, it is too early to ask me that," replied Beth, gently. "I am
going to try to like you, and my first sight of my new aunt leads me
to hope I shall succeed."

"Why shouldn't you like me?" cried the old woman. "Why must you try to
like your mother's sister?"

Beth flushed. She had promised herself not to become angry or
discomposed, whatever her aunt might say or do; but before she could
control herself an indignant expression flashed across her face and
Jane Merrick saw it.

"There are reasons," said Beth, slowly, "why your name is seldom
mentioned in my father's family. Until your letter came I scarcely
knew I possessed an aunt. It was your desire we should become better
acquainted, and I am here for that purpose. I hope we shall become
friends, Aunt Jane, but until then, it is better we should not discuss
the past."

The woman frowned. It was not difficult for her to read the character
of the child before her, and she knew intuitively that Beth was
strongly prejudiced against her, but was honestly trying not to allow
that prejudice to influence her. She decided to postpone further
interrogations until another time.

"Your journey has tired you," she said abruptly. "I'll have Misery
show you to your room."

She touched a bell beside her.

"I'm not tired, but I'll go to my room, if you please," answered Beth,
who realized that she had in some way failed to make as favorable an
impression as she had hoped. "When may I see you again?"

"When I send for you," snapped Aunt Jane, as the housekeeper entered.
"I suppose you know I am a paralytic, and liable to die at any time?"

"I am very sorry," said Beth, hesitatingly. "You do not seem very
ill."

"I'm on my last legs. I may not live an hour. But that's none of your
business, I suppose. By the way, I expect your cousin on the afternoon
train."

Beth gave a start of surprise.

"My cousin?" she asked.

"Yes, Louise Merrick."

"Oh!" said Beth, and stopped short.

"What do you mean by that?" enquired Aunt Jane, with a smile that was
rather malicious.

"I did not know I had a cousin," said the girl. "That is," correcting
herself, "I did not know whether Louise Merrick was alive or not.
Mother has mentioned her name once or twice in my presence; but not
lately."

"Well, she's alive. Very much alive, I believe. And she's coming to
visit me, while you are here. I expect you to be friends."

"To be sure," said Beth, nevertheless discomfited at the news.

"We dine at seven," said Aunt Jane. "I always lunch in my own room,
and you may do the same," and with a wave of her thin hand she
dismissed the girl, who thoughtfully followed the old housekeeper
through the halls.

It was not going to be an easy task to win this old woman's affection.
Already she rebelled at the necessity of undertaking so distasteful a
venture and wondered if she had not made a mistake in trying to curb
her natural frankness, and to conciliate a creature whose very nature
seemed antagonistic to her own. And this new cousin, Louise Merrick,
why was she coming to Elmhurst? To compete for the prize Beth had
already determined to win? In that case she must consider carefully
her line of action, that no rival might deprive her of this great
estate. Beth felt that she could fight savagely for an object she so
much desired. Her very muscles hardened and grew tense at the thought
of conflict as she walked down the corridor in the wake of old Misery
the housekeeper. She had always resented the sordid life at Cloverton.
She had been discontented with her lot since her earliest girlhood,
and longed to escape the constant bickerings of her parents and their
vain struggles to obtain enough money to "keep up appearances" and
drive the wolf from the door. And here was an opportunity to win a
fortune and a home beautiful enough for a royal princess. All that was
necessary was to gain the esteem of a crabbed, garrulous old woman,
who had doubtless but a few more weeks to live. It must be done,
in one way or another; but how? How could she out-wit this unknown
cousin, and inspire the love of Aunt Jane?

"If there's any stuff of the right sort in my nature," decided the
girl, as she entered her pretty bedchamber and threw herself into a
chair, "I'll find a way to win out. One thing is certain--I'll never
again have another chance at so fine a fortune, and if I fail to get
it I shall deserve to live in poverty forever afterward."

Suddenly she noticed the old housekeeper standing before her and
regarding her with a kindly interest. In an instant she sprang up,
threw her arms around Misery and kissed her furrowed cheek.

"Thank you for being so kind," said she. "I've never been away from
home before and you must be a mother to me while I'm at Elmhurst."

Old Misery smiled and stroked the girl's glossy head.

"Bless the child!" she said, delightedly; "of course I'll be a mother
to you. You'll need a bit of comforting now and then, my dear, if
you're going to live with Jane Merrick."

"Is she cross?" asked Beth, softly.

"At times she's a fiend," confided the old housekeeper, in almost a
whisper. "But don't you mind her tantrums, or lay 'em to heart, and
you'll get along with her all right."

"Thank you," said the girl. "I'll try not to mind."

"Do you need anything else, deary?" asked Misery, with a glance around
the room.

"Nothing at all, thank you."

The housekeeper nodded and softly withdrew.

"That was one brilliant move, at any rate," said Beth to herself, as
she laid aside her hat and prepared to unstrap her small trunk. "I've
made a friend at Elmhurst who will be of use to me; and I shall make
more before long. Come as soon as you like, Cousin Louise! You'll have
to be more clever than I am, if you hope to win Elmhurst."




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DIPLOMAT.


Aunt Jane was in her garden, enjoying the flowers. This was her
especial garden, surrounded by a high-box hedge, and quite distinct
from the vast expanse of shrubbery and flower-beds which lent so much
to the beauty of the grounds at Elmhurst. Aunt Jane knew and loved
every inch of her property. She had watched the shrubs personally for
many years, and planned all the alterations and the construction of
the flower-beds which James had so successfully attended to. Each
morning, when her health permitted, she had inspected the greenhouses
and issued her brief orders--brief because her slightest word to the
old gardener incurred the fulfillment of her wishes. But this bit of
garden adjoining her own rooms was her especial pride, and contained
the choicest plants she had been able to secure. So, since she had
been confined to her chair, the place had almost attained to the
dignity of a private drawing-room, and on bright days she spent many
hours here, delighting to feast her eyes with the rich coloring of the
flowers and to inhale their fragrance. For however gruff Jane Merrick
might be to the people with whom she came in contact, she was always
tender to her beloved flowers, and her nature invariably softened when
in their presence.

By and by Oscar, the groom, stepped through an opening in the hedge
and touched his hat.

"Has my niece arrived?" asked his mistress, sharply.

"She's on the way, mum," the man answered, grinning. "She stopped
outside the grounds to pick wild flowers, an' said I was to tell you
she'd walk the rest o' the way."

"To pick wild flowers?"

"That's what she said, mum. She's that fond of 'em she couldn't
resist it. I was to come an' tell you this, mum; an' she'll follow me
directly."

Aunt Jane stared at the man sternly, and he turned toward her an
unmoved countenance. Oscar had been sent to the station to meet Louise
Merrick, and drive her to Elmhurst; but this strange freak on the part
of her guest set the old woman thinking what her object could be. Wild
flowers were well enough in their way; but those adjoining the grounds
of Elmhurst were very ordinary and unattractive, and Miss Merrick's
aunt was expecting her. Perhaps--

A sudden light illumined the mystery.

"See here, Oscar; has this girl been questioning you?"

"She asked a few questions, mum."

"About me?"

"Some of 'em, if I remember right, mum, was about you."

"And you told her I was fond of flowers?"

"I may have just mentioned that you liked 'em, mum."

Aunt Jane gave a scornful snort, and the man responded in a curious
way. He winked slowly and laboriously, still retaining the solemn
expression on his face.

"You may go, Oscar. Have the girl's luggage placed in her room."

"Yes, mum."

He touched his hat and then withdrew, leaving Jane Merrick with a
frown upon her brow that was not caused by his seeming impertinence.

Presently a slight and graceful form darted through the opening in the
hedge and approached the chair wherein Jane Merrick reclined.

"Oh, my dear, dear aunt!" cried Louise. "How glad I am to see you at
last, and how good of you to let me come here!" and she bent over and
kissed the stern, unresponsive face with an enthusiasm delightful to
behold.

"This is Louise, I suppose," said Aunt Jane, stiffly. "You are welcome
to Elmhurst."

"Tell me how you are," continued the girl, kneeling beside the chair
and taking the withered hands gently in her own. "Do you suffer any?
And are you getting better, dear aunt, in this beautiful garden with
the birds and the sunshine?"

"Get up," said the elder woman, roughly. "You're spoiling your gown."

Louise laughed gaily.

"Never mind the gown," she answered. "Tell me about yourself. I've
been so anxious since your last letter."

Aunt Jane's countenance relaxed a trifle. To speak of her broken
health always gave her a sort of grim satisfaction.

"I'm dying, as you can plainly see," she announced. "My days are
numbered, Louise. If you stay long enough you can gather wild flowers
for my coffin."

Louise flushed a trifle. A bunch of butter-cups and forget-me-nots was
fastened to her girdle, and she had placed a few marguerites in her
hair.

"Don't laugh at these poor things!" she said, deprecatingly. "I'm so
fond of flowers, and we find none growing wild in the cities, you
know."

Jane Merrick looked at her reflectively.

"How old are you, Louise," she asked.

"Just seventeen, Aunt."

"I had forgotten you are so old as that. Let me see; Elizabeth cannot
be more than fifteen."

"Elizabeth?"

"Elizabeth De Graf, your cousin. She arrived at Elmhurst this morning,
and will be your companion while you are here."

"That is nice," said Louise.

"I hope you will be friends."

"Why not, Aunt? I haven't known much of my relations in the past, you
know, so it pleases me to find an aunt and a cousin at the same time.
I am sure I shall love you both. Let me fix your pillow--you do not
seem comfortable. There! Isn't that better?" patting the pillow
deftly. "I'm afraid you have needed more loving care than a paid
attendant can give you," glancing at old Martha Phibbs, who stood some
paces away, and lowering her voice that she might not be overheard.
"But for a time, at least, I mean to be your nurse, and look after
your wants. You should have sent for me before, Aunt Jane."

"Don't trouble yourself; Phibbs knows my ways, and does all that is
required," said the invalid, rather testily. "Run away, now, Louise.
The housekeeper will show you to your room. It's opposite Elizabeth's,
and you will do well to make her acquaintance at once. I shall expect
you both to dine with me at seven."

"Can't I stay here a little longer?" pleaded Louise. "We haven't
spoken two words together, as yet, and I'm not a bit tired or anxious
to go to my room. What a superb oleander this is! Is it one of your
favorites, Aunt Jane?"

"Run away," repeated the woman. "I want to be alone."

The girl sighed and kissed her again, stroking the gray hair softly
with her white hand.

"Very well; I'll go," she said. "But I don't intend to be treated as
a strange guest, dear Aunt, for that would drive me to return home at
once. You are my father's eldest sister, and I mean to make you love
me, if you will give me the least chance to do so."

She looked around her, enquiringly, and Aunt Jane pointed a bony
finger at the porch.

"That is the way. Phibbs will take you to Misery, the housekeeper, and
then return to me. Remember, I dine promptly at seven."

"I shall count the minutes," said Louise, and with a laugh and a
graceful gesture of adieu, turned to follow Martha into the house.

Jane Merrick looked after her with a puzzled expression upon her face.

"Were she in the least sincere," she muttered, "Louise might prove a
very pleasant companion. But she's not sincere; she's coddling me to
win my money, and if I don't watch out she'll succeed. The girl's a
born diplomat, and weighed in the balance against sincerity, diplomacy
will often tip the scales. I might do worse than to leave Elmhurst to
a clever woman. But I don't know Beth yet. I'll wait and see which
girl is the most desirable, and give them each an equal chance."




CHAPTER IX.

COUSINS.


"Come in," called Beth, answering a knock at her door.

Louise entered, and with a little cry ran forward and caught Beth in
her arms, kissing her in greeting.

"You must be my new cousin--Cousin Elizabeth--and I'm awfully glad to
see you at last!" she said, holding the younger girl a little away,
that she might examine her carefully.

Beth did not respond to the caress. She eyed her opponent sharply,
for she knew well enough, even in that first moment, that they were
engaged in a struggle for supremacy in Aunt Jane's affections, and
that in the battles to come no quarter could be asked or expected.

So they stood at arm's length, facing one another and secretly forming
an estimate each of the other's advantages and accomplishments.

"She's pretty enough, but has no style whatever," was Louise's
conclusion. "Neither has she tact nor self-possession, or even a
prepossessing manner. She wears her new gown in a dowdy manner and one
can read her face easily. There's little danger in this quarter, I'm
sure, so I may as well be friends with the poor child."

As for Beth, she saw at once that her "new cousin" was older and more
experienced in the ways of the world, and therefore liable to prove
a dangerous antagonist. Slender and graceful of form, attractive
of feature and dainty in manner, Louise must be credited with
many advantages; but against these might be weighed her evident
insincerity--the volubility and gush that are so often affected to
hide one's real nature, and which so shrewd and suspicious a woman as
Aunt Jane could not fail to readily detect. Altogether, Beth was not
greatly disturbed by her cousin's appearance, and suddenly realizing
that they had been staring at one another rather rudely, she said,
pleasantly enough:

"Won't you sit down?"

"Of course; we must get acquainted," replied Louise, gaily, and
perched herself cross-legged upon the window-seat, surrounded by a
mass of cushions.

"I didn't know you were here, until an hour ago," she continued. "But
as soon as Aunt Jane told me I ran to my room, unpacked and settled
the few traps I brought with me, and here I am--prepared for a good
long chat and to love you just as dearly as you will let me."

"I knew you were coming, but not until this morning," answered Beth,
slowly. "Perhaps had I known, I would not have accepted our Aunt's
invitation."

"Ah! Why not?" enquired the other, as if in wonder.

Beth hesitated.

"Have you known Aunt Jane before today?" she asked.

"No."

"Nor I. The letter asking me to visit her was the first I have ever
received from her. Even my mother, her own sister, does not correspond
with her. I was brought up to hate her very name, as a selfish,
miserly old woman. But, since she asked me to visit her, we judged she
had softened and might wish to become friendly, and so I accepted the
invitation. I had no idea you were also invited."

"But why should you resent my being here?" Louise asked, smiling.
"Surely, two girls will have a better time in this lonely old place
than one could have alone. For my part, I am delighted to find you at
Elmhurst."

"Thank you," said Beth. "That's a nice thing to say, but I doubt if
it's true. Don't let's beat around the bush. I hate hypocrisy, and if
we're going to be friends let's be honest with one another from the
start."

"Well?" queried Louise, evidently amused.

"It's plain to me that Aunt Jane has invited us here to choose which
one of us shall inherit her money--and Elmhurst. She's old and feeble,
and she hasn't any other relations."

"Oh, yes, she has" corrected Louise.

"You mean Patricia Doyle?"

"Yes."

"What do you know of her?"

"Nothing at all."

"Where does she live?"

"I haven't the faintest idea."

Louise spoke as calmly as if she had not mailed Patricia's defiant
letter to Aunt Jane, or discovered her cousin's identity in the little
hair-dresser from Madame Borne's establishment.

"Has Aunt Jane mentioned her?" continued Beth.

"Not in my presence."

"Then we may conclude she's left out of the arrangement," said Beth,
calmly. "And, as I said, Aunt Jane is likely to choose one of us to
succeed her at Elmhurst. I hoped I had it all my own way, but it's
evident I was mistaken. You'll fight for your chance and fight mighty
hard!"

Louise laughed merrily.

"How funny!" she exclaimed, after a moment during which Beth frowned
at her darkly. "Why, my dear cousin, I don't want Aunt Jane's money."

"You don't?"

"Not a penny of it; nor Elmhurst; nor anything you can possibly lay
claim to, my dear. My mother and I are amply provided for, and I am
only here to find rest from my social duties and to get acquainted
with my dead father's sister. That is all."

"Oh!" said Beth, lying back in her chair with a sigh of relief.

"So it was really a splendid idea of yours to be frank with me at our
first meeting," continued Louise, cheerfully; "for it has led to your
learning the truth, and I am sure you will never again grieve me by
suggesting that I wish to supplant you in Aunt Jane's favor. Now tell
me something about yourself and your people. Are you poor?"

"Poor as poverty," said Beth, gloomily. "My father teaches music, and
mother scolds him continually for not being able to earn enough money
to keep out of debt."

"Hasn't Aunt Jane helped you?"

"We've never seen a cent of her money, although father has tried at
times to borrow enough to help him out of his difficulties."

"That's strange. She seems like such a dear kindly old lady," said
Louise, musingly.

"I think she's horrid," answered Beth, angrily; "but I mustn't let her
know it. I even kissed her, when she asked me to, and it sent a shiver
all down my back."

Louise laughed with genuine amusement.

"You must dissemble, Cousin Elizabeth," she advised, "and teach our
aunt to love you. For my part, I am fond of everyone, and it delights
me to fuss around invalids and assist them. I ought to have been a
trained nurse, you know; but of course there's no necessity of my
earning a living."

"I suppose not," said Beth. Then, after a thoughtful silence, she
resumed abruptly; "What's to prevent Aunt Jane leaving you her
property, even if you are rich, and don't need it? You say you like to
care for invalids, and I don't. Suppose Aunt Jane prefers you to me,
and wills you all her money?"

"Why, that would be beyond my power to prevent," answered Louise, with
a little yawn.

Beth's face grew hard again.

"You're deceiving me," she declared, angrily. "You're trying to make
me think you don't want Elmhurst, when you're as anxious to get it as
I am."

"My dear Elizabeth--by the way, that's an awfully long name; what do
they call you, Lizzie, or Bessie, or--"

"They call me Beth," sullenly.

"Then, my dear Beth, let me beg you not to borrow trouble, or to doubt
one who wishes to be your friend. Elmhurst would be a perfect bore
to me. I wouldn't know what to do with it. I couldn't live in this
out-of-the-way corner of the world, you know."

"But suppose she leaves it to you?" persisted Beth. "You wouldn't
refuse it, I imagine."

Louise seemed to meditate.

"Cousin," she said, at length, "I'll make a bargain with you. I can't
refuse to love and pet Aunt Jane, just because she has money and my
sweet cousin Beth is anxious to inherit it. But I'll not interfere in
any way with your chances, and I'll promise to sing your praises to
our aunt persistently. Furthermore, in case she selects me as her
heir, I will agree to transfer half of the estate to you--the half
that consists of Elmhurst."

"Is there much more?" asked Beth.

"I haven't any list of Aunt Jane's possessions, so I don't know. But
you shall have Elmhurst, if I get it, because the place would be of no
use to me."

"It's a magnificent estate," said Beth, looking at her cousin
doubtfully.

"It shall be yours, dear, whatever Aunt Jane decides. See, this is a
compact, and I'll seal it with a kiss."

She sprang up and, kneeling beside Beth, kissed her fervently.

"Now shall we be friends?" she asked, lightly. "Now will you abandon
all those naughty suspicions and let me love you?"

Beth hesitated. The suggestion seemed preposterous. Such generosity
savored of play acting, and Louise's manner was too airy to be
genuine. Somehow she felt that she was being laughed at by this
slender, graceful girl, who was scarcely older than herself; but she
was too unsophisticated to know how to resent it. Louise insisted upon
warding off her enmity, or at least establishing a truce, and Beth,
however suspicious and ungracious, could find no way of rejecting the
overtures.

"Were I in your place," she said, "I would never promise to give up a
penny of the inheritance. If I win it, I shall keep it all."

"To be sure. I should want you to, my dear."

"Then, since we have no cause to quarrel, we may as well become
friends," continued Beth, her features relaxing a little their set
expression.

Louise laughed again, ignoring the other's brusqueness, and was soon
chatting away pleasantly upon other subjects and striving to draw Beth
out of her natural reserve.

The younger girl had no power to resist such fascinations. Louise
knew the big world, and talked of it with charming naivete, and
Beth listened rapturously. Such a girl friend it had never been her
privilege to have before, and when her suspicions were forgotten she
became fairly responsive, and brightened wonderfully.

They dressed in time for dinner, and met Aunt Jane and Silas Watson,
the lawyer, in the great drawing-room. The old gentleman was very
attentive and courteous during the stately dinner, and did much to
relieve the girls' embarrassment. Louise, indeed, seemed quite at home
in her new surroundings, and chatted most vivaciously during the meal;
but Aunt Jane was strangely silent, and Beth had little to say and
seemed awkward and ill at ease.

The old lady retired to her own room shortly after dinner, and
presently sent a servant to request Mr. Watson to join her.

"Silas," she said, when he entered, "what do you think of my nieces?"

"They are very charming girls," he answered, "although they are at
an age when few girls show to good advantage. Why did you not invite
Kenneth to dinner, Jane?"

"The boy?"

"Yes. They would be more at ease in the society of a young gentleman
more nearly their own age."

"Kenneth is a bear. He is constantly saying disagreeable things. In
other words, he is not gentlemanly, and the girls shall have nothing
to do with him."

"Very well," said the lawyer, quietly.

"Which of my nieces do you prefer?" asked the old lady, after a pause.

"I cannot say, on so short an acquaintance," he answered, with
gravity. "Which do you prefer, Jane?"

"They are equally unsatisfactory," she answered. "I cannot imagine
Elmhurst belonging to either, Silas." Then she added, with an abrupt
change of manner: "You must go to New York for me, at once."

"Tonight?"

"No; tomorrow morning. I must see that other niece--the one who defies
me and refuses to answer my second letter."

"Patricia Doyle?"

"Yes. Find her and argue with her. Tell her I am a crabbed old woman
with a whim to know her, and that I shall not die happy unless she
comes to Elmhurst. Bribe her, threaten her--kidnap her if necessary,
Silas; but get her to Elmhurst as quickly as possible."

"I'll do my best, Jane. But why are you so anxious?"

"My time is drawing near, old friend," she replied, less harshly than
usual, "and this matter of my will lies heavily on my conscience. What
if I should die tonight?"

He did not answer.

"There would be a dozen heirs to fight for my money, and dear old
Elmhurst would be sold to strangers," she resumed, with bitterness.
"But I don't mean to cross over just yet, Silas, even if one limb is
dead already. I shall hang on until I get this matter settled, and I
can't settle it properly without seeing all three of my nieces. One of
these is too hard, and the other too soft. I'll see what Patricia is
like."

"She may prove even more undesirable," said the lawyer.

"In that case, I'll pack her back again and choose between these two.
But you must fetch her, Silas, that I may know just what I am doing.
And you must fetch her at once!"

"I'll do the best I can, Jane," repeated the old lawyer.




CHAPTER X.

THE MAN WITH THE BUNDLE.


In the harness-room above the stable sat Duncan Muir, the coachman and
most important servant, with the exception of the head gardener, in
Miss Merrick's establishment. Duncan, bald-headed but with white and
bushy side-whiskers, was engaged in the serious business of oiling and
polishing the state harness, which had not been used for many months
past. But that did not matter. Thursday was the day for oiling the
harness, and so on Thursday he performed the task, never daring to
entrust a work so important to a subordinate.

In one corner of the little room Kenneth Forbes squatted upon a bench,
with an empty pine box held carelessly in his lap. While Duncan worked
the boy was busy with his pencil, but neither had spoken for at least
a half hour.

Finally the aged coachman, without looking up, enquired:

"What do ye think o' 'em, Kenneth lad?"

"Think o' whom, Don?"

"The young leddies."

"What young ladies?"

"Miss Jane's nieces, as Oscar brought from the station yesterday."

The boy looked astonished, and leaned over the box in his lap eagerly.

"Tell me, Don," he said. "I was away with my gun all yesterday, and
heard nothing of it."

"Why, it seems Miss Jane's invited 'em to make her a visit."

"But not yet, Don! Not so soon."

"Na'theless, they're here."

"How many, Don?"

"Two, lad. A bonny young thing came on the morning train, an' a nice,
wide-awake one by the two o'clock."

"Girls?" with an accent of horror.

"Young females, anyhow," said Donald, polishing a buckle briskly.

The boy glared at him fixedly.

"Will they be running about the place, Don?"

"Most likely, 'Twould be a shame to shut them up with the poor missus
this glad weather. But why not? They'll be company for ye, Kenneth
lad."

"How long will they stay?"

"Mabbe for aye. Oscar forbys one or the ither o' 'em will own the
place when Miss Jane gi'es up the ghost."

The boy sat silent a moment, thinking upon this speech. Then, with a
cry that was almost a scream, he dashed the box upon the floor and
flew out the door as if crazed, and Donald paused to listen to his
footsteps clattering down the stairs.

Then the old man groaned dismally, shaking his side-whiskers with a
negative expression that might have conveyed worlds of meaning to one
able to interpret it. But his eye fell upon the pine box, which had
rolled to his feet, and he stooped to pick it up. Upon the smoothly
planed side was his own picture, most deftly drawn, showing him
engaged in polishing the harness. Every strap and buckle was depicted
with rare fidelity; there was no doubt at all of the sponge and bottle
on the stool beside him, or the cloth in his hand. Even his bow
spectacles rested upon the bridge of his nose at exactly the right
angle, and his under lip protruded just as it had done since he was a
lad.

Donald was not only deeply impressed by such an exhibition of art; he
was highly gratified at being pictured, and full of wonder that the
boy could do such a thing; "wi' a wee pencil an' a bit o' board!" He
turned the box this way and that to admire the sketch, and finally
arose and brought a hatchet, with which he carefully pried the board
away from the box. Then he carried his treasure to a cupboard, where
he hid it safely behind a row of tall bottles.

Meantime Kenneth had reached the stable, thrown a bridle over the head
of a fine sorrel mare, and scorning to use a saddle leaped upon her
back and dashed down the lane and out at the rear gate upon the old
turnpike road.

His head was whirling with amazement, his heart full of indignation.
Girls! Girls at Elmhurst--nieces and guests of the fierce old woman
he so bitterly hated! Then, indeed, his days of peace and quiet were
ended. These dreadful creatures would prowl around everywhere; they
might even penetrate the shrubbery to the foot of the stairs leading
to his own retired room; they would destroy his happiness and drive
him mad.

For this moody, silent youth had been strangely happy in his life
at Elmhurst, despite the neglect of the grim old woman who was its
mistress and the fact that no one aside from Lawyer Watson seemed to
care whether he lived or died.

Perhaps Donald did. Good old Don was friendly and seldom bothered him
by talking. Perhaps old Misery liked him a bit, also. But these were
only servants, and almost as helpless and dependent as himself.

Still, he had been happy. He began to realize it, now that these awful
girls had come to disturb his peace. The thought filled him with grief
and rebellion and resentment; yet there was nothing he could do to
alter the fact that Donald's "young females" were already here, and
prepared, doubtless, to stay.

The sorrel was dashing down the road at a great pace, but the boy
clung firmly to his seat and gloried in the breeze that fanned his hot
cheeks. Away and away he raced until he reached the crossroads, miles
away, and down this he turned and galloped as recklessly as before.
The sun was hot, today, and the sorrel's flanks begun to steam and
show flecks of white upon their glossy surface. He turned again to the
left, entering upon a broad highway that would lead him straight home
at last; but he had almost reached the little village of Elmwood,
which was the railway station, before he realized his cruelty to the
splendid mare he bestrode. Then indeed, he fell to a walk, patting
Nora's neck affectionately and begging her to forgive him for his
thoughtlessness. The mare tossed her head in derision. However she
might sweat and pant, she liked the glorious pace even better than her
rider.

Through the village he paced moodily, the bridle dangling loosely on
the mare's neck. The people paused to look at him curiously, but he
had neither word nor look for any.

He did not know one of them by name, and cared little how much they
might speculate upon his peculiar position at "the big house."

Then, riding slowly up the hedge bordered road, his troubles once more
assailed him, and he wondered if there was not some spot upon the
broad earth to which he could fly for retirement until the girls had
left Elmhurst for good.

Nora shied, and he looked up to discover that he had nearly run down a
pedestrian--a stout little man with a bundle under his arm, who held
up one hand as if to arrest him.

Involuntarily he drew rein, and stopped beside the traveler with a
look of inquiry.

"Sorry to trouble you, sir," remarked the little man, in a cheery
voice, "but I ain't just certain about my way."

"Where do you want to go?" asked the boy.

"To Jane Merrick's place. They call it Elmhurst, I guess."

"It's straight ahead," said Kenneth, as the mare walked on. His
questioner also started and paced beside him.

"Far from here?"

"A mile, perhaps."

"They said it was three from the village, but I guess I've come a
dozen a'ready."

The boy did not reply to this. There was nothing offensive in the
man's manner. He spoke with an easy familiarity that made it difficult
not to respond with equal frank cordiality, and there was a shrewd
expression upon his wrinkled, smooth-shaven face that stamped him a
man who had seen life in many of its phases.

Kenneth, who resented the companionship of most people, seemed
attracted by the man, and hesitated to gallop on and leave him.

"Know Jane Merrick?" asked the stranger.

The boy nodded.

"Like her?"

"I hate her," he said, savagely.

The man laughed, a bit uneasily.

"Then it's the same Jane as ever," he responded, with a shake of his
grizzled head. "Do you know, I sort o' hoped she'd reformed, and I'd
be glad to see her again. They tell me she's got money."

The boy looked at him in surprise.

"She owns Elmhurst, and has mortgages on a dozen farms around here,
and property in New York, and thousands of dollars in the bank," he
said. "Aunt Jane's rich."

"Aunt Jane?" echoed the man, quickly. "What's your name, lad?"

"Kenneth Forbes."

A shake of the head.

"Don't recollect any Forbeses in the family."

"She isn't really my aunt," said the boy, "and she doesn't treat me
as an aunt, either; but she's my guardian, and I've always called her
Aunt, rather than say Miss Merrick."

"She's never married, has she?"

"No. She was engaged to my Uncle Tom, who owned Elmhurst. He was
killed in a railway accident, and then it was found he'd left her all
he had."

"I see."

"So, when my parents died, Aunt Jane took me for Uncle Tom's sake, and
keeps me out of charity."

"I see." Quite soberly, this time.

The boy slid off the mare and walked beside the little man, holding
the bridle over his arm. They did not speak again for some moments.

Finally the stranger asked:

"Are Jane's sisters living--Julia and Violet?"

"I don't know. But there are two of her nieces at Elmhurst."

"Ha! Who are they?"

"Girls," with bitterness. "I haven't seen them."

The stranger whistled.

"Don't like girls, I take it?"

"No; I hate them."

Another long pause. Then the boy suddenly turned questioner.

"You know Aunt--Miss Merrick, sir?"

"I used to, when we were both younger."

"Any relation, sir?"

"Just a brother, that's all."

Kenneth stopped short, and the mare stopped, and the little man, with
a whimsical smile at the boy's astonishment, also stopped.

"I didn't know she had a brother, sir--that is, living."

"She had two; but Will's dead, years ago, I'm told. I'm the other."

"John Merrick?"

"That's me. I went west a long time ago; before you were born, I
guess. We don't get much news on the coast, so I sort of lost track of
the folks back east, and I reckon they lost track of me, for the same
reason."

"You were the tinsmith?"

"The same. Bad pennies always return, they say. I've come back to look
up the family and find how many are left. Curious sort of a job, isn't
it."

"I don't know. Perhaps it's natural," replied the boy, reflectively.
"But I'm sorry you came to Aunt Jane first."

"Why?"

"She's in bad health--quite ill, you know--and her temper's dreadful.
Perhaps she--she--"

"I know. But I haven't seen her in years; and, after all, she's my
sister. And back at the old home, where I went first, no one knew
anything about what had become of the family except Jane. They kept
track of her because she suddenly became rich, and a great lady, and
that was a surprising thing to happen to a Merrick. We've always been
a poor lot, you know."

The boy glanced at the bundle, pityingly, and the little man caught
the look and smiled his sweet, cheery smile.

"My valise was too heavy to carry," he said; "so I wrapped up a few
things in case Jane wanted me to stay over night. And that's why I
didn't get a horse at the livery, you know. Somebody'd have to take it
back again."

"I'm sure she'll ask you to stay, sir. And if she doesn't, you come
out to the stable and let me know, and I'll drive you to town again.
Donald--that's the coachman--is my friend, and he'll let me have the
horse if I ask him."

"Thank you, lad," returned the man, gratefully. "I thought a little
exercise would do me good, but this three miles has seemed like thirty
to me!"

"We're here at last," said the boy, turning: into the drive-way.
"Seeing that you're her brother, sir, I advise you to go right up to
the front door and ring the bell."

"I will," said the man.

"I always go around the back way, myself."

"I see."

The boy turned away, but in a moment halted again. His interest in
Miss Jane's brother John was extraordinary.

"Another thing," he said, hesitating.

"Well?"

"You'd better not say you met me, you know. It wouldn't be a good
introduction. She hates me as much as I hate her."

"Very good, my lad. I'll keep mum."

The boy nodded, and turned away to lead Nora to the stable. The man
looked after him a moment, and shook his head, sadly.

"Poor boy!" he whispered.

Then he walked up to the front door and rang the bell.




CHAPTER XI.

THE MAD GARDENER.


"This seems to be a lazy place," said Louise, as she stood in the
doorway of Beth's room to bid her good night. "I shall sleep until
late in the morning, for I don't believe Aunt Jane will be on
exhibition before noon."

"At home I always get up at six o'clock," answered Beth.

"Six o'clock! Good gracious! What for?"

"To study my lessons and help get the breakfast."

"Don't you keep a maid?"

"No," said Beth, rather surlily; "we have hard work to keep
ourselves."

"But you must be nearly through with school by this time. I finished
my education ages ago."

"Did you graduate?" asked Beth.

"No; it wasn't worth while," declared Louise, complacently. "I'm sure
I know as much as most girls do, and there are more useful lessons to
be learned from real life than from books."

"Good night," said Beth.

"Good night," answered the older girl, and shut the door behind her.

Beth sat for a time moodily thinking. She did not like the way in
which her cousin assumed superiority over her. The difference in
their ages did not account for the greater worldly wisdom Louise
had acquired, and in much that she said and did Beth recognized a
shrewdness and experience that made her feel humbled and, in a way,
inferior to her cousin. Nor did she trust the friendship Louise
expressed for her.

Somehow, nothing that the girl said seemed to ring true, and Beth
already, in her mind, accused her of treachery and insincerity.

As a matter of fact, however, she failed to understand her cousin.
Louise really loved to be nice to people, and to say nice thing's. It
is true she schemed and intrigued to advance her personal welfare and
position in life; but even her schemes were undertaken lightly and
carelessly, and if they failed the girl would be the first to laugh at
her disappointment and try to mend her fortunes. If others stood in
her way she might not consider them at all; if she pledged her word,
it might not always be profitable to keep it; but she liked to be on
pleasant terms with everyone, and would be amiable to the last, no
matter what happened. Comedy was her forte, rather than tragedy. If
tragedy entered her life she would probably turn it into ridicule.
Wholly without care, whimsical and generous to a degree, if it suited
her mood, Louise Merrick possessed a nature capable of great things,
either for good or ill.

It was no wonder her unsophisticated country cousin failed to
comprehend her, although Beth's intuition was not greatly at fault.

Six o'clock found Beth wide awake, as usual; so she quietly dressed
and, taking her book under her arm, started to make her way into the
gardens. Despite Louise's cynicism she had no intention of abandoning
her studies. She had decided to fit herself for a teacher before Aunt
Jane's invitation had come to her, and this ambition would render it
necessary for her to study hard during vacations.

If she became an heiress she would not need to teach, but she was not
at all confident of her prospects, and the girl's practical nature
prompted her to carry out her plans until she was sure of the future.

In the hall she met Phibbs, shuffling along as if in pain.

"Good morning, miss," said the old servant.

Beth looked at her thoughtfully. This was Aunt Jane's special and
confidential attendant.

"Do your feet hurt you?" she asked.

"Yes, miss; in the mornin' they's awful bad. It's being on 'em all the
day, 'tendin' to Miss Jane, you know. But after a time I gets more
used to the pain, and don't feel it. The mornin's always the worst."

She was passing on, but Beth stopped her.

"Come into my room," she said, and led the way.

Martha Phibbs followed reluctantly. Miss Jane might already be awake
and demanding her services, and she could not imagine what the young
lady wanted her for.

But she entered the room, and Beth went to a box and brought out a
bottle of lotion.

"Mother has the same trouble that you complain of," she said,
practically, "and here is a remedy that always gives her relief. I
brought it with me in case I should take long tramps, and get sore
feet."

She gently pushed the old woman into a chair, and then, to Phibbs'
utter amazement, knelt down and unfastened her shoes and drew off her
stockings. A moment later she was rubbing the lotion upon the poor
creature's swollen feet, paying no attention to Martha's horrified
protests.

"There. Now they're sure to feel better," said Beth, pulling the worn
and darned stockings upon the woman's feet again. "And you must take
this bottle to your room, and use it every night and morning."

"Bless your dear heart!" cried Phibbs, while tears of gratitude stood
in her faded eyes. "I'm sure I feel twenty years younger, a'ready. But
you shouldn't 'a' done it, miss; indeed you shouldn't."

"I'm glad to help you," said Beth, rinsing her hands at the wash stand
and drying them upon a towel. "It would be cruel to let you suffer
when I can ease your pain."

"But what would Miss Jane say?" wailed old Martha, throwing up her
hands in dismay.

"She'll never know a thing about it. It's our secret, Martha, and I'm
sure if I ever need a friend you'll do as much for me."

"I'll do anything for you, Miss Elizabeth," was the reply, as the
woman took the bottle of lotion and departed.

Beth smiled.

"That was not a bad thought," she said to herself, again starting for
the gardens. "I have made a firm friend and done a kindly action at
the same time--and all while Cousin Louise is fast asleep."

The housekeeper let her out at the side door, after Beth had pressed
her hand and kissed her good morning.

"You're looking quite bonny, my dear," said the old woman. "Do you
feel at home, at all, in this strange place?"

"Not quite, as yet," answered Beth. "But I know I have one good friend
here, and that comforts me."

She found a path between high hedges, that wandered away through the
grounds, and along this she strolled until she reached a rose arbor
with a comfortable bench.

Here she seated herself, looking around her curiously. The place
seemed little frequented, but was kept with scrupulous care. Even
at this hour, a little way off could be heard the "click-click!" of
hedge-shears, and Beth noted how neatly the paths were swept, and how
carefully every rose on the arbor was protected.

Elmhurst was a beautiful place. Beth sighed as she wondered if it
would ever be hers. Then she opened her book and began to work.

During the next hour the click of the hedge-shears drew nearer, but
the girl did not notice this. In another half hour James himself came
into view, intent upon his monotonous task. Gradually the motionless
form of the girl and the plodding figure of the gardener drew
together, until he stood but two yards distant. Then he paused, looked
toward the arbor, and uttered an exclamation.

Beth looked up.

"Good morning," she said, pleasantly.

James stared at her, but made no reply save a slight inclination of
his head.

"Am I in your way?" she asked.

He turned his back to her, then, and began clipping away as before.
Beth sprang up and laid a hand upon his arm, arresting him. Again he
turned to stare at her, and in his eyes was a look almost of fear.

She drew back.

"Why won't you speak to me?" enquired the girl, gently. "I'm a
stranger at Elmhurst, but I want to be your friend. Won't you let me?"

To her amazement James threw up his hands, letting the shears clatter
to the ground, and with a hoarse cry turned and fled up the path as
swiftly as he could go.

Beth was really puzzled, but as she stood silently looking after the
gardener she heard a soft laugh, and found old Misery beside her.

"It's just his way, Miss; don't you be scared by anything that James
does," said the woman. "Why, at times he won't even speak to Miss
Jane."

"He isn't dumb, is he?" asked Beth.

"Lor', no! But he's that odd an' contrary he won't talk to a soul.
Never did, since the day Master Tom was killed. James was travellin'
with Master Tom, you know, and there was an accident, an' the train
run off'n the track an' tipped over. James wasn't hurt at all, but he
dragged Master Tom out'n the wreck and sat by him until he died. Then
James brought Master Tom's body back home again; but his mind
seemed to have got a shock, in some way, and he never was the same
afterwards. He was powerful fond of young Master Tom. But then, we all
was."

"Poor man!" said Beth.

"After that," resumed Misery, "all that James would do was to look
after the flowers. Miss Jane, after she came, made him the head
gardener, and he's proved a rare good one, too. But James he won't
even talk to Miss Jane, nor even to his old friend Lawyer Watson, who
used to be Master Tom's special chum an' comrade. He does his duty,
and obeys all Miss Jane's orders as faithful as can be; but he won't
talk, an' we've all give up tryin' to make him."

"But why should I frighten him?" asked the girl.

"You tried to make him talk, and you're a stranger. Strangers always
affect James that way. I remember when Miss Jane first came to
Elmhurst he screamed at the sight of her; but when he found out that
Master Tom loved her and had given her Elmhurst, James followed her
around like a dog, and did everything she told him to. But breakfast
is ready, Miss. I came to call you."

"Thank you," said Beth, turning to walk beside the housekeeper.

According to Aunt Jane's instructions the breakfast was served in her
own room, and presently Louise, dressed in a light silk kimona, came
in bearing her tray "to keep her cousin company," she laughingly
announced.

"I should have slept an hour longer," she yawned, over her chocolate,
"but old Misery--who seems rightly named--insisted on waking me, just
that I might eat. Isn't this a funny establishment?"

"It's different from everything I'm used to," answered Beth, gravely;
"but it seems very pleasant here, and everyone is most kind and
attentive."

"Now I'll dress," said Louise, "and we'll take a long walk together,
and see the place."

So it happened that Kenneth clattered down the road on the sorrel mare
just a moment before the girls emerged from the house, and while he
was riding off his indignation at their presence at Elmhurst, they
were doing just what his horrified imagination had depicted--that is,
penetrating to all parts of the grounds, to every nook in the spacious
old gardens and even to the stables, where Beth endeavored to make a
friend of old Donald the coachman.

However, the gray-whiskered Scotsman was not to be taken by storm,
even by a pretty face. His loyalty to "the boy" induced him to be wary
in associating with these strange "young females" and although he
welcomed them to the stable with glum civility he withheld his opinion
of them until he should know them better.

In their rambles the girls found Kenneth's own stair, and were sitting
upon it when Phibbs came to summon Louise to attend upon Aunt Jane.

She obeyed with alacrity, for she wished to know more of the queer
relative whose guest she had become.

"Sit down," said Aunt Jane, very graciously, as the girl entered.

Louise leaned over the chair, kissed her and patted her cheek
affectionately, and then shook up the pillows to make them more
comfortable.

"I want you to talk to me," announced Aunt Jane, "and to tell me
something of the city and the society in which you live. I've been so
long dead to the world that I've lost track of people and things."

"Let me dress your hair at the same time," said Louise, pleadingly.
"It looks really frowsy, and I can talk while I work."

"I can't lift my left hand," said the invalid, flushing, "and Phibbs
is a stupid ass."

"Never mind, I can make it look beautiful in half a jiffy," said the
girl, standing behind the chair and drawing deftly the hairpins from
Aunt Jane's scanty grey locks, "and you can't imagine how it pleases
me to fuss over anyone."

It was surprising how meekly Aunt Jane submitted to this ordeal, but
she plied the girl with many shrewd questions and Louise, busily
working in a position where the old woman could not see her face,
never hesitated for an answer. She knew all the recent gossip of
fashionable society, and retailed it glibly. She had met this
celebrity at a ball and that one at a reception, and she described
them minutely, realizing that Aunt Jane would never be in a position
to contradict any assertion she might choose to make.

Indeed, Aunt Jane was really startled.

"However did your mother manage to gain an entree into society?" she
asked. "Your father was a poor man and of little account. I know, for
he was my own brother."

"He left us a very respectable life insurance," said Louise, demurely,
"and my mother had many friends who were glad to introduce us to good
society when we were able to afford such a luxury. Father died twelve
years ago, you know, and for several years, while I was at school,
mother lived very quietly. Then she decided it was time I made my
debut, but for the last season we have been rather gay, I admit."

"Are you rich?" asked Aunt Jane, sharply.

"Mercy, no!" laughed Louise, who had finished her work and now sat her
aunt's feet. "But we have enough for our requirements, and that makes
us feel quite independent. By the way, auntie, I want to return that
check you sent me. It was awfully good and generous of you, but I
didn't need it, you know, and so I want you to take it back."

She drew the slip of paper from her pocket and pressed it into Aunt
Jane's hand.

"It's quite enough for you to give me this nice treat in the country,"
resumed the girl, calmly. "The change from the city will do me a world
of good, and as I wanted to be quiet, and rest I declined all my other
invitations for the summer to accept yours. Isn't it glorious that we
can get acquainted at last? And I quite love Elmhurst, already!"

Aunt Jane was equally surprised and gratified. The return of the check
for a hundred dollars was very pleasant. She had drawn a similar check
for each of her three nieces, believing that it would be necessary for
her to meet their expenses, and she had considered the expenditure in
the nature of a business transaction. But Patricia had flung one check
in her face, practically, and now Louise had voluntarily returned
another, because she did not need the money. Really, Jane Merrick was
accomplishing her purpose for less money than she had expected, and
she had hoarded her wealth for so many years that she disliked to
spend any of it foolishly.

Louise had read her nature correctly. It had been a little hard to
return so large a check, but the girl's policy was not to appear
before Aunt Jane as a poor relation, but rather as a young lady fitted
by social education and position to become a gracious mistress of
Elmhurst. This she believed would give her a powerful advantage over
all competitors.

Whether she was right or not in this surmise it is certain that she
rose several points in Aunt Jane's estimation during this interview,
and when she was dismissed it was so graciously that she told herself
the money her little plot had cost had been well expended.

Afterward Elizabeth was summoned to attend her aunt.

"I want to be amused. Can you read aloud?" said the invalid.

"Not very well, I'm afraid. But I'll be glad to try," answered Beth.
"What do you like?"

"Select your own book," said Aunt Jane, pointing to a heap of volumes
beside her.

The girl hesitated. Louise would doubtless have chosen a romance, or
some light tale sure to interest for the hour, and so amuse the old
lady. But Beth erroneously judged that the aged and infirm love sober
and scholarly books, and picked out a treatise that proved ineffably
dull and tedious.

Aunt Jane sniffed, and then smiled slyly and proceeded to settle
herself for a nap. If the girl was a fool, let her be properly
punished.

Beth read for an hour, uncertain whether her aunt were intensely
interested or really asleep. At the end of that dreadful period old
Misery entered and aroused the sleeper without ceremony.

"What's the matter?" asked Aunt Jane, querrulously, for she resented
being disturbed.

"There's a man to see you, Miss."

"Send him about his business!"

"But--"

"I won't see him, I tell you!"

"But he says he's your brother, Miss."

"Who?"

"Your brother."

Miss Jane stared as if bewildered.

"Your brother John, Miss."

The invalid sank back upon her cushions with a sigh of resignation.

"I thought he was dead, long ago; but if he's alive I suppose I'll
have to see him," she said. "Elizabeth, leave the room. Misery, send
the man here!"




CHAPTER XII.

UNCLE JOHN GETS ACQUAINTED.


Beth went out to find Louise, and discovered her standing near the
stables, where a boy was rubbing down the sides of a sorrel mare with
wisps of straw.

"Something has happened," she said to Louise in a troubled voice.

"What?"

"A man has arrived who says he is Aunt Jane's brother."

"Impossible! Have you seen him?"

"No; he says he's Aunt Jane's brother John."

"Oh; I know. The peddler, or tinker, or something or other who
disappeared years ago. But it doesn't matter."

"It may matter a good deal," said practical Beth. "Aunt Jane may leave
him her money."

"Why, he's older than she is. I've heard mother say he was the eldest
of the family. Aunt Jane wont leave her money to an old man, you may
be sure."

Beth felt a little reassured at this, and stood for a moment beside
Louise watching the boy. Presently Oscar came to him, and after
touching his hat respectfully took the mare and led her into the
stable. The boy turned away, with his hands in his pockets, and
strolled up a path, unaware that the two dreaded girls had been
observing him.

"I wonder who that is," said Beth.

"We'll find out," returned Louise. "I took him for a stable boy, at
first. But Oscar seemed to treat him as a superior."

She walked into the stable, followed by her cousin, and found the
groom tying the mare.

"Who was the young man?" she asked.

"Which young man, Miss?"

"The one who has just arrived with the horse."

"Oh; that's Master Kenneth, Miss," answered Oscar, with a grin.

"Where did he come from?"

"Master Kenneth? Why, he lives here."

"At the house?"

"Yes, Miss."

"Who is he?"

"Master Tom's nephew--he as used to own Elmhurst, you know."

"Mr. Thomas Bradley?"

"The same, Miss."

"Ah. How long has Master Kenneth lived here?"

"A good many years. I can't just remember how long."

"Thank you, Oscar."

The girls walked away, and when they were alone Louise remarked:

"Here is a more surprising discovery than Uncle John, Beth. The boy
has a better right than any of us to inherit Elmhurst."

"Then why did Aunt Jane send for us?"

"It's a mystery, dear. Let us try to solve it."

"Come; we'll ask the housekeeper," said Beth. "I'm sure old Misery
will tell us all we want to know."

So they returned to the house and, with little difficulty, found the
old housekeeper.

"Master Kenneth?" she exclaimed. "Why, he's just Master Tom's nephew,
that's all."

"Is this his home?" asked Beth.

"All the home he's got, my dear. His father and mother are both dead,
and Miss Jane took him to care for just because she thought Master Tom
would 'a' liked it."

"Is she fond of him?" enquired Louise.

"Fond of the boy? Why, Miss Jane just hates him, for a fact. She won't
even see him, or have him near her. So he keeps to his little room in
the left wing, and eats and sleeps there."

"It's strange," remarked Beth, thoughtfully. "Isn't he a nice boy?"

"We're all very fond of Master Kenneth," replied the housekeeper,
simply. "But I'll admit he's a queer lad, and has a bad temper. It may
be due to his lack of bringin' up, you know; for he just runs wild,
and old Mr. Chase, who comes from the village to tutor him, is a poor
lot, and lets the boy do as he pleases. For that reason he won't
study, and he won't work, and I'm sure I don't know whatever will
become of him, when Miss Jane dies."

"Thank you," said Beth, much relieved, and the girls walked away with
lighter hearts.

"There's no danger in that quarter, after all," said Louise, gaily.
"The boy is a mere hanger-on. You see, Aunt Jane's old sweetheart,
Thomas Bradley, left everything to her when he died, and she can do as
she likes with it."

After luncheon, which they ate alone and unattended save by the maid
Susan, who was old Misery's daughter, the girls walked away to
the rose arbor, where Beth declared they could read or sew quite
undisturbed.

But sitting upon the bench they found a little old man, his legs
extended, his hands thrust deep into his pockets, and a look of calm
meditation upon his round and placid face. Between his teeth was a
black brier pipe, which he puffed lazily.

Beth was for drawing back, but Louise took her arm and drew her
forward.

"Isn't this Uncle John?" she asked.

The little man turned his eyes upon them, withdrew his hands from his
pockets and his pipe from his mouth, and then bowed profoundly.

"If you are my nieces, then I am Uncle John," he said, affably. "Sit
down, my dears, and let us get acquainted."

Louise smiled, and her rapid survey took in the man's crumpled and
somewhat soiled shirt-front, the frayed black necktie that seemed to
have done years of faithful service, and the thick and dusty cow-hide
boots. His clothing was old and much worn, and the thought crossed
her mind that Oscar the groom was far neater in appearance than this
newly-found relative.

Beth merely noticed that Uncle John was neither dignified nor imposing
in appearance. She sat down beside him--leaving a wide space between
them--with a feeling of disappointment that he was "like all the rest
of the Merricks."

"You have just arrived, we hear," remarked Louise.

"Yes. Walked up from the station this forenoon," said Uncle John.
"Come to see Jane, you know, but hadn't any idea I'd find two nieces.
Hadn't any idea I possessed two nieces, to be honest about it."

"I believe you have three," said Louise, in an, amused tone.

"Three? Who's the other?"

"Why, Patricia Doyle."

"Doyle? Doyle? Don't remember the name."

"I believe your sister Violet married a man named Doyle."

"So she did. Captain Doyle--or Major Doyle--or some such fellow. But
what is your name?"

"I am Louise Merrick, your brother Will's daughter."

"Oh! And you?" turning to Beth.

"My mother was Julia Merrick," said Beth, not very graciously. "She
married Professor DeGraf. I am Elizabeth DeGraf."

"Yes, yes," observed Uncle John, nodding his head. "I remember Julia
very well, as a girl. She used to put on a lot of airs, and jaw father
because he wouldn't have the old top-buggy painted every spring. Same
now as ever, I s'pose?"

Beth did not reply.

"And Will's dead, and out of his troubles, I hope," continued Uncle
John, reflectively. "He wrote me once that his wife had nearly driven
him crazy. Perhaps she murdered him in his sleep--eh, Louise?"

"Sir," said Louise, much offended, "you are speaking of my mother."

"Ah, yes. It's the same one your father spoke of," he answered,
unmoved. "But that's neither here nor there. The fact is, I've found
two nieces," looking shrewdly from one face into the other, "and I
seem to be in luck, for you're quite pretty and ladylike, my dears."

"Thank you," said Louise, rather coldly. "You're a competent judge,
sir, I suppose."

"Tolerable," he responded, with a chuckle. "So good a judge that I've
kep' single all my life."

"Where did you come from?" asked the girl.

"From out on the coast," tossing his grizzled head toward the west.

"What brought you back here, after all these years?"

"Family affection, I guess. Wanted to find out what folks yet belonged
to me."

An awkward silence followed this, during which Uncle John relighted
his pipe and Beth sat in moody silence. Louise drew a pattern in the
gravel with the end of her parasol. This new uncle, she reflected,
might become an intolerable bore, if she encouraged his frank
familiarity.

"Now that you are here," she said, presently, "what are you going to
do?"

"Nothing, my dear."

"Have you any money?"

He looked at her with a droll expression.

"Might have expected that question, my dear," said he; "but it's
rather hard to answer. If I say no, you'll be afraid I'll want to
borrow a little spendin' money, now an' then; and if I say yes, you'll
take me for a Rockyfeller."

"Not exactly," smiled Louise.

"Well, then, if I figure close I won't have to borrow," he responded,
gravely. "And here's Jane, my sister, just rolling in wealth that she
don't know what to do with. And she's invited me to stay a while. So
let's call the money question settled, my dear."

Another silence ensued. Louise had satisfied her curiosity concerning
her new uncle, and Beth had never had any. There was nothing more to
say, and as Uncle John showed no intention of abandoning the arbored
seat, it was evident they must go themselves. Louise was about to rise
when the man remarked:

"Jane won't last long".

"You think not?" she asked.

"She says she's half dead a'ready, and I believe it. It's about time,
you know. She's let her temper and restless disposition wear her out.
Pretty soon she'll blow out, like a candle. All that worries her is to
keep alive until she can decide who to leave her money to. That's why
you're here, I s'pose, my dears. How do you like being on exhibition,
an' goin' through your paces, like a bunch o' trotting hosses, to see
which is worth the most?"

"Uncle John," said Beth, "I had hoped I would like you. But if you are
going to be so very disagreeable, I'll have nothing more to do with
you!"

With this she arose and marched up the path, vastly indignant, and
Louise marched beside her. At the bend in the walk they glanced back,
and saw Uncle John sitting upon the bench all doubled up and shaking
with silent laughter.

"He's a queer old man," said Beth, flushing; "but he's impudent and
half a fool."

"Don't judge hastily, Beth," replied Louise, reflectively. "I can't
make up my mind, just yet, whether Uncle John is a fool or not."

"Anyhow," snapped Beth, "he's laughing at us."

"And that," said her cousin, softly, "is the strongest evidence of his
sanity. Beth, my love, Aunt Jane has placed us in a most ridiculous
position."

That evening at dinner they met Uncle John again, seated opposite Aunt
Jane in the great dining hall. The mistress of Elmhurst always dressed
for this meal and tonight she wore a rich black silk and had her
invalid chair wheeled to her place at the head of the table. Uncle
John had simply changed his old black necktie for a soiled white one.
Otherwise his apparel was the same as before, and his stubby gray hair
was in a sad state of disarray. But his round face wore a cheerful
smile, nevertheless, and Aunt Jane seemed not to observe anything
_outre_ in her brother's appearance. And so the meal passed pleasantly
enough.

After it was finished Uncle John strolled into the garden to smoke his
pipe under the stars and Louise sang a few songs for Aunt Jane in the
dimly-lit drawing room. Beth, who was a music teacher's daughter,
could not sing at all.

It was some time later when John Merrick came to his sister's room to
bid her good night.

"Well," she asked him, "what do you think of the girls?"

"My nieces?"

"Yes."

"During my lifetime," said the old man, "I've always noticed that
girls are just girls--and nothing more. Jane, your sex is a puzzle
that ain't worth the trouble solving. You're all alike, and what
little I've seen of my nieces convinces me they're regulation
females--no better nor worse than their kind."

"Louise seems a capable girl," declared Aunt Jane, musingly. "I didn't
care much for her, at first; but she improves on acquaintance. She has
been well trained by her mother, and is very ladylike and agreeable."

"She's smarter than the other one, but not so honest," said Uncle
John.

"Beth has no tact at all," replied Aunt Jane. "But then, she's younger
than Louise."

"If you're trying to figure out what they are, and what they are not,"
returned the man, "you've got a hard job on your hands, Jane, and like
as not you'll make a mistake in the end. Where's the other niece?
Aren't there three of them?"

"Yes. The other's coming. Silas Watson, my lawyer, has just
telegraphed from New York that he's bringing Patricia back with him."

"Had to send for her, eh?"

"Yes. She's Irish, and if I remember rightly her father is a
disgraceful old reprobate, who caused poor Violet no end of worry. The
girl may be like him, for she wrote me a dreadful letter, scolding me
because I hadn't kept her parents supplied with money, and refusing to
become my guest."

"But she's changed her mind?"

"I sent Watson after her, and he's bringing her. I wanted to see what
the girl is like."

Uncle John whistled a few bars of an ancient tune.

"My advice is," he said, finally, "to let 'em draw cuts for Elmhurst.
If you want to leave your money to the best o' the lot, you're as sure
of striking it right that way as any other."

"Nonsense!" said Jane Merrick, sharply. "I don't want to leave my
money to the best of the lot."

"No?"

"By no means. I want to leave it to the one I prefer--whether she's
the best or not."

"I see. Jane, I'll repeat my former observation. Your sex is a puzzle
that isn't worth solving. Good night, old girl."

"Good night, John."




CHAPTER XIII.

THE OTHER NIECE.


Patricia sat down opposite her Aunt Jane. She still wore her hat and
the gray wrap.

"Well, here I am," she exclaimed, with a laugh; "but whether I ought
to be here or not I have my doubts."

Aunt Jane surveyed her critically.

"You're a queer little thing," she said, bluntly. "I wonder why I took
so much trouble to get you."

"So do I," returned Patsy, her eyes twinkling. "You'll probably be
sorry for it."

Lawyer Watson, who had remained standing, now broke in nervously.

"I explained to Miss Doyle," said he, "that you were ill, and wanted
to see her. And she kindly consented to come to Elmhurst for a few
days."

"You see," said Patsy, "I'd just got Daddy away on his vacation, to
visit his old colonel. I've wanted him to go this three years back,
but he couldn't afford it until I got a raise this Spring. He'll have
a glorious old time with the colonel, and they'll fish and hunt and
drink whiskey all day, and fight the war all over again every evening.
So I was quite by myself when Mr. Watson came to me and wouldn't take
no for his answer."

"Why did you object to come here?" asked Aunt Jane.

"Well, I didn't know you; and I didn't especially want to know you.
Not that I bear grudges, understand, although you've been little of a
friend to my folks these past years. But you are rich and proud--and I
suspect you're a little cross, Aunt Jane--while we are poor and proud
and like to live our lives in our own way."

"Are you a working girl?" enquired Miss Merrick.

"Surely," said Patsy, "and drawing a big lump of salary every Saturday
night. I'm a hair-dresser, you know--and by the way, Aunt Jane, it
puzzles me to find a certain kink in your hair that I thought I'd
invented myself."

"Louise dressed my hair this way," said Miss Merrick, a bit stiffly.

"Your maid?"

"My niece, Louise Merrick."

Patsy whistled, and then clapped her hand over her mouth and looked
grave.

"Is she here?" she asked, a moment later.

"Yes, and your other cousin, Elizabeth De Graf, is here also."

"That's just the trouble," cried Patsy, energetically. "That's why I
didn't want to come, you know."

"I don't understand you, Patricia."

"Why, it's as plain as the nose on your face, even if I hadn't pumped
Mr. Watson until I got the truth out of him. You want us girls here
just to compare us with each other, and pick out the one you like
best."

"Well?"

"The others you'll throw over, and the favorite will get your money."

"Haven't I a right to do that?" asked the invalid, in an amazed tone.

"Perhaps you have. But we may as well understand each other right
now, Aunt Jane. I won't touch a penny of your money, under any
circumstances."

"I don't think you will, Patricia."

The girl laughed, with a joyous, infectious merriment that was hard to
resist.

"Stick to that, aunt, and there's no reason we shouldn't be friends,"
she said, pleasantly. "I don't mind coming to see you, for it will
give me a bit of a rest and the country is beautiful just now. More
than that, I believe I shall like you. You've had your own way a long
time, and you've grown crochetty and harsh and disagreeable; but there
are good lines around your mouth and eyes, and your nature's liable to
soften and get sunny again. I'm sure I hope so. So, if you'd like me
to stay a few days, I'll take off my things and make myself at home.
But I'm out of the race for your money, and I'll pay my way from now
on just as I have always done."

Silas Watson watched Aunt Jane's face during this speech with an
anxious and half-frightened expression upon his own. No one but
himself had ever dared to talk to Jane Merrick as plainly as this
before, and he wondered how she would accept such frankness from a
young girl.

But Patricia's manner was not at all offensive. Her big eyes were
as frank as her words, but they glistened with kindliness and good
nature, and it was evident the girl had no doubt at all of her aunt's
reply, for she straightway begun to take off her hat.

The invalid had kept her eyes sternly fastened upon her young niece
ever since the beginning of the interview. Now she reached out a hand
and touched her bell.

"Misery," she said to the old housekeeper, "show my niece, Miss
Patricia, to the rose chamber. And see that she is made comfortable."

"Thank you," said Patsy, jumping up to go.

"Make yourself perfectly free of the place," continued Aunt Jane, in
an even tone, turning to Patricia, "and have as good a time as you
can. I'm afraid it's rather stupid here for girls, but that can't be
helped. Stay as long as you please, and go home whenever you like; but
while you are here, if you ever feel like chatting with a harsh
and disagreeable old woman, come to me at any time and you will be
welcome."

Patsy, standing before her, looked down into her worn face with a
pitying expression.

"Ah! I've been cruel to you," she exclaimed, impulsively, "and I
didn't mean to hurt you at all, Aunt Jane. You must forgive me. It's
just my blunt Irish way, you see; but if I hadn't been drawn to you
from the first I wouldn't have said a word--good or bad!"

"Go now," replied Aunt Jane, turning in her chair rather wearily. "But
come to me again whenever you like."

Patsy nodded, and followed the housekeeper to the rose chamber--the
prettiest room old Elmhurst possessed, with broad windows opening
directly upon the finest part of the garden.

Lawyer Watson sat opposite his old friend for some moments in
thoughtful silence. "The child is impossible." he said, at last.

"You think so?" she enquired, moodily.

"Absolutely. Either of the others would make a better Lady of
Elmhurst. Yet I like the little thing, I confess. She quite won my old
heart after I had known her for five minutes. But money would ruin
her. She's a child of the people, and ought not to be raised from her
proper level. Jane, Jane--you're making a grave mistake in all this.
Why don't you do the only right thing in your power, and leave
Elmhurst to Kenneth?"

"You bore me, Silas," she answered, coldly. "The boy is the most
impossible of all."

It was the old protest and the old reply. He had hardly expected
anything different.

After a period of thought he asked;

"What is this I hear about John Merrick having returned from the
West?"

"He came yesterday. It was a great surprise to me."

"I never knew this brother, I believe."

"No; he had gone away before I became acquainted with either you or
Tom."

"What sort of a man is he?"

"Honest and simple, hard-headed and experienced."

"Is he independent?"

"I believe so; he has never mentioned his affairs to me. But he has
worked hard all his life, he says, and now means to end his days
peacefully. John is not especially refined in his manner, nor did he
have much of an education; but he seems to be a good deal of a man,
for all that. I am very glad he appeared at Elmhurst just at this
time."

"You had believed him dead?"

"Yes. He had passed out of my life completely, and I never knew what
became of him."

"He must be an eccentric person," said Mr. Watson, with a smile.

"He is." she acknowledged. "But blood is thicker than water, Silas,
and I'm glad brother John is here at last."

A little later the lawyer left her and picked his way through the
gardens until he came to Kenneth's wing and the stair that led to
his room. Here he paused a moment, finding himself surrounded by a
profound stillness, broken only by the chirping of the birds in the
shrubbery. Perhaps Kenneth was not in. He half decided to retrace
his steps, but finally mounted the stair softly and stood within the
doorway of the room.

The boy and a little stout man were playing chess at a table, and both
were in a deep study of the game. The boy's back was toward him, but
the man observed the newcomer and gave a nod. Then he dropped his eyes
again to the table.

Kenneth was frowning sullenly.

"You're bound to lose the pawn, whichever way you play," said the
little man quietly.

The boy gave an angry cry, and thrust the table from him, sending the
chess-men clattering into a corner. Instantly the little man leaned
over and grasped the boy by the collar, and with a sudden jerk landed
him across his own fat knees. Then, while the prisoner screamed and
struggled, the man brought his hand down with a slap that echoed
throughout the room, and continued the operation until Master Kenneth
had received a sound spanking.

Then he let the boy slip to the floor, from whence he arose slowly and
backed toward the door, scowling and muttering angrily.

"You broke the bargain, and I kept my word," said Uncle John, calmly
taking his pipe from his pocket and filling it. "The compact was that
if you raised a rough-house, like you did yesterday, and got unruly,
that I'd give you a good thrashing. Now, wasn't it?"

"Yes," acknowledged the boy.

"Well, that blamed temper o' your'n got away with you again, and
you're well spanked for not heading it off. Pick up the board. Ken, my
lad, and let's try it again."

The boy hesitated. Then he looked around and saw Lawyer Watson, who
had stood motionless by the doorway, and with a cry that was half a
sob Kenneth threw himself into his old friend's arms and burst into a
flood of tears.

Uncle John struck a match, and lighted his pipe.

"A bargain's a bargain," he observed, composedly.

"He whipped me!" sobbed the boy. "He whipped me like a child."

"Your own fault," said Uncle John. "You wanted me to play a game with
you, and I agreed, providin' you behaved yourself. And you didn't.
Now, look here. Do you blame me any?"

"No," said the boy.

"No harm's done, is there?"

"No."

"Then stop blubberin', and introduce me to your friend," continued
Uncle John. "Name's Watson, ain't it."

"Silas Watson, sir, at your service," said the lawyer, smiling. "And
this must be John Merrick, who I understand has arrived at Elmhurst
during my absence."

"Exactly," said Uncle John, and the two men shook hands cordially.

"Glad to welcome you to Elmhurst, sir," continued the lawyer. "I've
known it ever since I was a boy, when it belonged to my dear friend
Thomas Bradley. And I hope you'll love it as much as I do, when you
know it better."

"Bradley must have been a fool to give this place to Jane," said Uncle
John, reflectively.

"He was in love, sir," observed the other, and they both smiled. Then
the lawyer turned to Kenneth. "How are things going?" he asked. "Have
the girls bothered you much, as yet?"

"No," said the boy. "I keep out of their way."

"That's a good idea. By the bye, sir," turning to John Merrick. "I've
just brought you a new niece."

"Patricia?"

"She prefers to be called Patsy. A queer little thing; half Irish, you
know."

"And half Merrick. That's an odd combination, but the Irish may be
able to stand it," said Uncle John. "These nieces are more than I
bargained for. I came to see one relative, and find three more--and
all women!"

"I think you'll like Patsy, anyhow. And so will you, Kenneth."

The boy gave an indignant roar.

"I hate all girls!" he said.

"You won't hate this one. She's as wild and impulsive as you are, but
better natured. She'll make a good comrade, although she may box your
ears once in a while."

The boy turned away sulkily, and began picking up the scattered
chess-men. The two men walked down the stair and strolled together
through the garden.

"A strange boy," said Uncle John, presently.

"I'm glad to see you've made friends with him," replied the lawyer,
earnestly. "Until now he has had no one to befriend him but me, and at
times he's so unmanageable that it worries me dreadfully."

"There's considerable character about the lad," said John Merrick;
"but he's been spoiled and allowed to grow up wild, like a weed. He's
got it in him to make a criminal or a gentleman, whichever way his
nature happens to develop."

"He ought to go to a military school," replied Lawyer Watson. "Proper
training would make a man of Kenneth; but I can't induce Jane to spend
the money on him. She gives him food and clothing and lodging--all
of the simplest description--but there her generosity ends. With
thousands of dollars lying idle, she won't assist the only nephew of
Tom Bradley to secure a proper education."

"Jane's queer, too," said that lady's brother, with a sigh. "In fact,
Mr. Watson, it's a queer world, and the longer I live in it the
queerer I find it. Once I thought it would be a good idea to regulate
things myself and run the world as it ought to be run; but I gave it
up long ago. The world's a stage, they say; but the show ain't always
amusing, by a long chalk, and sometimes I wish I didn't have a
reserved seat."




CHAPTER XIV.

KENNETH IS FRIGHTENED.


Lawyer Watson, unable to direct events at Elmhurst, became a silent
spectator of the little comedy being enacted there, and never
regretted that, as Uncle John expressed it, he "had a reserved seat at
the show."

Jane Merrick, formerly the most imperious and irrascible of women, had
become wonderfully reserved since the arrival of her nieces, and was
evidently making a sincere effort to study their diverse characters.
Day by day the invalid's health was failing visibly. She had no more
strokes of paralysis, but her left limb did not recover, and the
numbness was gradually creeping upward toward her heart.

Perhaps the old woman appreciated this more fully than anyone else. At
any event, she became more gentle toward Phibbs and Misery, who mostly
attended her, and showed as much consideration as possible for her
nieces and her brother. Silas Watson she kept constantly by her side.
He was her oldest and most trusted friend, and the only differences
they had ever had were over the boy Kenneth, whom she stubbornly
refused to favor.

Uncle John speedily became an established fixture at the place. The
servants grew accustomed to seeing him wander aimlessly about the
grounds, his pipe always in his mouth, his hands usually in his
pockets. He had a pleasant word always for Donald or Oscar or James,
but was not prone to long conversations. Every evening, when he
appeared at dinner, he wore his soiled white tie; at other times
the black one was always in evidence; but other than this his dress
underwent no change. Even Kenneth came to wonder what the bundle had
contained that Uncle John brought under his arm to Elmhurst.

The little man seemed from the first much attracted by his three
nieces. Notwithstanding Louise's constant snubs and Beth's haughty
silence he was sure to meet them when they strolled out and try to
engage them in conversation. It was hard to resist his simple good
nature, and the girls came in time to accept him as an inevitable
companion, and Louise mischievously poked fun at him while Beth
conscientiously corrected him in his speech and endeavored to improve
his manners. All this seemed very gratifying to Uncle John. He thanked
Beth very humbly for her kind attention, and laughed with Louise when
she ridiculed his pudgy, round form and wondered if his bristly gray
hair wouldn't make a good scrubbing brush.

Patsy didn't get along very well with her cousins. From the first,
when Louise recognized her, with well assumed surprise, as "the girl
who had been sent to dress her hair," Patricia declared that their
stations in life were entirely different.

"There's no use of our getting mixed up, just because we're cousins
and all visiting Aunt Jane," she said. "One of you will get her money,
for I've told her I wouldn't touch a penny of it, and she has told me
I wouldn't get the chance. So one of you will be a great lady, while I
shall always earn my own living. I'll not stay long, anyhow; so just
forget I'm here, and I'll amuse myself and try not to bother you."

Both Beth and Louise considered this very sensible, and took Patricia
at her word. Moreover, Phibbs had related to Beth, whose devoted
adherent she was, all of the conversation between Aunt Jane and
Patricia, from which the girls learned they had nothing to fear from
their cousin's interference. So they let her go her way, and the three
only met at the state dinners, which Aunt Jane still attended, in
spite of her growing weakness.

Old Silas Watson, interested as he was in the result, found it hard to
decide, after ten days, which of her nieces Jane Merrick most favored.
Personally he preferred that Beth should inherit, and frankly told his
old friend that the girl would make the best mistress of Elmhurst.
Moreover, all the servants sang Beth's praises, from Misery and Phibbs
down to Oscar and Susan. Of course James the gardener favored no one,
as the numerous strangers at Elmhurst kept him in a constant state of
irritation, and his malady seemed even worse than usual. He avoided
everyone but his mistress, and although his work was now often
neglected Miss Merrick made no complaint. James' peculiarities were
well understood and aroused nothing but sympathy.

Louise, however, had played her cards so well that all Beth's friends
were powerless to eject the elder girl from Aunt Jane's esteem. Louise
had not only returned the check to her aunt, but she came often to sit
beside her and cheer her with a budget of new social gossip, and no
one could arrange the pillows so comfortably or stroke the tired head
so gently as Louise. And then, she was observing, and called Aunt
Jane's attention to several ways of curtailing the household
expenditures, which the woman's illness had forced her to neglect.

So Miss Merrick asked Louise to look over the weekly accounts, and in
this way came to depend upon her almost as much as she did upon Lawyer
Watson.

As for Patsy, she made no attempt whatever to conciliate her aunt, who
seldom mentioned her name to the others but always brightened visibly
when the girl came into her presence with her cheery speeches and
merry laughter. She never stayed long, but came and went, like a
streak of sunshine, whenever the fancy seized her; and Silas Watson,
shrewdly looking on, saw a new light in Jane's eyes as she looked
after her wayward, irresponsible niece, and wondered if the bargain
between them, regarding the money, would really hold good.

It was all an incomprehensible problem, this matter of the
inheritance, and although the lawyer expected daily to be asked to
draw up Jane Merrick's will, and had, indeed, prepared several forms,
to be used in case of emergency, no word had yet passed her lips
regarding her intentions.

Kenneth's life, during this period, was one of genuine misery. It
seemed to his morbid fancy that whatever path he might take, he was
sure of running upon one or more of those detestable girls who were
visiting at Elmhurst. Even in Donald's harness-room he was not secure
from interruption, for little Patsy was frequently perched upon the
bench there, watching with serious eyes old Donald's motions, and
laughing joyously when in his embarrassment he overturned a can of oil
or buckled the wrong straps together.

Worse than all, this trying creature would saddle Nora, the sorrel
mare, and dash away through the lanes like a tom-boy, leaving him
only old Sam to ride--for Donald would allow no one to use the coach
horses. Sam was tall and boney, and had an unpleasant gait, so that
the boy felt he was thoroughly justified in hating the girl who so
frequently interfered with his whims.

Louise was at first quite interested in Kenneth, and resolved to force
him to talk and become more sociable.

She caught him in a little summer-house one morning, from whence,
there being but one entrance, he could not escape, and at once entered
into conversation.

"Ah, you are Kenneth Forbes, I suppose," she began, pleasantly. "I
am very glad to make your acquaintance. I am Louise Merrick, Miss
Merrick's niece, and have come to visit her."

The boy shrank back as fur as possible, staring her full in the face,
but made no reply.

"You needn't be afraid of me," continued Louise. "I'm very fond of
boys, and you must be nearly my own age."

Still no reply.

"I suppose you don't know much of girls and are rather shy," she
persisted. "But I want to be friendly and I hope you'll let me.
There's so much about this interesting old place that you can tell me,
having lived here so many years. Come, I'll sit beside you on this
bench, and we'll have a good talk together."

"Go away!" cried the boy, hoarsely, raising his hands as if to ward
off her approach.

Louise looked surprised and pained.

"Why, we are almost cousins," she said. "Cannot we become friends and
comrades?"

With a sudden bound he dashed her aside, so rudely that she almost
fell, and an instant later he had left the summer house and disappear
among the hedges.

Louise laughed at her own discomfiture and gave up the attempt to make
the boy's acquaintance.

"He's a regular savage," she told Beth, afterward, "and a little
crazy, too, I suspect."

"Never mind," said Beth, philosophically. "He's only a boy, and
doesn't amount to anything, anyway. After Aunt Jane dies he will
probably go somewhere else to live. Don't let us bother about him."

Kenneth's one persistent friend was Uncle John. He came every day
to the boy's room to play chess with him, and after that one day's
punishment, which, singularly enough, Kenneth in no way resented, they
got along very nicely together. Uncle John was a shrewd player of the
difficult game, but the boy was quick as a flash to see an advantage
and use it against his opponent; so neither was ever sure of winning
and the interest in the game was constantly maintained. At evening
also the little man often came to sit on the stair outside the boy's
room and smoke his pipe, and frequently they would sit beneath the
stars, absorbed in thought and without exchanging a single word.

Unfortunately, Louise and Beth soon discovered the boy's secluded
retreat, and loved to torment him by entering his own bit of garden
and even ascending the stairs to his little room. He could easily
escape them by running through the numerous upper halls of the
mansion; but here he was liable to meet others, and his especial dread
was encountering old Miss Merrick. So he conceived a plan for avoiding
the girls in another way.

In the hallway of the left wing, near his door, was a small ladder
leading to the second story roof, and a dozen feet from the edge of
the roof stood an old oak tree, on the further side of a tall hedge.
Kenneth managed to carry a plank to the roof, where, after several
attempts, he succeeded in dropping one end into a crotch of the oak,
thus connecting the edge of the roof with the tree by means of the
narrow plank. After this, at first sight of the girls in his end of
the garden, he fled to the roof, ran across the improvised bridge,
"shinned" down the tree and, hidden by the hedge, made good his
escape.

The girls discovered this plan, and were wicked enough to surprise the
boy often and force him to cross the dizzy plank to the tree. Having
frightened him away they would laugh and stroll on, highly amused at
the evident fear they aroused in the only boy about the place.

Patricia, who was not in the other girls' secret, knew nothing of this
little comedy and really disturbed Kenneth least of the three. But he
seemed to avoid her as much as he did the others.

She sooned learned from Oscar that the boy loved to ride as well as
she did, and once or twice she met him on a lonely road perched on top
of big Sam. This led her to suspect she had thoughtlessly deprived him
of his regular mount. So one morning she said to the groom:

"Doesn't Kenneth usually ride Nora?"

"Yes, Miss," answered the man.

"Then I'd better take Sam this morning," she decided.

But the groom demurred.

"You won't like Sam, Miss," he said, "and he gets ugly at times and
acts bad. Master Kenneth won't use Nora today, I'm sure."

She hesitated.

"I think I'll ask him," said she, after a moment, and turned away into
the garden, anxious to have this plausible opportunity to speak to the
lonely boy.




CHAPTER XV.

PATSY MEETS WITH AN ACCIDENT.


"Get out of here!" shouted the boy, angrily, as Patsy appeared at the
foot of his stair.

"I won't!" she answered indignantly. "I've come to speak to you about
the mare, and you'll just treat me decently or I'll know the reason
why!"

But he didn't wait to hear this explanation. He saw her advancing up
the stairs, and fled in his usual hasty manner to the hall and up the
ladder to the roof.

Patsy stepped back into the garden, vexed at his flight, and the next
instant she saw him appear, upon the sloping roof and start to run
down the plank.

Even as she looked the boy slipped, fell headlong, and slid swiftly
downward. In a moment he was over the edge, clutching wildly at the
plank, which was a foot or more beyond his reach. Headforemost he
dove into space, but the clutching hand found something at last--the
projecting hook of an old eaves-trough that had long since been
removed--and to this he clung fast in spite of the jerk of his
arrested body, which threatened to tear away his grip.

But his plight was desperate, nevertheless. He was dangling in space,
the hard pavement thirty feet below him, with no possible way of
pulling himself up to the roof again. And the hook was so small that
there was no place for his other hand. The only way he could cling
to it at all was to grasp his wrist with the free hand as a partial
relief from the strain upon his arm.

"Hold fast!" called Patsy. "I'm coming."

She sprang up the steps, through the boy's room and into the hallway.
There she quickly perceived the ladder, and mounted it to the roof.
Taking in the situation at a glance she ran with steady steps down
the sloping roof to where the plank lay, and stepped out upon it far
enough to see the boy dangling beside her. Then she decided instantly
what to do.

"Hang on!" she called, and returning to the roof dragged the end of
the plank to a position directly over the hook. Then she lay flat upon
it, an arm on either side of the plank, and reaching down seized one
of the boy's wrists firmly in each hand.

"Now, then," said she, "let go the hook."

"If I do," answered the boy, his white face upturned to hers, "I'll
drag you down with me."

"No you won't. I'm very strong, and I'm sure I can save you. Let go,"
she said, imperatively.

"I'm not afraid to die," replied the boy, his voice full of
bitterness. "Take away your hands, and I'll drop."

But Patsy gripped him more firmly than ever.

"Don't be a fool!" she cried. "There's no danger whatever, if you do
just what I tell you."

His eyes met hers in a mute appeal; but suddenly he gained confidence,
and resolved to trust her. In any event, he could not cling to the
hook much longer.

He released his hold, and swung in mid-air just beneath the plank,
where the girl lay holding him by his wrists.

"Now, then," she said, quietly, "when I lift you up, grab the edges of
the plank."

Patricia's strength was equal to her courage, and under the excitement
of that desperate moment she did what few other girls of her size
could ever have accomplished. She drew the boy up until his eager
hands caught the edges of the plank, and gripped it firmly. Then she
released him and crept a little back toward the roof.

"Now swing your legs up and you're safe!" she cried.

He tried to obey, but his strength was failing him, and he could do no
more than touch the plank with his toes.

"Once more," called the girl.

This time she caught his feet as they swung upward, and drew his legs
around the plank.

"Can you climb up, now?" she asked, anxiously.

"I'll try," he panted.

The plank upon which this little tragedy was being enacted was in full
view of the small garden where Aunt Jane loved to sit in her chair and
enjoy the flowers and the sunshine. She could not see Kenneth's wing
at all, but she could see the elevated plank leading from the roof to
the oak tree, and for several days had been puzzled by its appearance
and wondered for what purpose it was there.

Today, as she sat talking with John Merrick and Silas Watson, she
suddenly gave a cry of surprise, and following her eyes the two men
saw Kenneth step out upon the roof, fall, and slide over the edge.
For a moment all three remained motionless, seized with fear and
consternation, and then they saw Patsy appear and run down to the
plank.

This they watched her move, and saw her lie down upon it.

"She's trying to save him--he must be caught somewhere!" cried the
lawyer, and both men started at full speed to reach the spot by the
round-about paths through the garden.

Aunt Jane sat still and watched. Suddenly the form of the boy swung
into view beneath the plank, dangling from the girl's outstretched
arms. The woman caught her breath, wondering what would happen next.
Patricia drew him up, until he seized the plank with his hands. Then
the girl crept back a little, and as the boy swung his feet upward she
caught them and twined his legs over the plank.

And now came the supreme struggle. The girl could do little more to
help him. He must manage to clamber upon the top of the plank himself.

Ordinarily Kenneth might have done this easily; but now his nerves
were all unstrung, and he was half exhausted by the strain of the past
few minutes. Almost he did it; but not quite. The next effort would be
even weaker. But now Patricia walked out upon the plank and Aunt Jane
saw her lean down, grasp the boy's collar and drag him into a position
of safety.

"Bravely done!" she murmured, but even as the sound came from her lips
the girl upon the bridge seemed in the exertion of the struggle to
lose her balance. She threw out her arms, leaned sidewise, and then
fell headlong into the chasm and disappeared from view.

Aunt Jane's agonized scream brought Phibbs running to her side. At
a glance she saw that her mistress had fainted, and looking hastily
around to discover the cause she observed the boy crawl slowly across
the plank, reach the tree, and slide down its trunk to pass out of
view behind the high hedge.

"Drat the boy!" growled the old servant, angrily, "he'll be the death
of Miss Jane, yet."




CHAPTER XVI.

GOOD RESULTS.


Uncle John could not run so swiftly as the lawyer, but he broke
through a gap in the hedge and arrived at a point just beneath the
plank at the same time that Silas Watson did.

One glance showed them the boy safely perched on top of the plank,
but the girl was bending backward. She threw out her arms in a vain
endeavor to save herself, and with a low cry toppled and plunged
swiftly toward the ground.

There was little time for the men to consider their actions.
Involuntarily they tried to catch Patricia, whose body struck them
sharply, felling them to the ground, and then bounded against the
hedge and back to the pavement.

When, half dazed, they scrambled to their feet, the girl lay
motionless before them, a stream of red blood welling from a deep cut
in her forhead, her eyes closed as if in sleep.

A moment more and the boy was kneeling beside her, striving to stay
the bleeding with his handkerchief.

"Do something! For God's sake try to do something," he wailed,
piteously. "Can't you see she's killed herself to save me?"

Uncle John knelt down and took the still form in his arms.

"Quiet, my lad," he said. "She isn't dead. Get Nora, and fetch the
doctor as soon as you can."

The boy was gone instantly, his agony relieved by the chance of
action, and followed by the lawyer, Uncle John carried his niece to
the rose chamber and laid her upon her white bed.

Misery met them, then, and following her came Louise and Beth, full of
horror and pity for the victim of the dreadful accident.

Jane Merrick had promptly recovered consciousness, for fainting spells
were foreign to her nature. Her first words to Phibbs, who was bending
over her, were:

"Is she dead?"

"Who, Miss Jane?"

"Patricia."

"I don't know, Miss Jane. Why should she be dead?"

"Run, you idiot! Run at once and find out. Ask my brother--ask
anyone--if Patricia is dead!"

And so Phibbs came to the rose chamber and found the little group
bending over the girl's unconscious form.

"Is she dead, sir? Miss Jane wants to know," said the old servant, in
awe-struck tones.

"No," answered Uncle John, gravely. "She isn't dead, I'm sure; but I
can't tell how badly she is hurt. One of her legs--the right one--is
broken, I know, for I felt it as I carried the child in my arms; but
we must wait until the doctor comes before I can tell more."

Misery was something of a nurse, it seemed, and with the assistance of
Louise, who proved most helpful in the emergency, she bathed the
wound in the girl's forehead and bandaged it as well as she was able.
Between them the women also removed Patricia's clothing and got her
into bed, where she lay white and still unconscious, but breathing so
softly that they knew she was yet alive.

The doctor was not long in arriving, for Kenneth forced him to leap
upon Nora's back and race away to Elmhurst, while the boy followed as
swiftly as he could on the doctor's sober cob.

Dr. Eliel was only a country practitioner, but his varied experiences
through many years had given him a practical knowledge of surgery,
and after a careful examination of Patricia's injuries he was able to
declare that she would make a fine recovery.

"Her leg is fractured, and she's badly bruised," he reported to Aunt
Jane, who sent for him as soon as he could leave the sick room. "But I
do not think she has suffered any internal injuries, and the wound on
her forehead is a mere nothing. So, with good care, I expect the young
lady to get along nicely."

"Do everything you can for her," said the woman, earnestly. "You shall
be well paid, Dr. Eliel."

Before Patricia recovered her senses the doctor had sewn up her
forehead and set the fractured limb, so that she suffered little pain
from the first.

Louise and Beth hovered over her constantly, ministering to every
possible want and filled with tenderest sympathy for their injured
cousin. The accident seemed to draw them out of their selfishness and
petty intrigues and discovered in them the true womanly qualities that
had lurked beneath the surface.

Patsy was not allowed to talk, but she smiled gratefully at her
cousins, and the three girls seemed suddenly drawn nearer together
than any of them would have thought possible a few hours before.

The boy paced constantly up and down outside Patricia's door, begging
everyone who left the room, for news of the girl's condition. All his
reserve and fear of women seemed to have melted away as if by magic.
Even Beth and Louise were questioned eagerly, and they, having learned
the story of Patricia's brave rescue of the boy, were very gentle with
him and took pains not to frighten or offend him.

Toward evening Louise asked Patricia if she would see Kenneth for a
moment, and the girl nodded a ready assent.

He came in awkward and trembling, glancing fearfully at the bandaged
forehead and the still white face. But Patricia managed to smile
reassuringly, and held out a little hand for him to take. The boy
grasped it in both his own, and held it for several minutes while he
stood motionless beside her, his wide eyes fixed intently upon her
own.

Then Louise sent him away, and he went to his room and wept profusely,
and then quieted down into a sort of dull stupor.

The next morning Uncle John dragged him away from Patricia's door and
forced him to play chess. The boy lost every game, being inattentive
and absorbed in thought, until finally Uncle John gave up the attempt
to amuse him and settled himself on the top stair for a quiet smoke.
The boy turned to the table, and took a sheet of paper from the
drawer. For an hour, perhaps, neither of these curious friends spoke
a word, but at the end of that time Uncle John arose and knocked the
ashes from his pipe. Kenneth did not notice him. The man approached
the table and looked over the boy's shoulder, uttering an exclamation
of surprise. Upon the paper appeared a cleverly drawn pencil sketch
of Patricia lying in her bed, a faint smile upon her face and her big
blue eyes turned pleasantly upon a shadowy form that stood beside her
holding her hand. The likeness was admirable, and if there were faults
in the perspective and composition Uncle John did not recognize them.

He gave a low whistle and turned thoughtfully away, and the young
artist was so absorbed that he did not even look up.

Strolling away to the stables, Uncle John met old Donald, who
enquired:

"How is Miss Patsy this morning, sir?" It was the name she had given,
and preferred to be called by.

"She's doing finely," said Uncle John.

"A brave girl, sir!"

"Yes, Donald."

"And the boy?"

"Why, he seems changed, in some way, Donald. Not so nervous and wild
as usual, you know. I've just left him drawing a picture. Curious. A
good picture, too."

"Ah, he can do that, sir, as well as a real artist."

"Have you known him to draw, before this?"

"Why, he's always at it, sir, in his quieter moods. I've got a rare
good likeness o' myself, as he did long ago, in the harness-room."

"May I see it?"

"With pleasure, sir."

Donald led the way to the harness-room, and took from the cupboard the
precious board he had so carefully preserved.

Uncle John glanced at it and laughed aloud. He could well appreciate
the humor of the sketch, which Donald never had understood, and the
caricature was as clever as it was amusing. He handed the treasure
back to Donald and went away even more thoughtful than before.

A few days later a large package arrived at Elmhurst addressed to
Kenneth Forbes, and Oscar carried it at once to the boy's room, who
sat for an hour looking at it in silent amazement. Then he carefully
unwrapped it, and found it to contain a portable easel, a quantity of
canvas and drawing-paper, paints and oils of every description
(mostly all unknown to him) and pencils, brushes and water colors in
profusion.

Kenneth's heart bounded with joy. Here was wealth, indeed, greater
than he had ever hoped for. He puzzled his brain for weeks to discover
how this fairy gift had ever come to him, but he was happier in its
possession than he had ever been before in all his life.

Patricia improved rapidly. Had it not been for the broken leg she
would have been out of the house in a week, as good as ever; but
broken limbs take time to heal, and Dr. Eliel would not permit the
girl to leave her bed until ten days had passed.

Meantime everyone delighted to attend her. Louise and Beth sat with
her for hours, reading or working, for the rose chamber was cheery and
pleasant, and its big windows opened upon the prettiest part of the
gardens. The two girls were even yet suspicious of one another, each
striving to win an advantage with Aunt Jane; but neither had the
slightest fear that Patricia would ever interfere with their plans. So
they allowed their natural inclinations to pet and admire the heroine
of the hour full sway, and Patsy responded so sweetly and frankly to
their advances that they came to love her dearly, and wondered why
they had not discovered from the first how lovable their Irish cousin
could be.

Kenneth, also came daily to the sick room for a visit, and Patsy had
a way of drawing the boy out and making him talk that was really
irresistible. After his fairy gift arrived he could not help telling
the girls all about it and then he brought the things down and
displayed them, and promised Patsy he would make a picture of the
garden for her.

Then, after the girl got better, he brought his easel down to her
room, where she could watch him work, and began upon the picture,
while the cousins joined him in speculations as to who the mysterious
donor could he.

"At first," said Kenneth, "I thought it was Mr. Watson, for he's alway
been very good to me; but he says he knows nothing about it. Then I
though it might be Uncle John; but Uncle John is too poor to afford
such an expensive present."

"I don't believe he has a penny in the world," said Louise, who sat by
with some needle-work.

"All he owns," remarked Beth, with a laugh, "is an extra necktie,
slightly damaged."

"But he's a dear old man," said Patsy, loyally, "and I'm sure he would
have given all those things to Kenneth had he been able."

"Then who was it?" asked the boy.

"Why, Aunt Jane, to be sure," declared Patsy.

The boy scowled, and shook his head.

"She wouldn't do anything to please me, even to save her life," he
growled. "She hates me, I know that well enough."

"Oh, no; I'm sure she doesn't," said Patsy. "Aunt Jane has a heap
of good in her; but you've got to dig for it, like you do for gold.
'Twould be just like her to make you this present and keep it a
secret."

"If she really did it," replied the boy, slowly, "and it seems as if
she is the only one. I know who could afford such a gift, it stands to
reason that either Uncle John or Mr. Watson asked her to, and she did
it to please them. I've lived here for years, and she has never spoken
a kindly word to me or done me a kindly act. It isn't likely she'd
begin now, is it?"

Unable to make a reassuring reply, Patsy remained silent, and the boy
went on with his work. He first outlined the picture in pencil, and
then filled it in with water color. They all expressed admiration for
the drawing; but the color effect was so horrible that even Patsy
found no words to praise it, and the boy in a fit of sudden anger tore
the thing to shreds and so destroyed it.

"But I must have my picture, anyhow," said the girl. "Make it in pen
and ink or pencil, Ken. and I'm sure it will be beautiful."

"You need instruction, to do water color properly," suggested Louise.

"Then I can never do it," he replied, bitterly. But he adopted Patsy's
suggestion and sketched the garden very prettily in pen and ink.
By the time the second picture was completed Patsy had received
permission to leave her room, which she did in Aunt Jane's second-best
wheel chair.

Her first trip was to Aunt Jane's own private garden, where the
invalid, who had not seen her niece since the accident, had asked her
to come.

Patsy wanted Kenneth to wheel her, but the boy, with a touch of his
old surly demeanor, promptly refused to meet Jane Merrick face to
face. So Beth wheeled the chair and Louise walked by Patsy's side, and
soon the three nieces reached their aunt's retreat.

Aunt Jane was not in an especially amiable mood.

"Well, girl, how do you like being a fool?" she demanded, as Patsy's
chair came to a stand just opposite her own.

"It feels so natural that I don't mind it," replied Patsy, laughing.

"You might have killed yourself, and all for nothing," continued the
old woman, querulously.

Patsy looked at her pityingly. Her aunt's face had aged greatly in the
two weeks, and the thin gray hair seemed now almost white.

"Are you feeling better, dear?" asked the girl.

"I shall never be better," said Jane Merrick, sternly. "The end is not
far off now."

"Oh, I'm sorry to hear you say that!" said Patsy; "but I hope it is
not true. Why, here are we four newly found relations all beginning to
get acquainted, and to love one another, and we can't have our little
party broken up, auntie dear."

"Five of us--five relations," cried Uncle John, coming around the
corner of the hedge. "Don't I count, Patsy, you rogue? Why you're
looking as bright and as bonny as can be. I wouldn't be surprised if
you could toddle."

"Not yet," she answered, cheerfully. "But I'm doing finely, Uncle
John, and it won't be long before I can get about as well as ever."

"And to think," said Aunt Jane, bitterly, "that all this trouble was
caused by that miserable boy! If I knew where to send him he'd not
stay at Elmhurst a day longer."

"Why, he's my best friend, aunt," announced Patsy, quietly. "I don't
think I could be happy at Elmhurst without Kenneth."

"He has quite reformed," said Louise, "and seems like a very nice
boy."

"He's a little queer, yet, at times," added Beth, "but not a bit rude,
as he used to be."

Aunt Jane looked from one to the other in amazement. No one had
spoken so kindly of the boy before in years. And Uncle John, with a
thoughtful look on his face, said slowly:

"The fact is, Jane, you've never given the boy a chance. On the
contrary, you nearly ruined him by making a hermit of him and giving
him no schooling to speak of and no society except that of servants.
He was as wild as a hawk when I first came, but these girls are just
the sort of companions he needs, to soften him and make him a man.
I've no doubt he'll come out all right, in the end."

"Perhaps you'd like to adopt him yourself, John," sneered the woman,
furious at this praise of the one person she so greatly disliked.

Her brother drew his hands from his pockets, looked around in a
helpless and embarrassed way, and then tried fumblingly to fill his
pipe.

"I ain't in the adopting business, Jane," he answered meekly. "And if
I was," with a quaint smile, "I'd adopt one or two of these nieces o'
mine, instead of Tom Bradley's nephew. If Bradley hadn't seen you,
Jane, and loved your pretty face when you were young, Kenneth Forbes
would now be the owner of Elmhurst. Did you ever think of that?"

Did she ever think of it? Why, it was this very fact that made the boy
odious to her. The woman grew white with rage.

"John Merrick, leave my presence."

"All right, Jane."

He stopped to light his pipe, and then slowly walked away, leaving an
embarrassed group behind him.

Patsy, however, was equal to the occasion. She began at once to
chatter about Dr. Eliel, and the scar that would always show on her
forehead; and how surprised the Major, her father, would be when he
returned from the visit to his colonel and found his daughter had been
through the wars herself, and bore the evidence of honorable wounds.
Louise gracefully assisted her cousin to draw Aunt Jane into a more
genial mood, and between them they presently succeeded. The interview
that had begun so unfortunately ended quite pleasantly, and when
Patricia returned to her room her aunt bade her adieu almost tenderly.

"In fact," said Louise to Beth, in the privacy of the latter's
chamber, "I'm getting rather worried over Aunt Jane's evident weakness
for our Cousin Patsy. Once or twice today I caught a look in her eye
when she looked at Patsy that she has never given either you or me.
The Irish girl may get the money yet."

"Nonsense," said Beth. "She has said she wouldn't accept a penny of
it, and I'm positive she'll keep her word."





CHAPTER XVII.

AUNT JANE'S HEIRESS.


"Silas," said Aunt Jane to her lawyer, the next morning after her
interview with Patsy, "I'm ready to have you draw up my will."

Mr. Watson gave a start of astonishment. In his own mind he had
arrived at the conclusion that the will would never be executed, and
to have Miss Merrick thus suddenly declare her decision was enough to
startle even the lawyer's natural reserve.

"Very well, Jane," he said, briefly.

They were alone in the invalid's morning room, Phibbs having been
asked to retire.

"There is no use disguising the fact, Silas, that I grow weaker every
day, and the numbness is creeping nearer and nearer to my heart," said
Miss Merrick, in her usual even tones. "It is folly for me to trifle
with these few days of grace yet allowed me, and I have fully made up
my mind as to the disposition of my property."

"Yes?" he said, enquiringly, and drew from his pocket a pencil and
paper.

"I shall leave to my niece Louise five thousand dollars."

"Yes, Jane," jotting down the memorandum.

"And to Elizabeth a like sum."

The lawyer seemed disappointed. He tapped the pencil against his
teeth, musingly, for a moment, and then wrote down the amount.

"Also to my brother, John Merrick, the sum of five thousand dollars,"
she resumed.

"To your brother?"

"Yes. That should be enough to take care of him as long as he lives.
He seems quite simple in his tastes, and he is an old man."

The lawyer wrote it down.

"All my other remaining property, both real and personal, I shall
leave to my niece, Patricia Doyle."

"Jane!"

"Did you hear me?"

"Yes."

"Then do as I bid you, Silas Watson."

He leaned back in his chair and looked at her thoughtfully.

"I am not only your lawyer, Jane; I am also your friend and
counsellor. Do you realize what this bequest means?" he asked, gently.

"It means that Patricia will inherit Elmhurst--and a fortune besides.
Why not, Silas? I liked the child from the first. She's frank and open
and brave, and will do credit to my judgment."

"She is very young and unsophisticated," said the lawyer, "and of all
your nieces she will least appreciate your generosity."

"You are to be my executor, and manage the estate until the girl comes
of age. You will see that she is properly educated and fitted for her
station in life. As for appreciation, or gratitude, I don't care a
snap of my finger for such fol-de-rol."

The lawyer sighed.

"But the boy, Jane? You seem to have forgotten him," he said.

"Drat the boy! I've done enough for him already."

"Wouldn't Tom like you to provide for Kenneth in some way, however
humbly?"

She glared at him angrily.

"How do you know what Tom would like, after all these years?" she
asked, sternly. "And how should I know, either? The money is mine, and
the boy is nothing to me. Let him shift for himself."

"There is a great deal of money, Jane," declared the lawyer,
impressively. "We have been fortunate in our investments, and you have
used but little of your ample income. To spare fifty thousand dollars
to Kenneth, who is Tom's sole remaining relative, would be no hardship
to Patricia. Indeed, she would scarcely miss it."

"You remind me of something, Silas," she said, looking at him with
friendly eyes. "Make a memorandum of twenty thousand dollars to Silas
Watson. You have been very faithful to my interests and have helped
materially to increase my fortune."

"Thank you, Jane."

He wrote down the amount as calmly as he had done the others.

"And the boy?" he asked, persistently.

Aunt Jane sighed wearily, and leaned against her pillows.

"Give the boy two thousand," she said.

"Make it ten, Jane."

"I'll make it five, and not a penny more," she rejoined. "Now leave
me, and prepare the paper at once. I want to sign it today, if
possible."

He bowed gravely, and left the room.

Toward evening the lawyer came again, bringing with him a notary from
the village. Dr. Eliel, who had come to visit Patricia, was also
called into Jane Merrick's room, and after she had carefully read the
paper in their presence the mistress of Elmhurst affixed her signature
to the document which transferred the great estate to the little Irish
girl, and the notary and the doctor solemnly witnessed it and retired.

"Now, Silas," said the old woman, with a sigh of intense relief, "I
can die in peace."

Singularly enough, the signing of the will seemed not to be the end
for Jane Merrick, but the beginning of an era of unusual comfort. On
the following morning she awakened brighter than usual, having passed
a good night, freed from the worries and anxieties that had beset her
for weeks. She felt more like her old self than at any time since the
paralysis had overtaken her, and passed the morning most enjoyably
in her sunshiney garden. Here Patricia was also brought in her wheel
chair by Beth, who then left the two invalids together.

They conversed genially enough, for a time, until an unfortunate
remark of Aunt Jane's which seemed to asperse her father's character
aroused Patricia's ire. Then she loosened her tongue, and in her
voluable Irish way berated her aunt until poor Phibbs stood aghast at
such temerity, and even Mr. Watson, who arrived to enquire after his
client and friend, was filled with amazement.

He cast a significant look at Miss Merrick, who answered it in her
usual emphatic way.

"Patricia is quite right, Silas," she declared, "and I deserve all
that she has said. If the girl were fond enough of me to defend me as
heartily as she does her father, I would be very proud, indeed."

Patricia cooled at once, and regarded her aunt with a sunny smile.

"Forgive me!" she begged. "I know you did not mean it, and I was wrong
to talk to you in such a way."

So harmony was restored, and Mr. Watson wondered more and more at
this strange perversion of the old woman's character. Heretofore any
opposition had aroused in her intense rage and a fierce antagonism,
but now she seemed delighted to have Patsy fly at her, and excused the
girl's temper instead of resenting it.

But Patsy was a little ashamed of herself this morning, realizing
perhaps that Aunt Jane had been trying to vex her, just to enjoy her
indignant speeches; and she also realized the fact that her aunt was
old and suffering, and not wholly responsible for her aggravating and
somewhat malicious observations. So she firmly resolved not to be so
readily entrapped again, and was so bright and cheery during the next
hour that Aunt Jane smiled more than once, and at one time actually
laughed at her niece's witty repartee.

After that it became the daily program for Patsy to spend her mornings
in Aunt Jane's little garden, and although they sometimes clashed,
and, as Phibbs told Beth, "had dreadful fights," they both enjoyed
these hours very much.

The two girls became rather uneasy during the days their cousin spent
in the society of Aunt Jane. Even the dreadful accounts they received
from Phibbs failed wholly to reassure them, and Louise redoubled her
solicitious attentions to her aunt in order to offset the influence
Patricia seemed to be gaining over her.

Louise had also become, by this time, the managing housekeeper of
the establishment, and it was certain that Aunt Jane looked upon her
eldest and most competent niece with much favor.

Beth, with all her friends to sing her praises, seemed to make less
headway with her aunt than either of the others, and gradually she
sank into a state of real despondency.

"I've done the best I could," she wrote her mother, "but I'm not as
clever as Louise nor as amusing as Patricia; so Aunt Jane pays little
attention to me. She's a dreadful old woman, and I can't bring myself
to appear to like her. That probably accounts for my failure; but I
may as well stay on here until something happens."

In a fortnight more Patricia abandoned her chair and took to crutches,
on which she hobbled everywhere as actively as the others walked. She
affected her cousins' society more, from this time, and Aunt Jane's
society less, for she had come to be fond of the two girls who had
nursed her so tenderly, and it was natural that a young girl would
prefer to be with those of her own age rather than a crabbed old woman
like Aunt Jane.

Kenneth also now became Patsy's faithful companion, for the boy had
lost his former bashfulness and fear of girls, and had grown to feel
at ease even in the society of Beth and Louise. The four had many
excursions and picnics into the country together; but Kenneth and
Patsy were recognized as especial chums, and the other girls did not
interfere in their friendship except to tease them, occasionally, in a
good natured way.

The boy's old acquaintances could hardly recognize him as the same
person they had known before Patricia's adventure on the plank. His
fits of gloomy abstraction and violent bursts of temper had alike
vanished, or only prevailed at brief intervals. Nor was he longer rude
and unmannerly to those with whom he came in contact. Awkward he still
was, and lacking in many graces that education and good society can
alone confer; but he was trying hard to be, as he confided to old
Uncle John, "like other people," and succeeded in adapting himself
very well to his new circumstances.

Although he had no teacher, as yet, he had begun to understand color
a little, and succeeded in finishing one or two water-color sketches
which Patsy, who knew nothing at all of such things, pronounced
"wonderfully fine." Of course the boy blushed with pleasure and was
encouraged to still greater effort.

The girl was also responsible for Kenneth's sudden advancement in the
household at Elmhurst.

One day she said calmly to Aunt Jane:

"I've invited Kenneth to dinner this evening."

The woman flew angry in an instant.

"Who gave you such authority?" she demanded.

"No one. I just took it," said Patsy, saucily.

"He shall not come," declared Aunt Jane, sternly. "I'll have no
interference from you, Miss, with my household arrangements. Phibbs,
call Louise!"

Patsy's brow grew dark. Presently Louise appeared.

"Instruct the servants to forbid that boy to enter my dining room this
evening," she said to Louise.

"Also, Louise," said Patsy, "tell them not to lay a plate for me, and
ask Oscar to be ready with the wagon at five o'clock. I'm going home."

Louise hesitated, and looked from Miss Jane to Patsy, and back again.
They were glaring upon each other like two gorgons.

Then she burst into laughter; she could not help it, the sight was too
ridiculous. A moment later Patsy was laughing, too, and then Aunt Jane
allowed a grim smile to cross her features.

"Never mind, Louise," she said, with remarkable cheerfulness; "We'll
compromise matters."

"How?" asked Patsy.

"By putting a plate for Kenneth," said her aunt, cooly. "I imagine I
can stand his society for one evening."

So the matter was arranged to Patricia's satisfaction, and the boy
came to dinner, trembling and unhappy at first, but soon placed at
ease by the encouragements of the three girls. Indeed, he behaved so
well, in the main, and was so gentle and unobstrusive, that Aunt Jane
looked at him with surprise, and favored him with one or two speeches
which he answered modestly and well.

Patsy was radiant with delight, and the next day Aunt Jane remarked
casually that she did not object to the boy's presence at dinner, at
all, and he could come whenever he liked.

This arrangement gave great pleasure to both Uncle John and Mr.
Watson, the latter of whom was often present at the "state dinner,"
and both men congratulated Patsy upon the distinct victory she had
won. No more was said about her leaving Elmhurst. The Major wrote that
he was having a splendid time with the colonel, and begged for an
extension of his vacation, to which Patsy readily agreed, she being
still unable on account of her limb to return to her work at Madam
Borne's.

And so the days glided pleasantly by, and August came to find a happy
company of young folks at old Elmhurst, with Aunt Jane wonderfully
improved in health and Uncle John beaming complacently upon everyone
he chanced to meet.




CHAPTER XVIII.

PATRICIA SPEAKS FRANKLY.


It was Lawyer Watson's suggestion that she was being unjust to Beth
and Louise, in encouraging them to hope they might inherit Elmhurst,
that finally decided Aunt Jane to end all misunderstandings and inform
her nieces of the fact that she had made a final disposition of her
property.

So one morning she sent word asking them all into her room, and when
the nieces appeared they found Uncle John and the lawyer already
in their aunt's presence. There was an air of impressive formality
pervading the room, although Miss Merrick's brother, at least, was as
ignorant as her nieces of the reason why they had been summoned.

Patsy came in last, hobbling actively on her crutches, although the
leg was now nearly recovered, and seated herself somewhat in the rear
of the apartment.

Aunt Jane looked into one expectant face after another with curious
interest, and then broke the silence by saying, gravely, but in more
gentle tones than she was accustomed to use:

"I believe, young ladies, that you have understood from the first my
strongest reason for inviting you to visit Elmhurst this summer. I
am old, and must soon pass away, and instead of leaving you and
your parents, who would be my legitimate heirs, to squabble over my
property when I am gone, I decided to excute a will bequeathing my
estate to some one who would take proper care of it and maintain it in
a creditable manner. I had no personal acquaintance with any of you,
but judged that one out of the three might serve my purpose, and
therefore invited you all here."

By this time the hearts of Louise and Beth were fluttering with
excitement, and even Patsy looked interested. Uncle John sat a little
apart, watching them with an amused smile upon his face, and the
lawyer sat silent with his eyes fixed upon a pattern in the rug.

"In arriving at a decision, which I may say I have succeeded in
doing," continued Aunt Jane, calmly, "I do not claim to have acted
with either wisdom or discernment. I have simply followed my own whim,
as I have the right to do, and selected the niece I prefer to become
my heiress. You cannot accuse of injustice, because none of you had a
right to expect anything of me; but I will say this, that I am well
pleased with all three of you, and now wish that I had taken pains to
form your acquaintance earlier in life. You might have cheered my old
age and rendered it less lonely and dull."

"Well said, Jane," remarked Uncle John, nodding his head approvingly.

She did not notice the interruption, but presently continued:

"Some days ago I asked my lawyer, Mr. Watson, to draw up my will. It
was at once prepared and signed, and now stands as my last will and
testament. I have given to you, Louise, the sum of five thousand
dollars."

Louise laughed nervously, and threw out her hands with an indifferent
gesture.

"Many thanks, Aunt," she said, lightly.

"To you, Beth," continued Miss Merrick, "I have given the same sum."

Beth's heart sank, and tears forced themselves into her eyes in spite
of her efforts to restrain them. She said nothing.

Aunt Jane turned to her brother.

"I have also provided for you, John, in the sum of five thousand
dollars."

"Me!" he exclaimed, astounded. "Why, suguration, Jane, I don't--"

"Silence!" she cried, sternly. "I expect neither thanks nor protests.
If you take care of the money, John, it will last you as long as you
live."

Uncle John laughed. He doubled up in his chair and rocked back and
forth, shaking his little round body as if he had met with the most
amusing thing that had ever happened in his life. Aunt Jane stared
at him, while Louise and Beth looked their astonishment, but Patsy's
clear laughter rang above Uncle John's gasping chuckles.

"I hope, dear Uncle," said she, mischievously, "that when poor Aunt
Jane is gone you'll be able to buy a new necktie."

He looked at her whimsically, and wiped the tears from his eyes.

"Thank you, Jane," said the little man to his sister. "It's a lot of
money, and I'll be proud to own it."

"Why did you laugh." demanded Aunt Jane.

"I just happened to think that our old Dad once said I'd never be
worth a dollar in all my life. What would he say now, Jane, if he knew
I stood good to have five thousand--if I can manage to outlive you?"

She turned from him with an expression of scorn.

"In addition to these bequests," said she, "I have left five thousand
to the boy and twenty thousand to Mr. Watson. The remainder of the
property will go to Patricia."

For a moment the room was intensely still. Then Patricia said, with
quiet determination:

"You may as well make another will, Aunt. I'll not touch a penny of
your money."

"Why not?" asked the woman, almost fiercely.

"You have been kind to me, and you mean well," said Patricia. "I would
rather not tell you my reasons."

"I demand to know them!"

"Ah, aunt; can't you understand, without my speaking?"

"No," said the other; but a flush crossed her pale cheek,
nevertheless.

Patsy arose and stumped to a position directly in front of Jane
Merrick, where she rested on her crutches. Her eyes were bright and
full of indignation, and her plain little face was so white that every
freckle showed distinctly.

"There was a time, years ago," she began in a low voice, "when you
were very rich and your sister Violet, my mother, was very poor. Her
health was bad, and she had me to care for, while my father was very
ill with a fever. She was proud, too, and for herself she would never
have begged a penny of anyone; but for my sake she asked her rich
sister to loan her a little money to tide her over her period of want.
What did you do, Jane Merrick, you who lived in a beautiful mansion,
and had more money than you could use? You insulted her, telling her
she belonged to a family of beggars, and that none of them could
wheedle your money away from you!"

"It was true," retorted the elder woman, stubbornly. "They were after
me like a drove of wolves--every Merrick of them all--and they would
have ruined me if I had let them bleed me as they wished."

"So far as my mother is concerned, that's a lie," said Patsy, quietly.
"She never appealed to you but that once, but worked as bravely as she
could to earn money in her own poor way. The result was that she died,
and I was left to the care of strangers until my father was well
enough to support me."

She paused, and again the room seemed unnaturally still.

"I'm sorry, girl," said Aunt Jane, at last, in trembling tones. "I was
wrong. I see it now, and I am sorry I refused Violet."

"Then I forgive you!" said Patsy, impulsively. "I forgive you all,
Aunt Jane; for through your own selfishness you cut yourself off from
all your family--from all who might have loved you--and you have lived
all these years a solitary and loveless life. There'll be no grudge
of mine to follow you to the grave, Aunt Jane. But," her voice
hardening, "I'll never touch a penny of the money that was denied my
poor dead mother. Thank God the old Dad and I are independent, and can
earn our own living."

Uncle John came to where Patsy stood and put both arms around her,
pressing her--crutches and all--close to his breast. Then he released
her, and without a word stalked from the room.

"Leave me, now," said Aunt Jane, in a husky voice. "I want time to
think."

Patricia hobbled forward, placed one hand caressingly upon the gray
head, and then bent and kissed Aunt Jane's withered cheek.

"That's right," she whispered. "Think it over, dear. It's all past
and done, now, and I'm sorry I had to hurt you. But--not a penny,
aunt--remember, not a penny will I take!"

Then she left the room, followed by Louise and Beth, both of whom were
glad to be alone that they might conquer their bitter disappointment.

Louise, however, managed to accept the matter philosophically, as the
following extract from her letter to her mother will prove:

"After all, it isn't so bad as it might be, mater, dear," she wrote.
"I'll get five thousand, at the very worst, and that will help us on
our way considerably. But I am quite sure that Patsy means just what
she says, and that she will yet induce Aunt Jane to alter her will. In
that case I believe the estate will either be divided between Beth and
me, or I will get it all. Anyway, I shall stay here and play my best
cards until the game is finished."




CHAPTER XIX.

DUPLICITY.


Aunt Jane had a bad night, as might have been expected after her
trials of the previous day.

She sent for Patricia early in the forenoon, and when the girl arrived
she was almost shocked by the change in her aunt's appearance. The
invalid's face seemed drawn and gray, and she lay upon her cushions
breathing heavily and without any appearance of vitality or strength.
Even the sharpness and piercing quality of her hard gray eyes was
lacking and the glance she cast at her niece was rather pleading than
defiant.

"I want you to reconsider your decision of yesterday, Patricia," she
begun.

"Don't ask me to do that, aunt," replied the girl, firmly. "My mind is
fully made up."

"I have made mistakes, I know," continued the woman feebly; "but I
want to do the right thing, at last."

"Then I will show you how," said Patricia, quickly. "You mustn't think
me impertinent, aunt, for I don't mean to be so at all. But tell me;
why did you wish to leave me your money?"

"Because your nature is quite like my own, child, and I admire your
independence and spirit."

"But my cousins are much more deserving," said she, thoughtfully.
"Louise is very sweet and amiable, and loves you more than I do, while
Beth is the most sensible and practical girl I have ever known."

"It may be so," returned Aunt Jane, impatiently; "but I have left each
a legacy, Patricia, and you alone are my choice for the mistress of
Elmhurst. I told you yesterday I should not try to be just. I mean to
leave my property according to my personal desire, and no one shall
hinder me." This last with a spark of her old vigor.

"But that is quite wrong, aunt, and if you desire me to inherit your
wealth you will be disappointed. A moment ago you said you wished to
do the right thing, at last. Don't you know what that is?"

"Perhaps you will tell me," said Aunt Jane, curiously.

"With pleasure," returned Patsy. "Mr. Bradley left you this property
because he loved you, and love blinded him to all sense of justice.
Such an estate should not have passed into the hands of aliens because
of a lover's whim. He should have considered his own flesh and blood."

"There was no one but his sister, who at that time was not married and
had no son," explained Aunt Jane, calmly. "But he did not forget her
and asked me to look after Katherine Bradley in case she or her heirs
ever needed help. I have done so. When his mother died, I had the boy
brought here, and he has lived here ever since."

"But the property ought to be his," said Patricia, earnestly. "It
would please me beyond measure to have you make your will in his
favor, and you would be doing the right thing at last."

"I won't," said Aunt Jane, angrily.

"It would also be considerate and just to the memory of Mr. Bradley,"
continued the girl. "What's going to became of Kenneth?"

"I have left him five thousand," said the woman.

"Not enough to educate him properly," replied Patsy, with a shake of
her head. "Why, the boy might become a famous artist, if he had good
masters; and a person with an artistic temperament, such as his,
should have enough money to be independent of his art."

Aunt Jane coughed, unsympathetically.

"The boy is nothing to me," she said.

"But he ought to have Elmhurst, at least," pleaded the girl. "Won't
you leave it to him, Aunt Jane?"

"No."

"Then do as you please," cried Patsy, flying angry in her turn. "As a
matter of justice, the place should never have been yours, and I won't
accept a dollar of the money if I starve to death!"

"Think of your father," suggested Aunt Jane, cunningly.

"Ah, I've done that," said the girl, "and I know how many comforts I
could buy for the dear Major. Also I'd like to go to a girl's college,
like Smith or Wellesley, and get a proper education. But not with your
money, Aunt Jane. It would burn my fingers. Always I would think that
if you had not been hard and miserly this same money would have saved
my mother's life. No! I loathe your money. Keep it or throw it to the
dogs, if you won't give it to the boy it belongs to. But don't you
dare to will your selfish hoard to me."

"Let us change the subject, Patricia."

"Will you change your will?"

"No.".

"Then I won't talk to you. I'm angry and hurt, and if I stay here I'll
say things I shall be sorry for."

With these words she marched out of the room, her cheeks flaming, and
Aunt Jane looked after her with admiring eyes.

"She's right," she whispered to herself. "It's just as I'd do under
the same circumstances!"

This interview was but the beginning of a series that lasted during
the next fortnight, during which time the invalid persisted in sending
for Patricia and fighting the same fight over and over again. Always
the girl pleaded for Kenneth to inherit, and declared she would not
accept the money and Elmhurst; and always Aunt Jane stubbornly refused
to consider the boy and tried to tempt the girl with pictures of the
luxury and pleasure that riches would bring her.

The interviews were generally short and spirited, however, and during
the intervals Patsy associated more than ever with her cousins, both
of whom grew really fond of her.

They fully believed Patricia when she declared she would never accept
the inheritance, and although neither Beth nor Louise could understand
such foolish sentimentality they were equally overjoyed at the girl's
stand and the firmness with which she maintained it. With Patsy out of
the field it was quite possible the estate would be divided between
her cousins, or even go entire to one or the other of them; and this
hope constantly buoyed their spirits and filled their days with
interest as they watched the fight between their aunt and their
cousin.

Patricia never told them she was pleading so hard for the boy. It
would only pain her cousins and make them think she was disloyal to
their interests; but she lost no opportunity when with her Aunt Jane
of praising Kenneth and proving his ability, and finally she seemed to
win her point.

Aunt Jane was really worn out with the constant squabbling with her
favorite niece. She had taken a turn for the worse, too, and began to
decline rapidly. So, her natural cunning and determination to have her
own way enhanced by her illness, the woman decided to deceive Patricia
and enjoy her few remaining days in peace.

"Suppose," she said to Mr. Watson, "my present will stands, and after
my death the estate becomes the property of Patricia. Can she refuse
it?"

"Not legally," returned the lawyer. "It would remain in her name,
but under my control, during her minority. When she became of age,
however, she could transfer it as she might choose."

"By that time she will have gained more sense," declared Aunt Jane,
much pleased with this aspect of the case, "and it isn't reasonable
that having enjoyed a fortune for a time any girl would throw it away.
I'll stick to my point, Silas, but I'll try to make Patricia believe
she has won me over."

Therefore, the very next time that the girl pleaded with her to make
Kenneth her heir, she said, with a clever assumption of resignation:

"Very well, Patricia; you shall have your way. My only desire, child,
is to please you, as you well know, and if you long to see Kenneth the
owner of Elmhurst I will have a new will drawn in his favor."

Patricia could scarcely believe her ears.

"Do you really mean it, aunt?" she asked, flushing red with pleasure.

"I mean exactly what I say, and now let us cease all bickerings, my
dear, and my few remaining days will be peaceful and happy."

Patricia thanked her aunt with eager words, and said, as indeed she
felt, that she could almost love Aunt Jane for her final, if dilatory,
act of justice.

Mr. Watson chanced to enter the room at that moment, and the girl
cried out:

"Tell him, aunt! Let him get the paper ready at once."

"There is no reason for haste," said Aunt Jane, meeting; the lawyer's
questioning gaze with some embarrassment.

Silas Watson was an honorable and upright man, and his client's
frequent doubtful methods had in past years met his severe censure.
Yet he had once promised his dead friend, Tom Bradley, that he would
serve Jane Merrick faithfully. He had striven to do so, bearing with
her faults of character when he found that he could not correct them.
His influence over her had never been very strong, however, and he had
learned that it was the most easy as well as satisfactory method to
bow to her iron will.

Her recent questionings had prepared him for some act of duplicity,
but he had by no means understood her present object, nor did she mean
that he should. So she answered his questioning look by saying:

"I have promised Patricia that you shall draw a new will, leaving
all my estate to Kenneth Forbes, except for the bequests that are
mentioned in the present paper."

The lawyer regarded her with amazement. Then his brow darkened, for he
thought she was playing with the girl, and was not sincere.

"Tell him to draw up the paper right away, aunt!" begged Patricia,
with sparkling eyes.

"As soon as you can, Silas," said the invalid.

"And, aunt, can't you spare a little more to Louise and Beth? It would
make them so happy."

"Double the amount I had allowed to each of them," the woman commanded
her lawyer.

"Can it all be ready to sign tonight?" asked Patsy, excitedly.

"I'll try, my dear," replied the old lawyer, gravely. Then he turned
to Jane Merrick.

"Are you in earnest?" he asked.

Patsy's heart suddenly sank.

"Yes," was the reply. "I am tired of opposing this child's wishes.
What do I care what becomes of my money, when I am gone? All that I
desire is to have my remaining days peaceful."

The girl spring forward and kissed her rapturously.

"They shall be, aunt!" she cried. "I promise it."




CHAPTER XX.

IN THE GARDEN.


From this hour Patsy devoted herself untiringly to Aunt Jane, and
filled her days with as much sunshine as her merry ways and happy
nature could confer. Yet there was one thing that rendered her uneasy:
the paper that Lawyer Watson had so promptly drawn had never yet been
signed and witnessed. Her aunt had allowed her to read it, saying she
wished the girl to know she had acted in good faith, and Patsy had no
fault at all to find with the document. But Aunt Jane was tired, and
deferred signing it that evening. The next day no witnesses could be
secured, and so another postponement followed, and upon one pretext or
another the matter was put off until Patricia became suspicious.

Noting this, Aunt Jane decided to complete her act of deception.
She signed the will in the girl's presence, with Oscar and Susan to
witness her signature. Lawyer Watson was not present on this occasion,
and as soon as Patsy had left her Miss Merrick tore off the signatures
and burned them, wrote "void" in bold letters across the face of the
paper, and then, it being rendered of no value, she enclosed it in a
large yellow envelope, sealed it, and that evening handed the envelope
to Mr. Watson with the request that it be not opened until after her
death.

Patricia, in her delight, whispered to the lawyer that the paper
was really signed, and he was well pleased and guarded the supposed
treasure carefully. The girl also took occasion to inform both Beth
and Louise that a new will had been made in which they both profited
largely, but she kept the secret of who the real heir was, and both
her cousins grew to believe they would share equally in the entire
property.

So now an air of harmony settled upon Elmhurst, and Uncle John
joined the others in admiration of the girl who had conquered the
stubbornness of her stern old aunt and proved herself so unselfish and
true.

One morning Aunt Jane had Phibbs wheel her into her little garden, as
usual, and busied herself examining the flowers and plants of which
she had always been so fond.

"James has been neglecting his work, lately," she said, sharply, to
her attendant.

"He's very queer, ma'am," replied old Martha, "ever since the young
ladies an' Master John came to Elmhurst. Strangers he never could
abide, as you know, and he runs and hides himself as soon as he sees
any of 'em about."

"Poor James!" said Miss Merrick, recalling her old gardener's
infirmity. "But he must not neglect my flowers in this way, or they
will be ruined."

"He isn't so afraid of Master John," went on Phibbs, reflectively, "as
he is of the young ladies. Sometimes Master John talks to James,
in his quiet way, and I've noticed he listens to him quite
respectively--like he always does to you, Miss Jane."

"Go and find James, and ask him to step here," commanded the mistress,
"and then guard the opening in the hedge, and see that none of my
nieces appear to bother him."

Phibbs obediently started upon her errand, and came upon James in the
tool-house, at the end of the big garden. He was working among his
flower pots and seemed in a quieter mood than usual.

Phibbs delivered her message, and the gardener at once started
to obey. He crossed the garden unobserved and entered the little
enclosure where Miss Jane's chair stood. The invalid was leaning back
on her cushions, but her eyes were wide open and staring.

"I've come, Miss," said James; and then, getting; no reply, he looked
into her face. A gleam of sunlight filtered through the bushes and
fell aslant Jane Merrick's eyes; but not a lash quivered.

James gave a scream that rang through the air and silenced even the
birds. Then, shrieking like the madman he was, he bounded away through
the hedge, sending old Martha whirling into a rose-bush, and fled as
if a thousand fiends were at his heels.

John Merrick and Mr. Watson, who were not far off, aroused by the
bloodcurdling screams, ran toward Aunt Jane's garden, and saw in a
glance what had happened.

"Poor Jane," whispered the brother, bending over to tenderly close the
staring eyes, "her fate has overtaken her unawares."

"Better so," said the lawyer, gently. "She has found Peace at last."

Together they wheeled her back into her chamber, and called the women
to care for their dead mistress.




CHAPTER XXI.

READING THE WILL.


Aunt Jane's funeral was extremely simple and quiet. The woman had
made no friends during her long residence in the neighborhood, having
isolated herself at "the big house" and refused to communicate in any
way with the families living near by. Therefore, although her death
undoubtedly aroused much interest and comment, no one cared to be
present at the obsequies.

So the minister came from Elmwood, and being unable to say much that
was good or bad of "the woman who had departed from this vale of
tears," he confined his remarks to generalities and made them as brief
as possible. Then the body was borne to the little graveyard a mile
away, followed by the state carriage, containing the three nieces
and Kenneth; the drag with Silas Watson and Uncle John, the former
driving; and then came the Elmhurst carryall with the servants. James
did not join these last; nor did he appear at the house after
that dreadful scene in the garden. He had a little room over the
tool-house, which Jane Merrick had had prepared for him years ago, and
here he locked himself in day and night, stealthily emerging but to
secure the food Susan carried and placed before his door.

No one minded James much, for all the inmates of Elhurst were under
severe and exciting strain in the days preceding the funeral.

The girls wept a little, but it was more on account of the solemnity
following the shadow of death than for any great affection they bore
their aunt. Patsy, indeed, tried to deliver a tribute to Aunt Jane's
memory; but it was not an emphatic success.

"I'm sure she had a good heart," said the girl, "and if she had lived
more with her own family and cultivated her friends she would have
been much less hard and selfish. At the last, you know, she was quite
gentle."

"I hadn't noticed it," remarked Beth.

"Oh, I did. And she made a new will, after that awful one she told us
of, and tried to be just and fair to all"

"I'm glad to hear that" said Louise. "Tell us, Patsy, what does the
will say? You must know all about it."

"Mr. Watson is going to read it, after the funeral," replied the girl,
"and then you will know as much about it as I do. I mustn't tell
secrets, my dear."

So Louise and Beth waited in much nervous excitement for the final
realization of their hopes or fears, and during the drive to the
cemetery there was little conversation in the state carriage.
Kenneth's sensitive nature was greatly affected by the death of the
woman who had played so important a part in the brief story of his
life, and the awe it inspired rendered him gloomy and silent. Lawyer
Watson had once warned him that Miss Merrick's death might make him an
outcast, and he felt the insecurity of his present position.

But Patsy, believing he would soon know of his good fortune, watched
him curiously during the ride, and beamed upon him as frequently as
her own low spirits would permit.

"You know, Ken," she reminded him, "that whatever happens we are
always to remain friends."

"Of course," replied the boy, briefly.

The girl had thrown aside her crutches, by this time, and planned to
return to her work immediately after the funeral.

The brief services at the cemetery being concluded, the little
cavalcade returned to Elmhurst, where luncheon was awaiting them.

Then Mr. Watson brought into the drawing room the tin box containing
the important Elmhurst papers in his possession, and having requested
all present to be seated he said:

"In order to clear up the uncertainty that at present exists
concerning Miss Merrick's last will and testament, I will now proceed
to read to you the document, which will afterward be properly probated
according to law."

There was no need to request their attention. An intense stillness
pervaded the room.

The lawyer calmly unlocked the tin box and drew out the sealed yellow
envelope which Miss Merrick had recently given him. Patsy's heart was
beating with eager expectancy. She watched the lawyer break the seal,
draw out the paper and then turn red and angry. He hesitated a moment,
and then thrust the useless document into its enclosure and cast it
aside.

"Is anything wrong?" asked the girl in a low whisper, which was yet
distinctly heard by all.

Mr. Watson seemed amazed. Jane Merrick's deceitful trickery,
discovered so soon after her death, was almost horrible for him to
contemplate. He had borne much from this erratic woman, but had never
believed her capable of such an act.

So he said, in irritable tones:

"Miss Merrick gave me this document a few days ago, leading me to
believe it was her last will. I had prepared it under her instruction
and understood that it was properly signed. But she has herself torn
off and destroyed the signature and marked the paper 'void,' so that
the will previously made is the only one that is valid."

"What do you mean?" cried Patsy, in amazement. "Isn't Kenneth to
inherit Elmhurst, after all?"

"Me! Me inherit?" exclaimed the boy.

"That is what she promised me," declared Patsy, while tears of
indignation stood in her eyes, "I saw her sign it, myself, and if she
has fooled me and destroyed the signature she's nothing but an old
fraud--and I'm glad she's dead!"

With this she threw herself, sobbing, upon a sofa, and Louise and
Beth, shocked to learn that after all their cousin had conspired
against them, forebore any attempt to comfort her.

But Uncle John, fully as indignant as Patricia, came to her side and
laid a hand tenderly on the girl's head.

"Never mind, little one." he said. "Jane was always cruel and
treacherous by nature, and we might have expected she'd deceive her
friends even in death. But you did the best you could, Patsy, dear,
and it can't be helped now."

Meantime the lawyer had been fumbling in the box, and now drew out the
genuine will.

"Give me your attention, please," said he.

Patsy sat up and glared at him.

"I won't take a cent of it!" she exclaimed.

"Be silent!" demanded the lawyer, sternly. "You have all, I believe,
been told by Miss Merrick of the terms of this will, which is properly
signed and attested. But it is my duty to read it again, from
beginning to end, and I will do so."

Uncle John smiled when his bequest was mentioned, and Beth frowned.
Louise, however, showed no sign of disappointment. There had been a
miserable scramble for this inheritance, she reflected, and she was
glad the struggle was over. The five thousand dollars would come in
handy, after all, and it was that much more than she had expected to
have before she received Aunt Jane's invitation. Perhaps she and her
mother would use part of it for a European trip, if their future plans
seemed to warrant it.

"As far as I am concerned," said Patsy, defiantly, "you may as well
tear up this will, too. I won't have that shameful old woman's money."

"That is a matter the law does not allow you to decide," returned the
lawyer, calmly. "You will note the fact that I am the sole executor of
the estate, and must care for it in your interests until you are of
age. Then it will he turned over to you to do as you please with."

"Can I give it away, if I want to?"

"Certainly. It is now yours without recourse, and although you cannot
dispose of it until you are of legal age, there will be nothing then
to prevent your transfering it to whomsoever you please. I called
Miss Merrick's attention to this fact when you refused to accept the
legacy."

"What did she say?"

"That you would be more wise then, and would probably decide to keep
it."

Patsy turned impulsively to the boy.

"Kenneth," she said, "I faithfully promise, in the presence of these
witnesses, to give you Elmhurst and all Aunt Jane's money as soon as I
am of age."

"Good for you, Patsy," said Uncle John.

The boy seemed bewildered.

"I don't want the money--really I don't!" he protested. "The five
thousand she left me will be enough. But I'd like to live here at
Elmhurst for a time, until it's sold or some one else comes to live in
the house!"

"It's yours," said Patsy, with a grand air. "You can live here
forever."

Mr. Watson seemed puzzled.

"If that is your wish, Miss Patricia," bowing gravely in her
direction, "I will see that it is carried out. Although I am, in
this matter, your executor, I shall defer to your wishes as much as
possible."

"Thank you," she said and then, after a moment's reflection, she
added: "Can't you give to Louise and Beth the ten thousand dollars
they were to have under the other will, instead of the five thousand
each that this one gives them?"

"I will consider that matter," he replied; "perhaps it can be
arranged."

Patsy's cousins opened their eyes at this, and began to regard her
with more friendly glances. To have ten thousand each instead of
five would be a very nice thing, indeed, and Miss Patricia Doyle
had evidently become a young lady whose friendship it would pay to
cultivate. If she intended to throw away the inheritance, a portion of
it might fall to their share.

They were expressing to Patsy their gratitude when old Donald suddenly
appeared in the doorway and beckoned to Uncle John.

"Will you please come to see James, sir?" he asked. "The poor fellow's
dying."




CHAPTER XXII.

JAMES TELLS A STRANGE STORY.


Uncle John followed the coachman up the stairs to the little room
above the tool-house, where the old man had managed to crawl after old
Sam had given him a vicious kick in the chest.

"Is he dead?" he asked.

"No, sir; but mortally hurt, I'm thinkin'. It must have happened while
we were at the funeral."

He opened the door, outside which Susan and Oscar watched with
frightened faces, and led John Merrick into the room.

James lay upon his bed with closed eyes. His shirt, above the breast,
was reeking with blood.

"The doctor should be sent for," said Uncle John.

"He'll be here soon, for one of the stable boys rode to fetch him. But
I thought you ought to know at once, sir."

"Quite right, Donald."

As they stood there the wounded man moved and opened his eyes, looking
from one to the other of them wonderingly. Finally he smiled.

"Ah, it's Donald," he said.

"Yes, old friend," answered the coachman. "And this is Mr. John."

"Mr. John? Mr. John? I don't quite remember you, sir," with a slight
shake of the gray head. "And Donald, lad, you've grown wonderful old,
somehow."

"It's the years, Jeemes," was the reply. "The years make us all old,
sooner or later."

The gardener seemed puzzled, and examined his companions more
carefully. He did not seem to be suffering any pain. Finally he
sighed.

"The dreams confuse me," he said, as if to explain something. "I can't
always separate them, the dreams from the real. Have I been sick,
Donald?"

"Yes, lad. You're sick now."

The gardener closed his eyes, and lay silent.

"Do you think he's sane?" whispered Uncle John.

"I do, sir. He's sane for the first time in years."

James looked at them again, and slowly raised his hand to wipe the
damp from his forehead.

"About Master Tom," he said, falteringly. "Master Tom's dead, ain't
he?"

"Yes, Jeemes."

"That was real, then, an' no dream. I mind it all, now--the shriek of
the whistle, the crash, and the screams of the dying. Have I told you
about it, Donald?"

"No, lad."

"It all happened before we knew it. I was on one side the car and
Master Tom on the other. My side was on top, when I came to myself,
and Master Tom was buried in the rubbish. God knows how I got him out,
but I did. Donald, the poor master's side was crushed in, and both
legs splintered. I knew at once he was dying, when I carried him to
the grass and laid him down; and he knew it, too. Yes, the master knew
he was done; and him so young and happy, and just about to be married
to--to--the name escapes me, lad!"

His voice sank to a low mumble, and he closed his eyes wearily.

The watchers at his side stood still and waited. It might be that
death had overtaken the poor fellow. But no; he moved again, and
opened his eyes, continuing his speech in a stronger tone.

"It was hard work to get the paper for Master Tom," he said; "but he
swore he must have it before he died. I ran all the way to the station
house and back--a mile or more--and brought the paper and a pen and
ink, besides. It was but a telegraph blank--all I could find. Naught
but a telegraph blank, lad."

Again his voice trailed away into a mumbling whisper, but now Uncle
John and Donald looked into one another's eyes with sudden interest.

"He mustn't die yet!" said the little man; and the coachman leaned
over the wounded form and said, distinctly:

"Yes, lad; I'm listening."

"To be sure," said James, brightening a bit. "So I held the paper for
him, and the brakeman supported Master Tom's poor body, and he wrote
out the will as clear as may be."

"The will!"

"Sure enough; Master Tom's last will. Isn't my name on it, too, where
I signed it? And the conductor's beside it, for the poor brakeman
didn't dare let him go? Of course. Who should sign the will with
Master Tom but me--his old servant and friend? Am I right, Donald?"

"Yes, lad."

"'Now,' says Master Tom, 'take it to Lawyer Watson, James, and bid him
care for it. And give my love to Jane--that's the name, Donald; the
one I thought I'd forgot--'and now lay me back and let me die.' His
very words, Donald. And we laid him back and he died. And he died.
Poor Master Tom. Poor, poor young Master. And him to--be married--in
a--"

"The paper, James!" cried Uncle John, recalling the dying man to the
present. "What became of it?"

"Sir, I do not know you," answered James, suspiciously. "The paper's
for Lawyer Watson. It's he alone shall have it."

"Here I am, James," cried the lawyer, thrusting the others aside and
advancing to the bed. "Give me the paper. Where is it? I am Lawyer
Watson!"

The gardener laughed--a horrible, croaking laugh that ended with a
gasp of pain.

"_You_ Lawyer Watson?" he cried, a moment later, in taunting tones.
"Why, you old fool, Si Watson's as young as Master Tom--as young as I
am! You--_you_ Lawyer Watson! Ha, ha, ha!"

"Where is the paper?" demanded the lawyer fiercely.

James stared at him an instant, and then suddenly collapsed and fell
back inert upon the bed.

"Have you heard all?" asked John Merrick, laying his hand on the
lawyer's shoulder.

"Yes; I followed you here as soon as I could. Tom Bradley made another
will, as he lay dying. I must have it, Mr. Merrick."

"Then you must find it yourself," said Donald gravely, "for James is
dead."

The doctor, arriving a few minutes later, verified the statement.
It was evident that the old gardener, for years insane, had been so
influenced by Miss Merrick's death that he had wandered into
the stables where he received his death blow. When he regained
consciousness the mania had vanished, and in a shadowy way he could
remember and repeat that last scene of the tragedy that had deprived
him of his reason. The story was logical enough, and both Mr. Watson
and John Merrick believed it.

"Tom Bradley was a level-headed fellow until he fell in love with your
sister," said the lawyer to his companion. "But after that he would
not listen to reason, and perhaps he had a premonition of his own
sudden death, for he made a will bequeathing all he possessed to his
sweetheart. I drew up the will myself, and argued against the folly of
it; but he had his own way. Afterward, in the face of death, I believe
he became more sensible, and altered his will."

"Yet James' story may all be the effect of a disordered mind," said
Uncle John.

"I do not think, so; but unless he has destroyed the paper in his
madness, we shall he able to find it among his possessions."

With this idea in mind, Mr. Watson ordered the servants to remove the
gardener's body to a room in the carriage-house, and as soon as this
was done he set to work to search for the paper, assisted by John
Merrick.

"It was a telegraph blank, he said."

"Yes."

"Then we cannot mistake it, if we find any papers at all," declared
the lawyer.

The most likely places in James' room for anything to be hidden were a
small closet, in which were shelves loaded with odds and ends, and an
old clothes-chest that was concealed underneath the bed.

This last was first examined, but found to contain merely an
assortment of old clothing. Having tossed these in a heap upon the
floor the lawyer begun an examination of the closet, the shelves
promising well because of several bundles of papers they contained.

While busy over these, he heard Uncle John say, quietly:

"I've got it."

The lawyer bounded from the closet. The little man had been searching
the pockets of the clothing taken from the chest, and from a faded
velvet coat he drew out the telegraph blank.

"Is it the will?" asked the lawyer, eagerly.

"Read it yourself," said Uncle John.

Mr. Watson put on his glasses.

"Yes; this is Tom Bradley's handwriting, sure enough. The will is
brief, but it will hold good in law. Listen: I bequeath to Jane
Merrick, my affianced bride, the possession and use of my estate
during the term of her life. On her death all such possessions, with
their accrument, shall be transferred to my sister, Katherine Bradley,
if she then survives, to have and to hold by her heirs and assignees
forever. But should she die without issue previous to the death of
Jane Merrick, I then appoint my friend and attorney, Silas Watson, to
distribute the property among such organized and worthy charities as
he may select.' That is all."

"Quite enough," said Uncle John, nodding approval.

"And it is properly signed and witnessed. The estate is Kenneth's,
sir, after all, for he is the sole heir of his mother. Katherine
Bradley Forbes. Hurrah!" ended the lawyer, waving the yellow paper
above his head.

"Hurrah!" echoed Uncle John, gleefully; and the two men shook hands.




CHAPTER XXIII.

PATSY ADOPTS AN UNCLE.


Uncle John and Mr. Watson did not appear at dinner, being closeted in
the former's room. This meal, however, was no longer a state function,
being served by the old servants as a mere matter of routine. Indeed,
the arrangements of the household had been considerably changed by the
death of its mistress, and without any real head to direct them
the servants were patiently awaiting the advent of a new master or
mistress. It did not seem clear to them yet whether Miss Patricia or
Lawyer Watson was to take charge of Elmhurst: but there were few tears
shed for Jane Merrick, and the new regime could not fail to be an
improvement over the last.

At dinner the young folks chatted together in a friendly and eager
manner concerning the events of the day. They knew of old James'
unfortunate end, but being unaware of its import gave it but passing
attention. The main subject of conversation was Aunt Jane's surprising
act in annulling her last will and forcing Patricia to accept the
inheritance when she did not want it. Kenneth, being at his ease when
alone with the three cousins, protested that it would not be right
for Patsy to give him all the estate. But, as she was so generous,
he would accept enough of his Uncle Tom's money to educate him as an
artist and provide for himself an humble home. Louise and Beth, having
at last full knowledge of their cousin's desire to increase their
bequests, were openly very grateful for her good will; although
secretly they could not fail to resent Patsy's choice of the boy as
the proper heir of his uncle's fortune. The balance of power seemed to
be in Patricia's hands, however; so it would be folly at this juncture
to offend her.

Altogether, they were all better provided for than they had feared
would be the case; so the little party spent a pleasant evening and
separated early, Beth and Louise to go to their rooms and canvass
quietly the events of the day, and the boy to take a long stroll
through the country lanes to cool his bewildered brain. Patsy wrote a
long letter to the major, telling him she would be home in three days,
and then she went to bed and slept peacefully.

After breakfast they were all again summoned to the drawing-room, to
their great surprise. Lawyer Watson and Uncle John were there, looking
as grave as the important occasion demanded, and the former at once
proceeded to relate the scene in James' room, his story of the death
of Thomas Bradley, and the subsequent finding of the will.

"This will, which has just been recovered," continued the lawyer,
impressively, "was made subsequent to the one under which Jane
Merrick inherited, and therefore supercedes it. Miss Jane had, as
you perceive, a perfect right to the use of the estate during her
lifetime, but no right whatever to will a penny of it to anyone. Mr.
Bradley having provided for that most fully. For this reason the will
I read to you yesterday is of no effect, and Kenneth Forbes inherits
from his uncle, through his mother, all of the estate."

Blank looks followed Mr. Watson's statement.

"Good-by to my five thousand," said Uncle John, with his chuckling
laugh. "But I'm much obliged to Jane, nevertheless."

"Don't we get anything at all?" asked Beth, with quivering lip.

"No, my dear," answered the lawyer, gently. "Your aunt owned nothing
to give you."

Patsy laughed. She felt wonderfully relieved.

"Wasn't I the grand lady, though, with all the fortune I never had?"
she cried merrily. "But 'twas really fine to be rich for a day, and
toss the money around as if I didn't have to dress ten heads of hair
in ten hours to earn my bread and butter."

Louise smiled.

"It was all a great farce," she said. "I shall take the afternoon
train to the city. What an old fraud our dear Aunt Jane was! And how
foolish of me to return her hundred dollar check."

"I used mine," said Beth, bitterly. "It's all I'll ever get, it
seems." And then the thought of the Professor and his debts overcame
her and she burst, into tears.

The boy sat doubled within his chair, so overcome by the extraordinary
fortune that had overtaken him that he could not speak, nor think even
clearly as yet.

Patsy tried to comfort Beth.

"Never mind, dear," said she. "We're no worse off than before we
came, are we? And we've had a nice vacation. Let's forget all
disappointments and be grateful to Aunt Jane's memory. As far as she
knew, she tried to be good to us."

"I'm going home today," said Beth, angrily drying her eyes.

"We'll all go home," said Patsy, cheerfully.

"For my part," remarked Uncle John, in a grave voice, "I have no
home."

Patsy ran up and put her arm around his neck.

"Poor Uncle John!" she cried. "Why, you're worse off than any of us.
What's going to become of you, I wonder?"

"I'm wondering that myself," said the little man, meekly.

"Ah! You can stay here," said the boy, suddenly arousing from his
apathy.

"No," replied Uncle John, "the Merricks are out of Elmhurst now, and
it returns to its rightful owners. You owe me nothing, my lad."

"But I like you," said Kenneth, "and you're old and homeless. Stay at
Elmhurst, and you shall always be welcome."

Uncle John seemed greatly affected, and wrung the boy's hand
earnestly. But he shook his head.

"I've wandered all my life," he said. "I can wander yet."

"See here," exclaimed Patsy. "We're all three your nieces, and we'll
take care of you between us. Won't we, girls?"

Louise smiled rather scornfully, and Beth scowled.

"My mother and I live so simply in our little flat," said one, "that
we really haven't extra room to keep a cat. But we shall be glad to
assist Uncle John as far as we are able."

"Father can hardly support his own family," said the other; "but I
will talk to my mother about Uncle John when I get home, and see what
she says."

"Oh, you don't need to, indeed!" cried Patsy, in great indignation.
"Uncle John is my dear mother's brother, and he's to come and live
with the Major and me, as long as he cares to. There's room and to
spare, Uncle," turning to him and clasping his hand, "and a joyful
welcome into the bargain. No, no! say nothing at all, sir! Come you
shall, if I have to drag you; and if you act naughty I'll send for the
Major to punish you!"

Uncle John's eyes were moist. He looked on Patsy most affectionately
and cast a wink at Lawyer Watson, who stood silently by.

"Thank you, my dear," said he; "but where's the money to come from?"

"Money? Bah!" she said. "Doesn't the Major earn a heap with his
bookkeeping, and haven't I had a raise lately? Why, we'll be as snug
and contented as pigs in clover. Can you get ready to come with me
today, Uncle John?"

"Yes," he said slowly. "I'll be ready, Patsy."

So the exodus from Elmhurst took place that very day, and Beth
travelled in one direction, while Louise, Patsy and Uncle John took
the train for New York. Louise had a seat in the parlor car, but Patsy
laughed at such extravagance.

"It's so much easier than walking," she said to Uncle John, "that the
common car is good enough," and the old man readily agreed with her.

Kenneth and Mr. Watson came to the station to see them off, and they
parted with many mutual expressions of friendship and good will.
Louise, especially, pressed an urgent invitation upon the new master
of Elmhurst to visit her mother in New York, and he said he hoped to
see all the girls again. They were really like cousins to him, by this
time. And after they were all gone he rode home on Nora's back quite
disconsolate, in spite of his wonderful fortune.

The lawyer, who had consented to stay at the mansion for a time, that
the boy might not be lonely, had already mapped put a plan for the
young heir's advancement. As he rode beside Kenneth he said:

"You ought to travel, and visit the art centers of Europe, and I shall
try to find a competent tutor to go with you."

"Can't you go yourself?" asked the boy.

The lawyer hesitated.

"I'm getting old, and my clients are few and unimportant, aside from
the Elmhurst interests," he said. "Perhaps I can manage to go abroad
with you."

"I'd like that," declared the boy. "And we'd stop in New York,
wouldn't we, for a time?"

"Of course. Do you want to visit New York especially?"

"Yes."

"It's rather a stupid city," said the lawyer, doubtfully.

"That may be," answered the boy. "But Patsy will be there, you know."




CHAPTER XXIV.

HOME AGAIN.


The Major was at the station to meet them. Uncle John had shyly
suggested a telegram, and Patsy had decided they could stand the
expense for the pleasure of seeing the old Dad an hour sooner.

The girl caught sight of him outside the gates, his face red and
beaming as a poppy in bloom and his snowy moustache bristling with
eagerness. At once she dropped her bundles and flew to the Major's
arms, leaving the little man in her wake to rescue her belongings and
follow after.

He could hardly see Patsy at all, the Major wrapped her in such an
ample embrace; but bye and bye she escaped to get her breath, and then
her eyes fell upon the meek form holding her bundles.

"Oh, Dad," she cried, "here's Uncle John, who has come to live with
us; and if you don't love him as much as I do I'll make your life
miserable!"

"On which account," said the Major, grasping the little man's hand
most cordially, "I'll love Uncle John like my own brother. And
surely," he added, his voice falling tenderly, "my dear Violet's
brother must be my own. Welcome, sir, now and always, to our little
home. It's modest, sir; but wherever Patsy is the sun is sure to
shine."

"I can believe that," said Uncle John, with a nod and smile.

They boarded a car for the long ride up town, and as soon as they were
seated Patsy demanded the story of the Major's adventures with his
colonel, and the old fellow rattled away with the eagerness of a
boy, telling every detail in the most whimsical manner, and finding
something humorous in every incident.

"Oh, but it was grand, Patsy!" he exclaimed, "and the Colonel wept on
my neck when we parted and stained the collar of me best coat, and he
give me a bottle of whiskey that would make a teetotaler roll his eyes
in ecstacy. 'Twas the time of my life."

"And you're a dozen years younger, Major!" she cried, laughing, "and
fit to dig into work like a pig in clover."

His face grew grave.

"But how about the money, Patsy dear?" he asked. "Did you get nothing
out of Jane Merrick's estate?"

"Not a nickle, Dad. 'Twas the best joke you ever knew. I fought with
Aunt Jane like a pirate and it quite won her heart. When she died she
left me all she had in the world."

"Look at that, now!" said the Major, wonderingly.

"Which turned out to be nothing at all," continued Patsy. "For another
will was found, made by Mr. Thomas Bradley, which gave the money to
his own nephew after Aunt Jane died. Did you ever?"

"Wonderful!" said the Major, with a sigh.

"So I was rich for half a day, and then poor as ever."

"It didn't hurt you, did it?" asked the Major. "You weren't vexed with
disappointment, were you, Patsy?"

"Not at all, Daddy."

"Then don't mind it, child. Like as not the money would be the
ruination of us all. Eh, sir?" appealing to Uncle John.

"To be sure," said the little man. "Jane left five thousand to me,
also, which I didn't get. But I'm not sorry at all."

"Quite right, sir," approved the Major, sympathetically, "although
it's easier not to expect anything at all, than to set your heart on a
thing and then not get it. In your case, it won't matter. Our house is
yours, and there's plenty and to spare."

"Thank you," said Uncle John, his face grave but his eyes merry.

"Oh, Major!" cried Patsy, suddenly. "There's Danny Reeves's
restaurant. Let's get off and have our dinner now; I'm as hungry as a
bear."

So they stopped the car and descended, lugging all the parcels into
the little restaurant, where they were piled into a chair while the
proprietor and the waiters all gathered around Patsy to welcome her
home.

My, how her eyes sparkled! She fairly danced for joy, and ordered the
dinner with reckless disregard of the bill.

"Ah, but it's good to be back," said the little Bohemian, gleefully.
"The big house at Elmhurst was grand and stately, Major, but there
wasn't an ounce of love in the cupboard."

"Wasn't I there. Patsy?" asked Uncle John, reproachfully.

"True, but now you're here; and our love, Uncle, has nothing to do
with Elmhurst. I'll bet a penny you liked it as little as I did."

"You'd win," admitted the little man.

"And now," said the girl to the smiling waiter, "a bottle of red
California wine for Uncle John and the Major, and two real cigars.
We'll be merry tonight if it bankrupts the Doyle family entirely."

But, after a merry meal and a good one, there was no bill at all when
it was called for.

Danny Reeves himself came instead, and made a nice little speech,
saying that Patsy had always brought good luck to the place, and this
dinner was his treat to welcome her home.

So the Major thanked him with gracious dignity and Patsy kissed Danny
on his right cheek, and then they went away happy and content to find
the little rooms up the second flight of the old tenement.

"It's no palace," said Patsy, entering to throw down the bundles as
soon as the Major unlocked the door, "but there's a cricket in the
hearth, and it's your home, Uncle John, as well as ours."

Uncle John looked around curiously. The place was so plain after the
comparative luxury of Elmhurst, and especially of the rose chamber
Patsy had occupied, that the old man could not fail to marvel at the
girl's ecstatic joy to find herself in the old tenement again. There
was one good sized living-room, with an ancient rag-carpet partially
covering the floor, a sheet-iron stove, a sofa, a table and three or
four old-fashioned chairs that had probably come from a second-hand
dealer.

Opening from this were two closet-like rooms containing each a bed and
a chair, with a wash-basin on a bracket shelf. On the wails were a
few colored prints from the Sunday newspapers and one large and fine
photograph of a grizzled old soldier that Uncle John at once decided
must represent "the Colonel."

Having noted these details, Patsy's uncle smoothed back his stubby
gray hair with a reflective and half puzzled gesture.

"It's cozy enough, my child; and I thank you for my welcome," said he.
"But may I enquire where on earth you expect to stow me in this rather
limited establishment?"

"Where? Have you no eyes, then?" she asked, in astonishment. "It's the
finest sofa in the world, Uncle John, and you'll sleep there like a
top, with the dear Colonel's own picture looking down at you to keep
you safe and give you happy dreams. Where, indeed!"

"Ah; I see," said Uncle John.

"And you can wash in my chamber," added the Major, with a grand air,
"and hang your clothes on the spare hooks behind my door."

"I haven't many," said Uncle John, looking thoughtfully at his red
bundle.

The Major coughed and turned the lamp a little higher.

"You'll find the air fine, and the neighborhood respectable," he said,
to turn the subject. "Our modest apartments are cool in summer and
warm in winter, and remarkably reasonable in price. Patsy gets our
breakfast on the stove yonder, and we buy our lunches down town, where
we work, and then dine at Danny Reeves's place. A model home, sir, and
a happy one, as I hope you'll find it."

"I'm sure to be happy here," said Uncle John, taking out his pipe.
"May I smoke?"

"Of course; but don't spoil the lace curtains, dear," answered Patsy,
mischievously. And then, turning to her father, she exclaimed: "Oh,
daddy! What will the Uncle do all the day while we're at work?"

"That's as he may choose," said the Major, courteously.

"Couldn't we get him a job?" asked Patsy, wistfully. "Not where
there'll be much work, you know, for the Uncle is old. But just to
keep him out of mischief, and busy. He can't hang around all day and
be happy, I suppose."

"I'll look around," answered the Major, briskly, as if such a "job"
was the easiest thing in the world to procure. "And meantime--"

"Meantime," said Uncle John, smiling at them, "I'll look around
myself."

"To be sure," agreed the Major. "Between the two of us and Patsy, we
ought to have no trouble at all."

There was a moment of thoughtful silence after this, and then Patsy
said:

"You know it won't matter, Uncle John, if you don't work. There'll
easy be enough for all, with the Major's wages and my own."

"By the bye," added the Major, "if you have any money about you, which
is just possible, sir, of course, you'd better turn it over to Patsy
to keep, and let her make you an allowance. That's the way I do--it's
very satisfactory."

"The Major's extravagant," exclaimed Patsy; "and if he has money he
wants to treat every man he meets."

Uncle John shook his head, reproachfully, at the Major.

"A very bad habit, sir," he said.

"I acknowledge it, Mr. Merrick," responded the Major. "But Patsy is
fast curing me. And, after all, it's a wicked city to be carrying a
fat pocketbook around in, as I've often observed."

"My pocketbook is not exactly fat," remarked Uncle John.

"But you've money, sir, for I marked you squandering it on the train,"
said Patsy, severely. "So out with it, and we'll count up, and see how
much of an allowance I can make you 'till you get the job."

Uncle John laughed and drew his chair up to the table. Then he emptied
his trousers' pockets upon the cloth, and Patsy gravely separated the
keys and jackknife from the coins and proceeded to count the money.

"Seven dollars and forty-two cents," she announced. "Any more?"

Uncle John hesitated a moment, and then drew from an inner pocket of
his coat a thin wallet. From this, when she had received it from his
hand, the girl abstracted two ten and one five dollar bills, all crisp
and new.

"Good gracious!" she cried, delightedly. "All this wealth, and you
pleading poverty?"

"I never said I was a pauper," returned Uncle John, complacently.

"You couldn't, and be truthful, sir," declared the girl. "Why, this
will last for ages, and I'll put it away safe and be liberal with
your allowance. Let me see," pushing the coins about with her slender
fingers, "you just keep the forty-two cents, Uncle John. It'll do for
car-fare and a bit of lunch now and then, and when you get broke you
can come to me."

"He smokes," observed the Major, significantly.

"Bah! a pipe," said Patsy. "And Bull Durham is only five cents a bag,
and a bag ought to last a week. And every Saturday night, sir, you
shall have a cigar after dinner, with the Major. It's it our regular
practice."

"Thank you, Patsy," said Uncle John, meekly, and gathered up his
forty-two cents.

"You've now a home, and a manager, sir, with money in the bank of
Patsy & Company, Limited," announced the Major. "You ought to be very
contented, sir."

"I am," replied Uncle John.




CHAPTER XXV

UNCLE JOHN ACTS QUEERLY.


When Patsy and the Major had both departed for work on Monday morning
Uncle John boarded a car and rode downtown also. He might have
accompanied them part of the way, but feared Patsey might think him
extravagant if she found him so soon breaking into the working fund of
forty-two cents, which she charged him to be careful of.

He seemed to be in no hurry, for it was early yet, and few of the
lower Broadway establishments were open. To pass the time he turned
into a small restaurant and had coffee and a plate of cakes, in spite
of the fact that Patsy had so recently prepared coffee over the
sheet-iron stove and brought some hot buns from a near-by bakery. He
was not especially hungry; but in sipping the coffee and nibbling the
cakes he passed the best part of an hour.

He smiled when he paid out twenty-five cents of his slender store for
the refreshment. With five cents for car-fare he had now but twelve
cents left of the forty-two Patsy had given him! Talk about the
Major's extravagance: it could not be compared to Uncle John's.

Another hour was spent in looking in at the shop windows. Then,
suddenly noting the time. Uncle John started down the street at a
swinging pace, and presently paused before a building upon which was
a sign, reading: "Isham, Marvin & Co., Bankers and Brokers." A
prosperous looking place, it seemed, with a host of clerks busily
working in the various departments. Uncle John walked in, although the
uniformed official at the door eyed him suspiciously.

"Mr. Marvin in?" he inquired, pleasantly.

"Not arrived yet," said the official, who wore a big star upon his
breast.

"I'll wait," announced Uncle John, and sat down upon a leather-covered
bench.

The official strutted up and down, watching the customers who entered
the bank or departed, and keeping a sharp watch on the little man upon
the bench.

Another hour passed.

Presently Uncle John jumped up and approached the official.

"Hasn't Mr. Marvin arrived yet?" he enquired, sharply.

"An hour ago," was the reply.

"Then why didn't you let me know? I want to see him."

"He's busy mornings. Has to look over the mail. He can't see you yet."

"Well, he will see me, and right away. Tell him John Merrick is here."

"Your card, sir."

"I haven't any. My name will do."

The official hesitated, and glanced at the little man's seedy garb and
countryfied air. But something in the angry glance of the shrewd
eye made him fear he had made a mistake. He opened a small door and
disappeared.

In a moment the door burst open to allow egress to a big, red-bearded
man in his shirtsleeves, who glanced around briefly and then rushed at
Uncle John and shook both his hands cordially.

"My dear Mr. Merrick!" he exclaimed, "I'm delighted and honored to see
you here. Come to my room at once. A great surprise and pleasure, sir!
Thomas, I'm engaged!"

This last was directed at the head of the amazed porter, who, as the
door slammed in his face, nodded solemnly and remarked:

"Fooled ag'in, and I might 'a' known it. Drat these 'ere billionaires!
Why don't they dress like decent people?"

Uncle John had been advised by Patsy where to go for a good cheap
luncheon; but he did not heed her admonition. Instead, he rode in a
carriage beside the banker to a splendid club, where he was served
with the finest dishes the chef could provide on short notice.
Moreover, Mr. Marvin introduced him to several substantial gentlemen
as "Mr. John Merrick, of Portland"; and each one bowed profoundly and
declared he was "highly honored."

Yet Uncle John seemed in no way elated by this reception. He retained
his simple manner, although his face was more grave than Patsy had
often seen it; and he talked with easy familiarity of preferred stocks
and amalgamated interests and invested, securities and many other
queer things that the banker seemed to understand fully and to listen
to with respectful deference.

Then they returned to the bank for another long session together, and
there was quite an eager bustle among the clerks as they stretched
their necks to get a glimpse of Mr. Marvin's companion.

"It's John Merrick" passed from mouth to mouth, and the uniformed
official strutted from one window to another, saying:

"I showed him in myself. And he came into the bank as quiet like as
anyone else would."

But he didn't go away quietly, you may be sure. Mr. Marvin and Mr.
Isham both escorted their famous client to the door, where the Marvin
carriage had been ordered to be in readiness for Mr. Merrick's
service.

But Uncle John waived it aside disdainfully.

"I'll walk," he said. "There are some other errands to attend to."

So they shook his hand and reminded him of a future appointment and
let him go his way. In a moment the great Broadway crowd had swallowed
up John Merrick, and five minutes later he was thoughtfully gazing
into a shop window again.

By and bye he bethought himself of the time, and took a cab uptown. He
had more than the twelve cents in his pocket, now, besides the check
book which was carefully hidden away in an inside pocket; so the cost
of the cab did not worry him. He dismissed the vehicle near an uptown
corner and started to walk hastily toward Danny Reeves's restaurant, a
block away, Patsy was standing in the doorway, anxiously watching for
him.

"Oh, Uncle John," she cried, as he strolled "I've been really worried
about you; it's such a big city, and you a stranger. Do you know
you're ten minutes late?"

"I'm sorry," he said, humbly; "but it's a long way here from
downtown."

"Didn't you take a car?"

"No, my dear."

"Why, you foolish old Uncle! Come in at once. The Major has been
terribly excited over you, and swore you should not be allowed to
wander through the streets without someone to look after you. But what
could we do?"

"I'm all right," declared Uncle John, cordially shaking hands with
Patsy's father. "Have you had a good day?"

"Fine," said the Major. "They'd missed me at the office, and were glad
to have me back. And what do you think? I've got a raise."

"Really?" said Uncle John, seeing it was expected of him.

"For a fact. It's Patsy's doing, I've no doubt. She wheedled the firm
into giving me a vacation, and now they're to pay me twelve a week
instead of ten."

"Is that enough?" asked Uncle John, doubtfully.

"More than enough, sir. I'm getting old, and can't earn as much as a
younger man. But I'm pretty tough, and mean to hold onto that twelve a
week as long as possible."

"What pay do you get, Patsy?" asked Uncle John.

"Almost as much as Daddy. We're dreadfully rich, Uncle John; so you
needn't worry if you don't strike a job yourself all at once."

"Any luck today, sir," asked the Major, tucking a napkin under his
chin and beginning on the soup.

Uncle John shook his head.

"Of course not," said Patsy, quickly. "It's too early, as yet. Don't
hurry, Uncle John. Except that it'll keep you busy, there's no need
for you to work at all."

"You're older than I am," suggested the Major, "and that makes it
harder to break in. But there's no hurry, as Patsy says."

Uncle John did not seem to be worrying over his idleness. He kept on
questioning his brother-in-law and his niece about their labors, and
afterward related to them the sights he had seen in the shop windows.
Of course he could not eat much after the feast he had had at
luncheon, and this disturbed Patsy a little. She insisted he was
tired, and carried her men away to the tenement rooms as soon as
possible, where she installed them at the table to play cribbage until
bed-time.

The next day Uncle John seemed to be busy enough, although of course
Patsy could not know what he was doing. He visited a real-estate
office, for one thing, and then telephoned Isham, Marvin & Co. and
issued a string of orders in a voice not nearly so meek and mild as
it was when he was in Patsy's presence. Whatever he had undertaken
required time, for all during the week he left the tenement directly
the Major and his daughter had gone to the city, and bustled about
until it was time to meet them for dinner at the restaurant. But he
was happy and in good spirits and enjoyed his evening game of cribbage
with the Major exceedingly.

"You must be nearly bankrupt, by this time," said Patsy on Tuesday
evening.

"It's an expensive city to live in," sighed Uncle John.

She gave him fifty cents of his money, then, and on Friday fifty cents
more.

"After a time," she said, "you'll manage to get along with less. It's
always harder to economize at first."

"How about the bills?" he inquired. "Don't I pay my share of them?"

"Your expenses are nothing at all," declared the Major, with a wave of
his hand.

"But my dinners at Danny Reeves' place must cost a lot," protested
Uncle John.

"Surely not; Patsy has managed all that for a trifle, and the pleasure
of your company more than repays us for the bit of expense."

On Saturday night there was a pint of red wine for the two men, and
then the weekly cigars were brought--very inexpensive ones, to be
sure. The first whiff he took made Uncle John cough; but the Major
smoked so gracefully and with such evident pleasure that his
brother-in-law clung manfully to the cigar, and succeeded in consuming
it to the end.

"Tomorrow is the day of rest," announced Patsy, "so we'll all go for a
nice walk in the parks after breakfast."

"And we sleep 'till eight o'clock, don't we, Patsy?" asked the Major.

"Of course."

"And the eggs for breakfast?"

"I've bought them already, three for a nickle. You don't care for more
than one, do you, Uncle John?"

"No, my dear."

"It's our Sunday morning extra--an egg apiece. The Major is so fond of
them."

"And so am I, Patsy."

"And now we'll have our cribbage and get to bed early. Heigho! but
Sunday's a great day for folks that work."




CHAPTER XXVI.

A BUNCH OF KEYS.


Uncle John did not sleep well. Perhaps he had a guilty conscience.
Anyway, he tossed about a good deal on the sofa-bed in the
living-room, and wore himself out to such an extent that when Patsy
got up at eight o'clock her uncle had fallen into his first sound
sleep.

She never disturbed him until she had made the fire and cooked the
coffee and boiled the three white eggs. By this time the Major was
dressed and shaved, and he aroused Uncle John and bade him hurry into
the closet and make his toilet, "so that Patsy could put the house to
rights."

Uncle John obeyed eagerly, and was ready as soon as the Major had
brought the smoking rolls from the bakery. Ah, but it was a merry
breakfast; and a delicious one into the bargain. Uncle John seemed
hungry, and looked at the empty egg-shells regretfully.

"Next time, Patsy," he said, "you must buy six eggs."

"Look at his recklessness!" cried Patsy, laughing. "You're just as bad
as the Major, every bit. If you men hadn't me for a guardian you'd be
in the poorhouse in a month."

"But we have you, my dear," said Uncle John, smiling into her dancing
eyes; "so we won't complain at one egg instead of two."

Just then someone pounded on the door, and the girl ran to open it.
There was a messenger boy outside, looking smart and neat in his
blue-and-gold uniform, and he touched his cap politely to the girl.

"Miss Patricia Doyle?"

"That's me."

"A parcel for you. Sign here, please."

Patsy signed, bothering her head the while to know what the little
package contained and who could have sent it. Then the boy was gone,
and she came back slowly to the breakfast table, with the thing in her
hand.

"What is it, Patsy?" asked the Major, curiously.

"I'm dying to know, myself," said the girl.

Uncle John finished his coffee, looking unconcerned.

"A good way is to open it," remarked the Major.

It was a very neat package, wrapped in fine paper and sealed with red
wax. Patsy turned it over once or twice, and then broke the wax and
untied the cord.

A bunch of keys fell out first--seven of them, strung on a purple
ribbon--and then a flat, impressive looking letter was discovered.

The Major stared open-mouthed. Uncle John leaned back in his chair and
watched the girl's face.

"There's a mistake," said Patsy, quite bewildered. Then she read her
name upon the wrapper, quite plainly written, and shook her head.
"It's for me, all right. But what does it mean?"

"Why not read the letter?" suggested the Major.

So she opened the big envelope and unfolded the stiff paper and read
as follows:

"Miss Patricia Doyle, Becker's Flats, Duggan Street, New York. Dear
Miss Doyle: An esteemed client of our house, who desires to remain
unknown, has placed at your disposal the furnished apartments 'D,'
at 3708 Willing Square, for the period of three years, or as long
thereafter as you may care to retain them. Our client begs you to
consider everything the apartments contain as your own, and to use
it freely as it may please you. All rentals and rates are paid in
advance, and you are expected to take possession at once. Moreover,
our firm is commanded to serve you in any and every way you may
require, and it will be our greatest pleasure to be of use to you. The
keys to the apartments are enclosed herewith.

"Most respectfully,

"Isham, Marvin & Co."

Having read this to the end, in a weak voice and with many pauses,
Miss Patricia Doyle sat down in her chair with strange abruptness and
stared blankly at her father. The Major stared back. So did Uncle
John, when her eyes roved toward his face.

Patricia turned the keys over, and jingled them. Then she referred to
the letter again.

"Apartments D, at 3708 Willing Square. Where's that?"

The Major shook his head. So did Uncle John.

"Might look in a directory" suggested the latter, uncertainly.

"Of course," added the Major.

"But what does it all mean?" demanded Patsy, with sudden fierceness.
"Is it a joke? Isham, Marvin & Co., the great bankers! What do I know
of them, or they of me?"

"That isn't the point," observed the Major, reflectively. "Who's their
unknown and mysterious client? That's the question."

"To be sure," said Uncle John. "They're only the agents. You must have
a fairy godmother, Patsy."

She laughed at the idea, and shook her head.

"They don't exist in these days, Uncle John. But the whole thing must
be a joke, and nothing more."

"We'll discover that," asserted the Major, shrewdly scrutinizing
the letter, which he had taken from Patsy's hands. "It surely looks
genuine enough, on the face of it. I've seen the bank letter-head
before, and this is no forgery, you can take my word. Get your things
on, Patsy. Instead of walking in the park we'll hunt up Willing
Square, and we'll take the keys with us."

"A very good idea," said Uncle John. "I'd like to go with you, if I
may."

"Of course you may," answered the girl. "You're one of the family now,
Uncle John, and you must help us to unravel the mystery."

The Major took off his carpet slippers and pulled on his boots, while
Patricia was getting ready for the walk. Uncle John wandered around
the room aimlessly for a time, and then took off his black tie and put
on the white one.

Patsy noticed this, when she came out of her closet, and laughed
merrily.

"You mustn't be getting excited, Uncle John, until we see how this
wonderful adventure turns out." she said. "But I really must wash and
iron that necktie for you, if you're going to wear it on Sundays."

"Not a bad idea," said the Major. "But come, are we all ready?"

They walked down the rickety steps very gravely and sedately, Patsy
jingling the keys as they went, and made their way to the corner drug
store, where the Major searched in the directory for Willing Square.

To his surprise it proved to be only a few blocks away.

"But it's in the dead swell neighborhood," he explained, "where I have
no occasion to visit. We can walk it in five minutes."

Patsy hesitated.

"Really, it's no use going, Dad," she protested. "It isn't in reason
that I'd have a place presented me in a dead swell neighborhood. Now,
is it?"

"We'll have to go, just the same," said Uncle John. "I couldn't sleep
a wink tonight if we didn't find out what this all means."

"True enough," agreed the Major. "Come along, Patsy; it's this way."

Willing Square was not very big, but it was beautiful with flowers and
well tended and 3708 proved to be a handsome building with a white
marble front, situated directly on a corner. The Major examined it
critically from the sidewalk, and decided it contained six suites of
apartments, three on each side.

"D must be the second floor to the right." he said, "and that's a fine
location, sure enough."

A porter appeared at the front door, which stood open, and examined
the group upon the sidewalk with evident curiosity.

Patsy walked up to him, and ignoring the big gold figures over the
entrance she enquired:

"Is this 3708 Willing Square?"

"Yes, Miss," answered the porter; "are you Miss Doyle?"

"I am," she answered, surprised.

"One flight up, Miss, and turn to the right," he continued, promptly;
and then he winked over the girl's head at Uncle John, who frowned so
terribly that the man drew aside and disappeared abruptly. The Major
and Patsy were staring at one another, however, and did not see this
by-play.

"Let's go up," said the Major, in a husky voice, and proceeded to
mount the stairs.

Patsy followed close behind, and then came Uncle John. One flight up
they paused at a door marked "D", upon the panel of which was a rack
bearing a card printed with the word "Doyle."

"Well, well!" gasped the Major. "Who'd have thought it, at all at
all!"

Patsy, with trembling fingers, put a key in the lock, and after one or
two efforts opened the door.

The sun was shining brilliantly into a tiny reception hall, furnished
most luxuriously.

The Major placed his hat on the rack, and Uncle John followed suit.

No one spoke a word as they marched in humble procession into the
living-room, their feet pressing without sound into the thick rugs.
Everything here was fresh and new, but selected with excellent taste
and careful attention to detail. Not a thing; was lacking, from the
pretty upright piano to the enameled clock ticking upon the mantel.
The dining-room was a picture, indeed, with stained-glass windows
casting their soft lights through the draperies and the side-board
shining with silver and glass. There was a cellarette in one corner,
the Major noticed, and it was well stocked.

Beyond was a pantry with well filled shelves and then the
kitchen--this last filled with every article that could possibly
be needed. In a store-room were enough provisions to stock a
grocery-store and Patsy noted with amazement that there was ice in the
refrigerator, with cream and milk and butter cooling beside it.

They felt now as if they were intruding in some fairy domain. It was
all exquisite, though rather tiny; but such luxury was as far removed
from the dingy rooms they had occupied as could well be imagined. The
Major coughed and ahemmed continually; Patsy ah'd and oh'd and seemed
half frightened; Uncle John walked after them silently, but with a
pleased smile that was almost childish upon his round and rugged face.

Across the hall were three chambers, each with a separate bath, while
one had a pretty dressing-room added.

"This will be Patsy's room," said the Major, with a vast amount of
dignity.

"Of course," said Uncle John. "The pins on the cushion spell
'Patricia,' don't they?"

"So they do!" cried Patsy, greatly delighted.

"And this room," continued the Major, passing into the next, "will be
mine. There are fine battle-scenes on the wall; and I declare, there's
just the place for the colonel's photograph over the dresser!"

"Cigars, too," said Patsy, opening a little cabinet; "but 'twill be a
shame to smoke in this palace."

"Then I won't live here!" declared the Major, stoutly, but no one
heeded him.

"Here is Uncle John's room," exclaimed the girl, entering the third
chamber.

"Mine?" enquired Uncle John in mild surprise.

"Sure, sir; you're one of the family, and I'm glad it's as good as the
Major's, every bit."

Uncle John's eyes twinkled.

"I hope the bed is soft," he remarked, pressing it critically.

"It's as good as the old sofa, any day," said Patsy, indignantly.

Just then a bell tinkled, and after looking at one another in silent
consternation for a moment, the Major tiptoed stealthily to the front
door, followed by the others.

"What'll we do?" asked Patsy, in distress.

"Better open it," suggested Uncle John, calmly.

The Major did so, and there was a little maid bowing and smiling
outside. She entered at once, closing the door behind her, and bowed
again.

"This is my new mistress, I suppose," she said, looking at Patsy. "I
am your servant, Miss Patricia."

Patsy gasped and stared at her. The maid was not much older than she
was, but she looked pleasant and intelligent and in keeping with the
rooms. She wore a gray dress with white collar and white apron and
cap, and seemed so dainty and sweet that the Major and Uncle John
approved her at once.

Patsy sat down, from sheer lack of strength to stand up.

"Who hired you, then?" she asked.

"A gentleman from the bank," was the reply. "I'm Mary, if you please,
Miss. And my wages are all arranged for in advance, so there will be
nothing for you to pay," said the little maid.

"Can you cook?" asked Patsy, curiously.

"Yes, Miss," with a smile. "The dinner will be ready at one o'clock."

"Oh; you've been here before, then?"

"Two days, Miss, getting ready for you."

"And where will you sleep?"

"I've a little room beyond the kitchen. Didn't you see it, Miss
Patricia?"

"No, Mary."

"Anything more at present, Miss Patricia?"

"No, Mary."

The maid bowed again, and disappeared toward the kitchen, leaving an
awe-struck group behind her.

The Major whistled softly. Uncle John seemed quite unconcerned. Patsy
took out her handkerchief. The tears _would_ come in spite of her
efforts.

"I--I--I'm going to have a good cry," she sobbed, and rushed into the
living-room to throw herself flat upon the divan.

"It's all right," said the Major, answering Uncle John's startled
look; "the cry will do her good. I've half a mind to join her myself."

But he didn't. He followed Uncle John into the tatter's room and
smoked one of the newly-discovered cigars while the elder man lay back
in an easy chair and silently puffed his pipe.

By and bye Patsy joined them, no longer crying but radiant with glee.

"Tell me, Daddy," said she, perching on the arm of the Major's chair,
"who gave me all this, do you think?"

"Not me," answered the Major, positively. "I couldn't do it on twelve
a week, anyhow at all."

"And you robbed me of all my money when I came to town," said Uncle
John.

"Stop joking," said the girl. "There's no doubt this place is intended
for us, is there?"

"None at all," declared the Major. "It's ours for three years, and not
a penny to pay."

"Well, then, do you think it's Kenneth?"

The Major shook his head.

"I don't know the lad." he said, "and he might be equal to it,
although I doubt it. But he can't touch his money till he comes
of age, and it isn't likely his lawyer guardian would allow such
extravagances."

"Then who can it be?"

"I can't imagine."

"It doesn't seem to matter," remarked Uncle John, lighting a fresh
pipe. "You're not supposed to ask questions, I take it, but to enjoy
your new home as much as you can."

"Ex--actly!" agreed the Major.

"I've been thinking," continued Uncle John, "that I'm not exactly fit
for all this style, Patsy. I'll have to get a new suit of clothes to
match my new quarters. Will you give me back ten dollars of that money
to buy 'em with?"

"I suppose I'll have to," she answered, thoughtfully.

"We'll have to go back to Becker's flats to pack up our traps," said
the Major, "so we might as well go now."

"I hate to leave here for a single moment," replied the girl.

"Why?"

"I'm afraid it will all disappear again."

"Nonsense!" said Uncle John. "For my part, I haven't any traps, so
I'll stay here and guard the treasure till you return."

"Dinner is served, Miss Patricia," said the small maid, appearing in
the doorway.

"Then let's dine!" cried Patsy, clapping her hands gleefully; "and
afterward the Major and I will make our last visit to Becker's flats."




CHAPTER XXVII.

LOUISE MAKES A DISCOVERY.


Uncle John did not stay to guard the treasure, after all, for he knew
very well it would not disappear.

As soon as Patsy and the Major had departed for Becker's flats, he
took his own hat from the rack and walked away to hunt up another
niece, Miss Louise Merrick, whose address he had casually obtained
from Patsy a day or two before.

It was near by, and he soon found the place--a pretty flat in a
fashionable building, although not so exclusive a residence district
as Willing Square.

Up three flights he rode in the elevator, and then rang softly at the
door which here the card of Mrs. Merrick.

A maid opened it and looked at him enquiringly.

"Are the ladies in?" he asked.

"I'll see. Your card, sir?"

"I haven't any."

She half closed the door.

"Any name, then?"

"Yes, John Merrick."

She closed the door entirely, and was gone several minutes. Then she
came back and ushered him through the parlor into a small rear room.

Mrs. Merrick arose from her chair by the window and advanced to meet
him.

"You are John Merrick?" she enquired.

"Your husband's brother, ma'am," he replied.

"How do you do, Uncle John?" called Louise, from the sofa. "Excuse my
getting up, won't you? And where in the world have you come from?"

Mrs. Merrick sat down again.

"Won't you take a chair?" she said, stiffly.

"I believe I will," returned Uncle John. "I just came to make a call,
you know."

"Louise has told me of you," said the lady. "It was very unfortunate
that your sister's death deprived you of a home. An absurd thing,
altogether, that fiasco of Jane Merrick's."

"True," he agreed.

"But I might have expected it, knowing the woman's character as I
did."

Uncle John wondered what Jane's character had to do with the finding
of Tom Bradley's last will; but he said nothing.

"Where are you living?" asked Louise.

"Not anywhere, exactly," he answered, "although Patsy has offered me
a home and I've been sleeping on a sofa in her living-room, the past
week."

"I advise you to stay with the Doyles," said Mrs. Merrick, quickly.
"We haven't even a sofa to offer you here, our flat is so small;
otherwise we would be glad to be of some help to you. Have you found
work?"

"I haven't tried to, yet, ma'am."

"It will be hard to get, at your age, of course. But that is a matter
in which we cannot assist you."

"Oh, I'm not looking for help, ma'am."

She glanced at his worn clothing and soiled white necktie, and smiled.

"But we want to do something for you," said Louise. "Now," sitting up
and regarding him gravely, "I'm going to tell you a state secret. We
are living, in this luxurious way, on the principal of my father's
life insurance. At our present rate of expenditure we figure that the
money will last us two years and nine months longer. By that time I
shall be comfortably married or we will go bankrupt--as the fates
decide. Do you understand the situation?"

"Perfectly. It's very simple," said the old man.

"And rather uncertain, isn't it? But in spite of this, we are better
able to help you than any of your other relatives. The Doyles are
hard-working folks, and very poor. Beth says that Professor De Graf is
over head and ears in debt and earns less every year, so he can't be
counted upon. In all the Merrick tribe the only tangible thing is my
father's life insurance, which I believe you once helped him to pay a
premium on."

"I'd forgotten that," said Uncle John.

"Well, we haven't. We don't want to appear ungenerous in your eyes.
Some day we may need help ourselves. But just now we can't offer you a
home, and, as mother says, you'd better stay with the Doyles. We have
talked of making you a small allowance; but that may not be necessary.
When you need assistance you must come to us, and we'll do whatever we
can, as long as our money lasts. Won't that be the better way?"

Uncle John was silent for a moment. Then he asked:

"Why have you thought it necessary to assist me?"

Louise seemed surprised.

"You are old and seemed to be without means," she answered, "and that
five thousand Aunt Jane left to you turned out to be a myth. But tell
me, have you money, Uncle John?"

"Enough for my present needs," he said, smiling.

Mrs. Merrick seemed greatly relieved.

"Then there is no need of our trying to be generous," she said, "and I
am glad of that on all accounts."

"I just called for a little visit," said Uncle John. "It seemed
unfriendly not to hunt you up, when I was in town."

"I'm glad you did," replied Mrs. Merrick, glancing at the clock. "But
Louise expects a young gentleman to call upon her in a few minutes,
and perhaps you can drop in again; another Sunday, for instance."

"Perhaps so," said Uncle John, rising with a red face. "I'll see."

"Good bye, Uncle," exclaimed Louise, rising to take his hand. "Don't
feel that we've hurried you away, but come in again, whenever you feel
like it."

"Thank you, my dear," he said, and went away.

Louise approached the open window, that led to a broad balcony. The
people in the next flat--young Mr. Isham, the son of the great
banker, and his wife--were sitting on the balcony, overlooking the
street, but Louise decided to glance over the rail to discover if the
young gentleman she so eagerly awaited chanced to be in sight.

As she did so Mr. Isham cried in great excitement:

"There he is, Myra--that's him!" and pointed toward the sidewalk.

"Whom?" enquired Mrs. Isham, calmly.

"Why John Merrick! John Merrick, of Portland, Oregon."

"And who is John Merrick?" asked the lady.

"One of the richest men in the world, and the best client our house
has. Isn't he a queer looking fellow? And dresses like a tramp. But
he's worth from eighty to ninety millions, at least, and controls most
of the canning and tin-plate industries of America. I wonder what
brought him into this neighborhood?"

Louise drew back from the window, pale and trembling. Then she caught
up a shawl and rushed from the room. Uncle John must be overtaken and
brought back, at all hazards.

The elevator was coming down, fortunately, and she descended quickly
and reached the street, where she peered eagerly up and down for the
round, plump figure of the little millionaire. But by some strange
chance he had already turned a corner and disappeared.

While she hesitated the young man came briskly up, swinging his cane.

"Why, Miss Louise," he said in some surprise, "were you, by good
chance, waiting for me?"

"No, indeed," she answered, with a laugh; "I've been saying good-bye
to my rich uncle, John Merrick, of Portland, who has just called."

"John Merrick, the tin-plate magnate? Is he your uncle?"

"My father's own brother," she answered, gaily. "Come upstairs,
please. Mother will be glad to see you!"




CHAPTER XXVIII.

PATSY LOSES HER JOB.


Uncle John reached Willing Square before Patsy and her father
returned, but soon afterward they arrived in an antiquated carriage
surrounded by innumerable bundles.

"The driver's a friend of mine," explained the Major, "and he moved us
for fifty cents, which is less than half price. We didn't bring a bit
of the furniture or beds, for there's no place here to put them; but
as the rent at Becker's flat is paid to the first of next month, we'll
have plenty of time to auction 'em all off."

The rest of the day was spent most delightfully in establishing
themselves in the new home. It didn't take the girl long to put her
few belongings into the closets and drawers, but there were a thousand
little things to examine in the rooms and she made some important
discovery at every turn.

"Daddy," she said, impressively, "it must have cost a big fortune to
furnish these little rooms. They're full of very expensive things, and
none of the grand houses Madam Borne has sent me to is any finer than
ours. I'm sure the place is too good for us, who are working people.
Do you think we ought to stay here?"

"The Doyles," answered the Major, very seriously, "are one of the
greatest and most aristocratic families in all Ireland, which is the
most aristocratic country in the world. If I only had our pedigree I
could prove it to you easily. There's nothing too good for an Irish
gentleman, even if he condescends to bookkeeping to supply the
immediate necessities of life; and as you're me own daughter,
Patricia, though a Merrick on your poor sainted mother's side, you're
entitled to all you can get honestly. Am I right, Uncle John, or do I
flatter myself?"

Uncle John stroked the girl's head softly.

"You are quite right," he said. "There is nothing too good for a
brave, honest girl who's heart is in the right place."

"And that's Patsy," declared the Major, as if the question were
finally settled.

On Monday morning Mary had a dainty breakfast all ready for them at
seven o'clock, and Patsy and her father departed with light hearts for
their work. Uncle John rode part way down town with them.

"I'm going to buy my new suit, today, and a new necktie," he said.

"Don't let them rob you," was Patsy's parting injunction. "Is your
money all safe? And if you buy a ten dollar suit of clothes the dealer
ought to throw in the necktie to bind the bargain. And see that
they're all wool, Uncle John."

"What, the neckties?"

"No, the clothes. Good-bye, and don't be late to dinner. Mary might
scold."

"I'll remember. Good-bye, my dear."

Patsy was almost singing for joy when she walked into Madam Borne's
hair-dressing establishment.

"Don't take off your things," said the Madam, sharply, "Your services
are no longer required."

Patsy looked at her in amazement. Doubtless she hadn't heard aright.

"I have another girl in your place," continued Madam Borne, "so I'll
bid you good morning."

Patsy's heart was beating fast.

"Do you mean I'm discharged?" she asked, with a catch in her voice.

"That's it precisely."

"Have I done anything wrong, Madam?"

"It isn't that," said Madam, pettishly. "I simply do not require your
services. You are paid up to Saturday night, and I owe you nothing.
Now, run along."

Patsy stood looking at her and wondering what to do. To lose this
place was certainly a great calamity.

"You'll give me a testimonial, won't you, Madam?" she asked,
falteringly.

"I don't give testimonials," was the reply.

"Do run away, child; I'm very busy this morning."

Patsy went away, all her happiness turned to bitter grief. What would
the Major say, and what were they to do without her wages? Then she
remembered Willing Square, and was a little comforted. Money was not
as necessary now as it had been before.

Nevertheless, she applied to one or two hair-dressers for employment,
and met with abrupt refusals. They had all the help they needed. So
she decided to go back home and think it over, before taking further
action.

It was nearly ten o'clock when she fitted her pass-key into the carved
door of Apartment D, and when she entered the pretty living-room she
found an elderly lady seated there, who arose to greet her.

"Miss Doyle?" enquired the lady.

"Yes, ma'am," said Patsy.

"I am Mrs. Wilson, and I have been engaged to give you private
instruction from ten to twelve every morning."

Patsy plumped down upon a chair and looked her amazement.

"May I ask who engaged you?" she ventured to enquire.

"A gentleman from the bank of Isham, Marvin & Co. made the
arrangement. May I take off my things?"

"If you please," said the girl, quietly. Evidently this explained why
Madam Borne had discharged her so heartlessly. The gentleman from
Isham, Marvin & Co. had doubtless interviewed the Madam and told her
what to do. And then, knowing she would be at liberty, he had sent her
this private instructor.

The girl felt that the conduct of her life had been taken out of her
own hands entirely, and that she was now being guided and cared for by
her unknown friend and benefactor. And although she was inclined to
resent the loss of her independence, at first, her judgment told her
it would not only be wise but to her great advantage to submit.

She found Mrs. Wilson a charming and cultivated lady, who proved so
gracious and kindly that the girl felt quite at ease in her presence.
She soon discovered how woefully ignorant Patsy was, and arranged a
course of instruction that would be of most benefit to her.

"I have been asked to prepare you to enter a girls' college," she
said, "and if you are attentive and studious I shall easily accomplish
the task."

Patsy invited her to stay to luncheon, which Mary served in the cosy
dining-room, and then Mrs. Wilson departed and left her alone to think
over this new example of her unknown friend's thoughtful care.

At three o'clock the door-bell rang and Mary ushered in another
strange person--a pretty, fair-haired young lady, this time, who said
she was to give Miss Doyle lessons on the piano.

Patsy was delighted. It was the one accomplishment she most longed to
acquire, and she entered into the first lesson with an eagerness that
made her teacher smile approvingly.

Meantime the Major was having his own surprises. At the office the
manager met him on his arrival and called him into his private room.

"Major Doyle," said he, "it is with great regret that we part with
you, for you have served our house most faithfully."

The Major was nonplussed.

"But," continued the manager, "our bankers, Messers. Isham, Marvin
& Co., have asked us to spare you for them, as they have a place
requiring a man of your abilities where you can do much better than
with us. Take this card, sir, and step over to the bankers and enquire
for Mr. Marvin. I congratulate you, Major Doyle, on your advancement,
which I admit is fully deserved."

The Major seemed dazed. Like a man walking in a dream he made his way
to the great banking house, and sent in the card to Mr. Marvin.

That gentleman greeted him most cordially.

"We want you to act as special auditor of accounts," said he. "It is a
place of much responsibility, but your duties will not be arduous. You
will occupy Private Office No. 11, and your hours are only from 10
to 12 each morning. After that you will be at liberty. The salary,
I regret to say, is not commensurate with your value, being merely
twenty-four hundred a year; but as you will have part of the day to
yourself you will doubtless be able to supplement that sum in other
ways. Is this satisfactory, sir?"

"Quite so," answered the Major. Twenty-four hundred a year! And only
two hours' work! Quite satisfactory, indeed!

His little office was very cosy, too; and the work of auditing the
accounts of the most important customers of the house required
accuracy but no amount of labor. It was an ideal occupation for a man
of his years and limited training.

He stayed in the office until two o'clock that day, in order to get
fully acquainted with the details of his work. Then he closed his
desk, went to luncheon, which he enjoyed amazingly, and then decided
to return to Willing Square and await Patsy's return from Madam
Borne's.

As he let himself in he heard an awkward drumming and strumming on the
piano, and peering slyly through the opening in the portierre he was
startled to find Patsy herself making the dreadful noise, while a
pretty girl sat beside her directing the movements of her fingers.

The Major watched for several minutes, in silent but amazed
exultation; then he tiptoed softly to his room to smoke a cigar and
wait until his daughter was at liberty to hear his great news and
explain her own adventures.

When Uncle John came home to dinner he found father and daughter
seated happily together in a loving embrace, their faces wreathed with
ecstatic smiles that were wonderful to behold.

Uncle John was radiant in a brand new pepper-and-salt suit of clothes
that fitted his little round form perfectly. Patsy marvelled that he
could get such a handsome outfit for the money, for Uncle John had on
new linen and a new hat and even a red-bordered handkerchief for the
coat pocket--besides the necktie, and the necktie was of fine silk and
in the latest fashion.

The transformation was complete, and Uncle John had suddenly become an
eminently respectable old gentleman, with very little to criticise in
his appearance.

"Do I match the flat, now?" he asked.

"To a dot!" declared Patsy. "So come to dinner, for it's ready and
waiting, and the Major and I have some wonderful fairy tales to tell
you."




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE MAJOR DEMANDS AN EXPLANATION.


That was a happy week, indeed. Patsy devoted all her spare time to her
lessons, but the house itself demanded no little attention. She would
not let Mary dust the ornaments or arrange the rooms at all, but
lovingly performed those duties herself, and soon became an ideal
housekeeper, as Uncle John approvingly remarked.

And as she flitted from room to room she sang such merry songs that it
was a delight to hear her, and the Major was sure to get home from the
city in time to listen to the strumming of the piano at three o'clock,
from the recess of his own snug chamber.

Uncle John went to the city every morning, and at first this
occasioned no remark. Patsy was too occupied to pay much attention to
her uncle's coming and going, and the Major was indifferent, being
busy admiring Patsy's happiness and congratulating himself on his own
good fortune.

The position at the bank had raised the good man's importance several
notches. The clerks treated him with fine consideration and the heads
of the firm were cordial and most pleasant. His fine, soldierly figure
and kindly, white-moustached face, conferred a certain dignity upon
his employers, which they seemed to respect and appreciate.

It was on Wednesday that the Major encountered the name of John
Merrick on the books. The account was an enormous one, running into
millions in stocks and securities. The Major smiled.

"That's Uncle John's name," he reflected. "It would please him to know
he had a namesake so rich as this one."

The next day he noted that John Merrick's holdings were mostly in
western canning industries and tin-plate factories, and again he
recollected that Uncle John had once been a tinsmith. The connection
was rather curious.

But it was not until Saturday morning that the truth dawned upon him,
and struck him like a blow from a sledge-hammer.

He had occasion to visit Mr. Marvin's private office, but being told
that the gentleman was engaged with an important customer, he lingered
outside the door, waiting.

Presently the door was partly opened.

"Don't forget to sell two thousand of the Continental stock tomorrow,"
he heard a familiar voice say.

"I'll not forget, Mr. Merrick," answered the banker.

"And buy that property on Bleeker street at the price offered. It's a
fair proposition, and I need the land."

"Very well, Mr. Merrick. Would it not be better for me to send these
papers by a messenger to your house?"

"No; I'll take them myself. No one will rob me." And then the door
swung open and, chuckling in his usual whimsical fashion, Uncle John
came out, wearing his salt-and-pepper suit and stuffing; a bundle of
papers into his inside pocket.

The Major stared at him haughtily, but made no attempt to openly
recognize the man. Uncle John gave a start, laughed, and then walked
away briskly, throwing a hasty "good-bye" to the obsequious banker,
who followed him out, bowing low.

The Major returned to his office with a grave face, and sat for the
best part of three hours in a brown study. Then he took his hat and
went home.

Patsy asked anxiously if anything had happened, when she saw his face;
but the Major shook his head.

Uncle John arrived just in time for dinner, in a very genial mood,
and he and Patsy kept up a lively conversation at the table while the
Major looked stern every time he caught the little man's eye.

But Uncle John never minded. He was not even as meek and humble as
usual, but laughed and chatted with the freedom of a boy just out of
school, which made Patsy think the new clothes had improved him in
more ways than one.

When dinner was over the Major led them into the sitting-room, turned
up the lights, and then confronted the little man with a determined
and majestic air.

"Sir," said he, "give an account of yourself."

"Eh?"

"John Merrick, millionaire and impostor, who came into my family under
false pretenses and won our love and friendship when we didn't know
it, give an account of yourself!"

Patsy laughed.

"What are you up to, Daddy?" she demanded. "What has Uncle John been
doing?"

"Deceiving us, my dear."

"Nonsense," said Uncle John, lighting his old briar pipe, "you've been
deceiving yourselves."

"Didn't you convey the impression that you were poor?" demanded the
Major, sternly.

"No."

"Didn't you let Patsy take away your thirty-two dollars and forty-two
cents, thinking it was all you had?"

"Yes."

"Aren't you worth millions and millions of dollars--so many that you
can't count them yourself?"

"Perhaps."

"Then, sir," concluded the Major, mopping the perspiration from his
forehead and sitting down limply in his chair, "what do you mean by
it?"

Patsy stood pale and trembling, her round eyes fixed upon her uncle's
composed face.

"Uncle John!" she faltered.

"Yes, my dear."

"Is it all true? Are you so very rich?"

"Yes, my dear."

"And it's you that gave me this house, and--and everything else--and
got the Major his fine job, and me discharged, and--and--"

"Of course, Patsy. Why not?"

"Oh, Uncle John!"

She threw herself into his arms, sobbing happily as he clasped her
little form to his bosom. And the Major coughed and blew his nose, and
muttered unintelligible words into his handkerchief. Then Patsy sprang
up and rushed upon her father, crying;

"Oh, Daddy! Aren't you glad it's Uncle John?"

"I have still to hear his explanation," said the Major.

Uncle John beamed upon them. Perhaps he had never been so happy before
in all his life.

"I'm willing to explain," he said, lighting his pipe again and
settling himself in his chair. "But my story is a simple one, dear
friends, and not nearly so wonderful as you may imagine. My father had
a big family that kept him poor, and I was a tinsmith with little work
to be had in the village where we lived. So I started west, working my
way from town to town, until I got to Portland, Oregon.

"There was work in plenty there, making the tin cans in which salmon
and other fish is packed, and as I was industrious I soon had a shop
of my own, and supplied cans to the packers. The shop grew to be
a great factory, employing hundreds of men. Then I bought up the
factories of my competitors, so as to control the market, and as I
used so much tin-plate I became interested in the manufacture of this
product, and invested a good deal of money in the production and
perfection of American tin. My factories were now scattered all along
the coast, even to California, where I made the cans for the great
quantities of canned fruits they ship from that section every year.
Of course the business made me rich, and I bought real estate with my
extra money, and doubled my fortune again and again.

"I never married, for all my heart was in the business, and I thought
of nothing else. But a while ago a big consolidation of the canning
industries was effected, and the active management I resigned to other
hands, because I had grown old, and had too much money already.

"It was then that I remembered the family, and went back quietly to
the village where I was born. They were all dead or scattered,
I found; but because Jane had inherited a fortune in some way I
discovered where she lived and went to see her. I suppose it was
because my clothes were old and shabby that Jane concluded I was a
poor man and needed assistance; and I didn't take the trouble to
undeceive her.

"I also found my three nieces at Elmhurst, and it struck me it would
be a good time to study their characters; for like Jane I had a
fortune to leave behind me, and I was curious to find out which girl
was the most deserving. No one suspected my disguise. I don't usually
wear such poor clothes, you know; but I have grown to be careless of
dress in the west, and finding that I was supposed to be a poor man I
clung to that old suit like grim death to a grasshopper."

"It was very wicked of you," said Patsy, soberly, from her father's
lap.

"As it turned out," continued the little man, "Jane's desire to leave
her money to her nieces amounted to nothing, for the money wasn't
hers. But I must say it was kind of her to put me down for five
thousand dollars--now, wasn't it?"

The Major grinned.

"And that's the whole story, my friends. After Jane's death you
offered me a home--the best you had to give--and I accepted it. I had
to come to New York anyway, you know, for Isham, Marvin & Co. have
been my bankers for years, and there was considerable business to
transact with them. I think that's all, isn't it?"

"Then this house is yours?" said Patsy, wonderingly.

"No, my dear; the whole block belongs to you and here's the deed for
it," drawing a package of papers from his pocket. "It's a very good
property, Patsy, and the rents you get from the other five flats will
be a fortune in themselves."

For a time the three sat in silence. Then the girl whispered, softly:

"Why are you so good to me, Uncle John?"

"Just because I like you, Patsy, and you are my niece."

"And the other nieces?"

"Well, I don't mean they shall wait for my death to be made happy,"
answered Uncle John. "Here's a paper that gives to Louise's mother the
use of a hundred thousand dollars, as long as she lives. After that
Louise will have the money to do as she pleases with."

"How fine!" cried Patsy, clapping her hands joyfully.

"And here's another paper that gives Professor De Graf the use of
another hundred thousand. Beth is to have it when he dies. She's a
sensible girl, and will take good care of it."

"Indeed she will!" said Patsy.

"And now," said Uncle John, "I want to know if I can keep my little
room in your apartments, Patsy; or if you'd prefer me to find another
boarding place."

"Your home is here as long as you live, Uncle John. I never meant to
part with you, when I thought you poor, and I'll not desert you now
that I know you're rich."

"Well said, Patsy!" cried the Major.

And Uncle John smiled and kissed the girl and then lighted his pipe
again, for it had gone out.



