

A CHRISTMAS SERMON


By the time this paper appears, I shall have been talking for twelve
months;[1] and it is thought I should take my leave in a formal and
seasonable manner. Valedictory eloquence is rare, and death-bed sayings
have not often hit the mark of the occasion. Charles Second, wit and
sceptic, a man whose life had been one long lesson in human incredulity,
an easy-going comrade, a manoeuvring king--remembered and embodied all
his wit and scepticism along with more than his usual good humour in the
famous "I am afraid, gentlemen, I am an unconscionable time a-dying."


I


An unconscionable time a-dying--there is the picture ("I am afraid,
gentlemen,") of your life and of mine. The sands run out, and the hours
are "numbered and imputed," and the days go by; and when the last of
these finds us, we have been a long time dying, and what else? The very
length is something, if we reach that hour of separation undishonoured;
and to have lived at all is doubtless (in the soldierly expression) to
have served. There is a tale in Tacitus of how the veterans mutinied in
the German wilderness; of how they mobbed Germanicus, clamouring to go
home; and of how, seizing their general's hand, these old, war-worn
exiles passed his finger along their toothless gums. _Sunt lacrymae
rerum_: this was the most eloquent of the songs of Simeon. And when a
man has lived to a fair age, he bears his marks of service. He may have
never been remarked upon the breach at the head of the army; at least he
shall have lost his teeth on the camp bread.

The idealism of serious people in this age of ours is of a noble
character. It never seems to them that they have served enough; they
have a fine impatience of their virtues. It were perhaps more modest to
be singly thankful that we are no worse. It is not only our enemies,
those desperate characters--it is we ourselves who know not what we
do;--thence springs the glimmering hope that perhaps we do better than
we think: that to scramble through this random business with hands
reasonably clean, to have played the part of a man or woman with some
reasonable fulness, to have often resisted the diabolic, and at the end
to be still resisting it, is for the poor human soldier to have done
right well. To ask to see some fruit of our endeavour is but a
transcendental way of serving for reward; and what we take to be
contempt of self is only greed of hire.

And again if we require so much of ourselves, shall we not require much
of others? If we do not genially judge our own deficiencies, is it not
to be feared we shall be even stern to the trespasses of others? And he
who (looking back upon his own life) can see no more than that he has
been unconscionably long a-dying, will he not be tempted to think his
neighbour unconscionably long of getting hanged? It is probable that
nearly all who think of conduct at all, think of it too much; it is
certain we all think too much of sin. We are not damned for doing wrong,
but for not doing right; Christ would never hear of negative morality;
_thou shalt_ was ever his word, with which he superseded _thou shalt
not_. To make our idea of morality centre on forbidden acts is to defile
the imagination and to introduce into our judgments of our fellow-men a
secret element of gusto. If a thing is wrong for us, we should not dwell
upon the thought of it; or we shall soon dwell upon it with inverted
pleasure. If we cannot drive it from our minds--one thing of two: either
our creed is in the wrong and we must more indulgently remodel it; or
else, if our morality be in the right, we are criminal lunatics and
should place our persons in restraint. A mark of such unwholesomely
divided minds is the passion for interference with others: the Fox
without the Tail was of this breed, but had (if his biographer is to be
trusted) a certain antique civility now out of date. A man may have a
flaw, a weakness, that unfits him for the duties of life, that spoils
his temper, that threatens his integrity, or that betrays him into
cruelty. It has to be conquered; but it must never be suffered to
engross his thoughts. The true duties lie all upon the farther side,
and must be attended to with a whole mind so soon as this preliminary
clearing of the decks has been effected. In order that he may be kind
and honest, it may be needful he should become a total abstainer; let
him become so then, and the next day let him forget the circumstance.
Trying to be kind and honest will require all his thoughts; a mortified
appetite is never a wise companion; in so far as he has had to mortify
an appetite, he will still be the worse man; and of such an one a great
deal of cheerfulness will be required in judging life, and a great deal
of humility in judging others.

It may be argued again that dissatisfaction with our life's endeavour
springs in some degree from dulness. We require higher tasks, because
we do not recognise the height of those we have. Trying to be kind and
honest seems an affair too simple and too inconsequential for gentlemen
of our heroic mould; we had rather set ourselves to something bold,
arduous, and conclusive; we had rather found a schism or suppress a
heresy, cut off a hand or mortify an appetite. But the task before us,
which is to co-endure with our existence, is rather one of microscopic
fineness, and the heroism required is that of patience. There is no
cutting of the Gordian knots of life; each must be smilingly unravelled.

To be honest, to be kind--to earn a little and to spend a little less,
to make upon the whole a family happier for his presence, to renounce
when that shall be necessary and not be embittered, to keep a few
friends but these without capitulation--above all, on the same grim
condition, to keep friends with himself--here is a task for all that a
man has of fortitude and delicacy. He has an ambitious soul who would
ask more; he has a hopeful spirit who should look in such an enterprise
to be successful. There is indeed one element in human destiny that not
blindness itself can controvert: whatever else we are intended to do, we
are not intended to succeed; failure is the fate allotted. It is so in
every art and study; it is so above all in the continent art of living
well. Here is a pleasant thought for the year's end or for the end of
life: Only self-deception will be satisfied, and there need be no
despair for the despairer.




II


But Christmas is not only the mile-mark of another year, moving us to
thoughts of self-examination: it is a season, from all its associations,
whether domestic or religious, suggesting thoughts of joy. A man
dissatisfied with his endeavours is a man tempted to sadness. And in the
midst of the winter, when his life runs lowest and he is reminded of the
empty chairs of his beloved, it is well he should be condemned to this
fashion of the smiling face. Noble disappointment, noble self-denial are
not to be admired, not even to be pardoned, if they bring bitterness.
It is one thing to enter the kingdom of heaven maim; another to maim
yourself and stay without. And the kingdom of heaven is of the
childlike, of those who are easy to please, who love and who give
pleasure. Mighty men of their hands, the smiters and the builders and
the judges, have lived long and done sternly and yet preserved this
lovely character; and among our carpet interests and twopenny concerns,
the shame were indelible if _we_ should lose it. Gentleness and
cheerfulness, these come before all morality; they are the perfect
duties. And it is the trouble with moral men that they have neither one
nor other. It was the moral man, the Pharisee, whom Christ could not
away with. If your morals make you dreary, depend upon it they are
wrong. I do not say "give them up," for they may be all you have; but
conceal them like a vice, lest they should spoil the lives of better
and simpler people.

A strange temptation attends upon man: to keep his eye on pleasures,
even when he will not share in them; to aim all his morals against
them. This very year a lady (singular iconoclast!) proclaimed a crusade
against dolls; and the racy sermon against lust is a feature of the age.
I venture to call such moralists insincere. At any excess or perversion
of a natural appetite, their lyre sounds of itself with relishing
denunciations; but for all displays of the truly diabolic--envy, malice,
the mean lie, the mean silence, the calumnious truth, the backbiter, the
petty tyrant, the peevish poisoner of family life--their standard is
quite different. These are wrong, they will admit, yet somehow not so
wrong; there is no zeal in their assault on them, no secret element of
gusto warms up the sermon; it is for things not wrong in themselves that
they reserve the choicest of their indignation. A man may naturally
disclaim all moral kinship with the Reverend Mr. Zola or the hobgoblin
old lady of the dolls; for these are gross and naked instances. And
yet in each of us some similar element resides. The sight of a pleasure
in which we cannot or else will not share moves us to a particular
impatience. It may be because we are envious, or because we are
sad, or because we dislike noise and romping--being so refined, or
because--being so philosophic--we have an overweighing sense of life's
gravity: at least, as we go on in years, we are all tempted to frown
upon our neighbour's pleasures. People are nowadays so fond of
resisting temptations; here is one to be resisted. They are fond of
self-denial; here is a propensity that cannot be too peremptorily
denied. There is an idea abroad among moral people that they should
make their neighbours good. One person I have to make good: myself. But
my duty to my neighbour is much more nearly expressed by saying that
I have to make him happy--if I may.




III


Happiness and goodness, according to canting moralists, stand in the
relation of effect and cause. There was never anything less proved or
less probable: our happiness is never in our own hands; we inherit our
constitution; we stand buffet among friends and enemies; we may be so
built as to feel a sneer or an aspersion with unusual keenness, and so
circumstanced as to be unusually exposed to them; we may have nerves
very sensitive to pain, and be afflicted with a disease very painful.
Virtue will not help us, and it is not meant to help us. It is not even
its own reward, except for the self-centred and--I had almost said--the
unamiable. No man can pacify his conscience; if quiet be what he want,
he shall do better to let that organ perish from disuse. And to avoid
the penalties of the law, and the minor _capitis diminutio_ of social
ostracism, is an affair of wisdom--of cunning, if you will--and not of
virtue.

In his own life, then, a man is not to expect happiness, only to profit
by it gladly when it shall arise; he is on duty here; he knows not how
or why, and does not need to know; he knows not for what hire, and must
not ask. Somehow or other, though he does not know what goodness is, he
must try to be good; somehow or other, though he cannot tell what will
do it, he must try to give happiness to others. And no doubt there comes
in here a frequent clash of duties. How far is he to make his neighbour
happy? How far must he respect that smiling face, so easy to cloud, so
hard to brighten again? And how far, on the other side, is he bound to
be his brother's keeper and the prophet of his own morality? How far
must he resent evil?

The difficulty is that we have little guidance; Christ's sayings on the
point being hard to reconcile with each other, and (the most of them)
hard to accept. But the truth of his teaching would seem to be this: in
our own person and fortune, we should be ready to accept and to pardon
all; it is _our_ cheek we are to turn, _r_ coat that we are to give
away to the man who has taken _our_ cloak. But when another's face is
buffeted, perhaps a little of the lion will become us best. That we are
to suffer others to be injured, and stand by, is not conceivable and
surely not desirable. Revenge, says Bacon, is a kind of wild justice;
its judgments at least are delivered by an insane judge; and in our
own quarrel we can see nothing truly and do nothing wisely. But in the
quarrel of our neighbour, let us be more bold. One person's happiness
is as sacred as another's; when we cannot defend both, let us defend
one with a stout heart. It is only in so far as we are doing this, that
we have any right to interfere: the defence of B is our only ground of
action against A. A has as good a right to go to the devil, as we to go
to glory; and neither knows what he does.

The truth is that all these interventions and denunciations and militant
mongerings of moral half-truths, though they be sometimes needful,
though they are often enjoyable, do yet belong to an inferior grade of
duties. Ill-temper and envy and revenge find here an arsenal of pious
disguises; this is the playground of inverted lusts. With a little more
patience and a little less temper, a gentler and wiser method might be
found in almost every case; and the knot that we cut by some fine
heady quarrel-scene in private life, or, in public affairs, by some
denunciatory act against what we are pleased to call our neighbour's
vices, might yet have been unwoven by the hand of sympathy.




IV


To look back upon the past year, and see how little we have striven
and to what small purpose: and how often we have been cowardly and
hung back, or temerarious and rushed unwisely in; and how every day
and all day long we have transgressed the law of kindness;--it may
seem a paradox, but in the bitterness of these discoveries, a certain
consolation resides. Life is not designed to minister to a man's vanity.
He goes upon his long business most of the time with a hanging head, and
all the time like a blind child. Full of rewards and pleasures as it
is--so that to see the day break or the moon rise, or to meet a friend,
or to hear the dinner-call when he is hungry, fills him with surprising
joys--this world is yet for him no abiding city. Friendships fall
through, health fails, weariness assails him; year after year, he must
thumb the hardly varying record of his own weakness and folly. It is a
friendly process of detachment. When the time comes that he should go,
there need be few illusions left about himself. _Here lies one who meant
well, tried a little, failed much_:--surely that may be his epitaph, of
which he need not be ashamed. Nor will he complain at the summons which
calls a defeated soldier from the field: defeated, ay, if he were Paul
or Marcus Aurelius!--but if there is still one inch of fight in his old
spirit, undishonoured. The faith which sustained him in his life-long
blindness and life-long disappointment will scarce even be required in
this last formality of laying down his arms. Give him a march with his
old bones; there, out of the glorious sun-coloured earth, out of the day
and the dust and the ecstasy--there goes another Faithful Failure!

From a recent book of verse, where there is more than one such beautiful
and manly poem, I take this memorial piece: it says better than I can,
what I love to think; let it be our parting word.

    "A late lark twitters from the quiet skies;
    And from the west,
    Where the sun, his day's work ended,
    Lingers as in content,
    There falls on the old, gray city
    An influence luminous and serene,
    A shining peace.

    "The smoke ascends
    In a rosy-and-golden haze. The spires
    Shine, and are changed. In the valley
    Shadows rise. The lark sings on. The sun,
    Closing his benediction,
    Sinks, and the darkening air
    Thrills with a sense of the triumphing night--
    Night, with her train of stars
    And her great gift of sleep.

    "So be my passing!
    My task accomplished and the long day done,
    My wages taken, and in my heart
    Some late lark singing,
    Let me be gathered to the quiet west,
    The sundown splendid and serene,
    Death."[2]




LEAVES FROM THE NOTEBOOK OF AN EMIGRANT BETWEEN NEW YORK AND SAN 
FRANCISCO


MONDAY. - It was, if I remember rightly, five o'clock when we were 
all signalled to be present at the Ferry Depot of the railroad.  An 
emigrant ship had arrived at New York on the Saturday night, 
another on the Sunday morning, our own on Sunday afternoon, a 
fourth early on Monday; and as there is no emigrant train on Sunday 
a great part of the passengers from these four ships was 
concentrated on the train by which I was to travel.  There was a 
babel of bewildered men, women, and children.  The wretched little 
booking-office, and the baggage-room, which was not much larger, 
were crowded thick with emigrants, and were heavy and rank with the 
atmosphere of dripping clothes.  Open carts full of bedding stood 
by the half-hour in the rain.  The officials loaded each other with 
recriminations.  A bearded, mildewed little man, whom I take to 
have been an emigrant agent, was all over the place, his mouth full 
of brimstone, blustering and interfering.  It was plain that the 
whole system, if system there was, had utterly broken down under 
the strain of so many passengers.

My own ticket was given me at once, and an oldish man, who 
preserved his head in the midst of this turmoil, got my baggage 
registered, and counselled me to stay quietly where I was till he 
should give me the word to move.  I had taken along with me a small 
valise, a knapsack, which I carried on my shoulders, and in the bag 
of my railway rug the whole of BANCROFT'S HISTORY OF THE UNITED 
STATES, in six fat volumes.  It was as much as I could carry with 
convenience even for short distances, but it insured me plenty of 
clothing, and the valise was at that moment, and often after, 
useful for a stool.  I am sure I sat for an hour in the baggage-
room, and wretched enough it was; yet, when at last the word was 
passed to me and I picked up my bundles and got under way, it was 
only to exchange discomfort for downright misery and danger.

I followed the porters into a long shed reaching downhill from West 
Street to the river.  It was dark, the wind blew clean through it 
from end to end; and here I found a great block of passengers and 
baggage, hundreds of one and tons of the other.  I feel I shall 
have a difficulty to make myself believed; and certainly the scene 
must have been exceptional, for it was too dangerous for daily 
repetition.  It was a tight jam; there was no fair way through the 
mingled mass of brute and living obstruction.  Into the upper 
skirts of the crowd porters, infuriated by hurry and overwork, 
clove their way with shouts.  I may say that we stood like sheep, 
and that the porters charged among us like so many maddened sheep-
dogs; and I believe these men were no longer answerable for their 
acts.  It mattered not what they were carrying, they drove straight 
into the press, and when they could get no farther, blindly 
discharged their barrowful.  With my own hand, for instance, I 
saved the life of a child as it sat upon its mother's knee, she 
sitting on a box; and since I heard of no accident, I must suppose 
that there were many similar interpositions in the course of the 
evening.  It will give some idea of the state of mind to which we 
were reduced if I tell you that neither the porter nor the mother 
of the child paid the least attention to my act.  It was not till 
some time after that I understood what I had done myself, for to 
ward off heavy boxes seemed at the moment a natural incident of 
human life.  Cold, wet, clamour, dead opposition to progress, such 
as one encounters in an evil dream, had utterly daunted the 
spirits.  We had accepted this purgatory as a child accepts the 
conditions of the world.  For my part, I shivered a little, and my 
back ached wearily; but I believe I had neither a hope nor a fear, 
and all the activities of my nature had become tributary to one 
massive sensation of discomfort.

At length, and after how long an interval I hesitate to guess, the 
crowd began to move, heavily straining through itself.  About the 
same time some lamps were lighted, and threw a sudden flare over 
the shed.  We were being filtered out into the river boat for 
Jersey City.  You may imagine how slowly this filtering proceeded, 
through the dense, choking crush, every one overladen with packages 
or children, and yet under the necessity of fishing out his ticket 
by the way; but it ended at length for me, and I found myself on 
deck under a flimsy awning and with a trifle of elbow-room to 
stretch and breathe in.  This was on the starboard; for the bulk of 
the emigrants stuck hopelessly on the port side, by which we had 
entered.  In vain the seamen shouted to them to move on, and 
threatened them with shipwreck.  These poor people were under a 
spell of stupor, and did not stir a foot.  It rained as heavily as 
ever, but the wind now came in sudden claps and capfuls, not 
without danger to a boat so badly ballasted as ours; and we crept 
over the river in the darkness, trailing one paddle in the water 
like a wounded duck, and passed ever and again by huge, illuminated 
steamers running many knots, and heralding their approach by 
strains of music.  The contrast between these pleasure embarkations 
and our own grim vessel, with her list to port and her freight of 
wet and silent emigrants, was of that glaring description which we 
count too obvious for the purposes of art.

The landing at Jersey City was done in a stampede.  I had a fixed 
sense of calamity, and to judge by conduct, the same persuasion was 
common to us all.  A panic selfishness, like that produced by fear, 
presided over the disorder of our landing.  People pushed, and 
elbowed, and ran, their families following how they could.  
Children fell, and were picked up to be rewarded by a blow.  One 
child, who had lost her parents, screamed steadily and with 
increasing shrillness, as though verging towards a fit; an official 
kept her by him, but no one else seemed so much as to remark her 
distress; and I am ashamed to say that I ran among the rest.  I was 
so weary that I had twice to make a halt and set down my bundles in 
the hundred yards or so between the pier and the railway station, 
so that I was quite wet by the time that I got under cover.  There 
was no waiting-room, no refreshment room; the cars were locked; and 
for at least another hour, or so it seemed, we had to camp upon the 
draughty, gaslit platform.  I sat on my valise, too crushed to 
observe my neighbours; but as they were all cold, and wet, and 
weary, and driven stupidly crazy by the mismanagement to which we 
had been subjected, I believe they can have been no happier than 
myself.  I bought half-a-dozen oranges from a boy, for oranges and 
nuts were the only refection to be had.  As only two of them had 
even a pretence of juice, I threw the other four under the cars, 
and beheld, as in a dream, grown people and children groping on the 
track after my leavings.

At last we were admitted into the cars, utterly dejected, and far 
from dry.  For my own part, I got out a clothes-brush, and brushed 
my trousers as hard as I could till I had dried them and warmed my 
blood into the bargain; but no one else, except my next neighbour 
to whom I lent the brush, appeared to take the least precaution.  
As they were, they composed themselves to sleep.  I had seen the 
lights of Philadelphia, and been twice ordered to change carriages 
and twice countermanded, before I allowed myself to follow their 
example.

TUESDAY. - When I awoke, it was already day; the train was standing 
idle; I was in the last carriage, and, seeing some others strolling 
to and fro about the lines, I opened the door and stepped forth, as 
from a caravan by the wayside.  We were near no station, nor even, 
as far as I could see, within reach of any signal.  A green, open, 
undulating country stretched away upon all sides.  Locust trees and 
a single field of Indian corn gave it a foreign grace and interest; 
but the contours of the land were soft and English.  It was not 
quite England, neither was it quite France; yet like enough either 
to seem natural in my eyes.  And it was in the sky, and not upon 
the earth, that I was surprised to find a change.  Explain it how 
you may, and for my part I cannot explain it at all, the sun rises 
with a different splendour in America and Europe.  There is more 
clear gold and scarlet in our old country mornings; more purple, 
brown, and smoky orange in those of the new.  It may be from habit, 
but to me the coming of day is less fresh and inspiriting in the 
latter; it has a duskier glory, and more nearly resembles sunset; 
it seems to fit some subsequential, evening epoch of the world, as 
though America were in fact, and not merely in fancy, farther from 
the orient of Aurora and the springs of day.  I thought so then, by 
the railroad side in Pennsylvania, and I have thought so a dozen 
times since in far distant parts of the continent.  If it be an 
illusion it is one very deeply rooted, and in which my eyesight is 
accomplice.

Soon after a train whisked by, announcing and accompanying its 
passage by the swift beating of a sort of chapel bell upon the 
engine; and as it was for this we had been waiting, we were 
summoned by the cry of "All aboard!" and went on again upon our 
way.  The whole line, it appeared, was topsy-turvy; an accident at 
midnight having thrown all the traffic hours into arrear.  We paid 
for this in the flesh, for we had no meals all that day.  Fruit we 
could buy upon the cars; and now and then we had a few minutes at 
some station with a meagre show of rolls and sandwiches for sale; 
but we were so many and so ravenous that, though I tried at every 
opportunity, the coffee was always exhausted before I could elbow 
my way to the counter.

Our American sunrise had ushered in a noble summer's day.  There 
was not a cloud; the sunshine was baking; yet in the woody river 
valleys among which we wound our way, the atmosphere preserved a 
sparkling freshness till late in the afternoon.  It had an inland 
sweetness and variety to one newly from the sea; it smelt of woods, 
rivers, and the delved earth.  These, though in so far a country, 
were airs from home.  I stood on the platform by the hour; and as I 
saw, one after another, pleasant villages, carts upon the highway 
and fishers by the stream, and heard cockcrows and cheery voices in 
the distance, and beheld the sun, no longer shining blankly on the 
plains of ocean, but striking among shapely hills and his light 
dispersed and coloured by a thousand accidents of form and surface, 
I began to exult with myself upon this rise in life like a man who 
had come into a rich estate.  And when I had asked the name of a 
river from the brakesman, and heard that it was called the 
Susquehanna, the beauty of the name seemed to be part and parcel of 
the beauty of the land.  As when Adam with divine fitness named the 
creatures, so this word Susquehanna was at once accepted by the 
fancy.  That was the name, as no other could be, for that shining 
river and desirable valley.

None can care for literature in itself who do not take a special 
pleasure in the sound of names; and there is no part of the world 
where nomenclature is so rich, poetical, humorous, and picturesque 
as the United States of America.  All times, races, and languages 
have brought their contribution.  Pekin is in the same State with 
Euclid, with Bellefontaine, and with Sandusky.  Chelsea, with its 
London associations of red brick, Sloane Square, and the King's 
Road, is own suburb to stately and primeval Memphis; there they 
have their seat, translated names of cities, where the Mississippi 
runs by Tennessee and Arkansas; and both, while I was crossing the 
continent, lay, watched by armed men, in the horror and isolation 
of a plague.  Old, red Manhattan lies, like an Indian arrowhead 
under a steam factory, below anglified New York.  The names of the 
States and Territories themselves form a chorus of sweet and most 
romantic vocables:  Delaware, Ohio, Indiana, Florida, Dakota, Iowa, 
Wyoming, Minnesota, and the Carolinas; there are few poems with a 
nobler music for the ear:  a songful, tuneful land; and if the new 
Homer shall arise from the Western continent, his verse will be 
enriched, his pages sing spontaneously, with the names of states 
and cities that would strike the fancy in a business circular.

Late in the evening we were landed in a waiting-room at Pittsburg.  
I had now under my charge a young and sprightly Dutch widow with 
her children; these I was to watch over providentially for a 
certain distance farther on the way; but as I found she was 
furnished with a basket of eatables, I left her in the waiting-room 
to seek a dinner for myself.  I mention this meal, not only because 
it was the first of which I had partaken for about thirty hours, 
but because it was the means of my first introduction to a coloured 
gentleman.  He did me the honour to wait upon me after a fashion, 
while I was eating; and with every word, look, and gesture marched 
me farther into the country of surprise.  He was indeed strikingly 
unlike the negroes of Mrs. Beecher Stowe, or the Christy Minstrels 
of my youth.  Imagine a gentleman, certainly somewhat dark, but of 
a pleasant warm hue, speaking English with a slight and rather odd 
foreign accent, every inch a man of the world, and armed with 
manners so patronisingly superior that I am at a loss to name their 
parallel in England.  A butler perhaps rides as high over the 
unbutlered, but then he sets you right with a reserve and a sort of 
sighing patience which one is often moved to admire.  And again, 
the abstract butler never stoops to familiarity.  But the coloured 
gentleman will pass you a wink at a time; he is familiar like an 
upper form boy to a fag; he unbends to you like Prince Hal with 
Poins and Falstaff.  He makes himself at home and welcome.  Indeed, 
I may say, this waiter behaved himself to me throughout that supper 
much as, with us, a young, free, and not very self-respecting 
master might behave to a good-looking chambermaid.  I had come 
prepared to pity the poor negro, to put him at his ease, to prove 
in a thousand condescensions that I was no sharer in the prejudice 
of race; but I assure you I put my patronage away for another 
occasion, and had the grace to be pleased with that result.

Seeing he was a very honest fellow, I consulted him upon a point of 
etiquette:  if one should offer to tip the American waiter?  
Certainly not, he told me.  Never.  It would not do.  They 
considered themselves too highly to accept.  They would even resent 
the offer.  As for him and me, we had enjoyed a very pleasant 
conversation; he, in particular, had found much pleasure in my 
society; I was a stranger; this was exactly one of those rare 
conjunctures....  Without being very clear seeing, I can still 
perceive the sun at noonday; and the coloured gentleman deftly 
pocketed a quarter.

WEDNESDAY. - A little after midnight I convoyed my widow and 
orphans on board the train; and morning found us far into Ohio.  
This had early been a favourite home of my imagination; I have 
played at being in Ohio by the week, and enjoyed some capital sport 
there with a dummy gun, my person being still unbreeched.  My 
preference was founded on a work which appeared in CASSELL'S FAMILY 
PAPER, and was read aloud to me by my nurse.  It narrated the 
doings of one Custaloga, an Indian brave, who, in the last chapter, 
very obligingly washed the paint off his face and became Sir 
Reginald Somebody-or-other; a trick I never forgave him.  The idea 
of a man being an Indian brave, and then giving that up to be a 
baronet, was one which my mind rejected.  It offended 
verisimilitude, like the pretended anxiety of Robinson Crusoe and 
others to escape from uninhabited islands.

But Ohio was not at all as I had pictured it.  We were now on those 
great plains which stretch unbroken to the Rocky Mountains.  The 
country was flat like Holland, but far from being dull.  All 
through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Iowa, or for as much as I saw 
of them from the train and in my waking moments, it was rich and 
various, and breathed an elegance peculiar to itself.  The tall 
corn pleased the eye; the trees were graceful in themselves, and 
framed the plain into long, aerial vistas; and the clean, bright, 
gardened townships spoke of country fare and pleasant summer 
evenings on the stoop.  It was a sort of flat paradise; but, I am 
afraid, not unfrequented by the devil.  That morning dawned with 
such a freezing chill as I have rarely felt; a chill that was not 
perhaps so measurable by instrument, as it struck home upon the 
heart and seemed to travel with the blood.  Day came in with a 
shudder.  White mists lay thinly over the surface of the plain, as 
we see them more often on a lake; and though the sun had soon 
dispersed and drunk them up, leaving an atmosphere of fever heat 
and crystal pureness from horizon to horizon, the mists had still 
been there, and we knew that this paradise was haunted by killing 
damps and foul malaria.  The fences along the line bore but two 
descriptions of advertisement; one to recommend tobaccos, and the 
other to vaunt remedies against the ague.  At the point of day, and 
while we were all in the grasp of that first chill, a native of the 
state, who had got in at some way station, pronounced it, with a 
doctoral air, "a fever and ague morning."

The Dutch widow was a person of some character.  She had conceived 
at first sight a great aversion for the present writer, which she 
was at no pains to conceal.  But being a woman of a practical 
spirit, she made no difficulty about accepting my attentions, and 
encouraged me to buy her children fruits and candies, to carry all 
her parcels, and even to sleep upon the floor that she might profit 
by my empty seat.  Nay, she was such a rattle by nature, and, so 
powerfully moved to autobiographical talk, that she was forced, for 
want of a better, to take me into confidence and tell me the story 
of her life.  I heard about her late husband, who seemed to have 
made his chief impression by taking her out pleasuring on Sundays.  
I could tell you her prospects, her hopes, the amount of her 
fortune, the cost of her housekeeping by the week, and a variety of 
particular matters that are not usually disclosed except to 
friends.  At one station, she shook up her children to look at a 
man on the platform and say if he were not like Mr. Z.; while to me 
she explained how she had been keeping company with this Mr. Z., 
how far matters had proceeded, and how it was because of his 
desistance that she was now travelling to the West.  Then, when I 
was thus put in possession of the facts, she asked my judgment on 
that type of manly beauty.  I admired it to her heart's content.  
She was not, I think, remarkably veracious in talk, but broidered 
as fancy prompted, and built castles in the air out of her past; 
yet she had that sort of candour, to keep me, in spite of all these 
confidences, steadily aware of her aversion.  Her parting words 
were ingeniously honest.  "I am sure," said she, "we all OUGHT to 
be very much obliged to you."  I cannot pretend that she put me at 
my ease; but I had a certain respect for such a genuine dislike.  A 
poor nature would have slipped, in the course of these 
familiarities, into a sort of worthless toleration for me.

We reached Chicago in the evening.  I was turned out of the cars, 
bundled into an omnibus, and driven off through the streets to the 
station of a different railroad.  Chicago seemed a great and gloomy 
city.  I remember having subscribed, let us say sixpence, towards 
its restoration at the period of the fire; and now when I beheld 
street after street of ponderous houses and crowds of comfortable 
burghers, I thought it would be a graceful act for the corporation 
to refund that sixpence, or, at the least, to entertain me to a 
cheerful dinner.  But there was no word of restitution.  I was that 
city's benefactor, yet I was received in a third-class waiting-
room, and the best dinner I could get was a dish of ham and eggs at 
my own expense.

I can safely say, I have never been so dog-tired as that night in 
Chicago.  When it was time to start, I descended the platform like 
a man in a dream.  It was a long train, lighted from end to end; 
and car after car, as I came up with it, was not only filled but 
overflowing.  My valise, my knapsack, my rug, with those six 
ponderous tomes of Bancroft, weighed me double; I was hot, 
feverish, painfully athirst; and there was a great darkness over 
me, an internal darkness, not to be dispelled by gas.  When at last 
I found an empty bench, I sank into it like a bundle of rags, the 
world seemed to swim away into the distance, and my consciousness 
dwindled within me to a mere pin's head, like a taper on a foggy 
night.

When I came a little more to myself, I found that there had sat 
down beside me a very cheerful, rosy little German gentleman, 
somewhat gone in drink, who was talking away to me, nineteen to the 
dozen, as they say.  I did my best to keep up the conversation; for 
it seemed to me dimly as if something depended upon that.  I heard 
him relate, among many other things, that there were pickpockets on 
the train, who had already robbed a man of forty dollars and a 
return ticket; but though I caught the words, I do not think I 
properly understood the sense until next morning; and I believe I 
replied at the time that I was very glad to hear it.  What else he 
talked about I have no guess; I remember a gabbling sound of words, 
his profuse gesticulation, and his smile, which was highly 
explanatory:  but no more.  And I suppose I must have shown my 
confusion very plainly; for, first, I saw him knit his brows at me 
like one who has conceived a doubt; next, he tried me in German, 
supposing perhaps that I was unfamiliar with the English tongue; 
and finally, in despair, he rose and left me.  I felt chagrined; 
but my fatigue was too crushing for delay, and, stretching myself 
as far as that was possible upon the bench, I was received at once 
into a dreamless stupor.

The little German gentleman was only going a little way into the 
suburbs after a DINER FIN, and was bent on entertainment while the 
journey lasted.  Having failed with me, he pitched next upon 
another emigrant, who had come through from Canada, and was not one 
jot less weary than myself.  Nay, even in a natural state, as I 
found next morning when we scraped acquaintance, he was a heavy, 
uncommunicative man.  After trying him on different topics, it 
appears that the little German gentleman flounced into a temper, 
swore an oath or two, and departed from that car in quest of 
livelier society.  Poor little gentleman!  I suppose he thought an 
emigrant should be a rollicking, free-hearted blade, with a flask 
of foreign brandy and a long, comical story to beguile the moments 
of digestion.

THURSDAY. - I suppose there must be a cycle in the fatigue of 
travelling, for when I awoke next morning, I was entirely renewed 
in spirits and ate a hearty breakfast of porridge, with sweet milk, 
and coffee and hot cakes, at Burlington upon the Mississippi.  
Another long day's ride followed, with but one feature worthy of 
remark.  At a place called Creston, a drunken man got in.  He was 
aggressively friendly, but, according to English notions, not at 
all unpresentable upon a train.  For one stage he eluded the notice 
of the officials; but just as we were beginning to move out of the 
next station, Cromwell by name, by came the conductor.  There was a 
word or two of talk; and then the official had the man by the 
shoulders, twitched him from his seat, marched him through the car, 
and sent him flying on to the track.  It was done in three motions, 
as exact as a piece of drill.  The train was still moving slowly, 
although beginning to mend her pace, and the drunkard got his feet 
without a fall.  He carried a red bundle, though not so red as his 
cheeks; and he shook this menacingly in the air with one hand, 
while the other stole behind him to the region of the kidneys.  It 
was the first indication that I had come among revolvers, and I 
observed it with some emotion.  The conductor stood on the steps 
with one hand on his hip, looking back at him; and perhaps this 
attitude imposed upon the creature, for he turned without further 
ado, and went off staggering along the track towards Cromwell 
followed by a peal of laughter from the cars.  They were speaking 
English all about me, but I knew I was in a foreign land.

Twenty minutes before nine that night, we were deposited at the 
Pacific Transfer Station near Council Bluffs, on the eastern bank 
of the Missouri river.  Here we were to stay the night at a kind of 
caravanserai, set apart for emigrants.  But I gave way to a thirst 
for luxury, separated myself from my companions, and marched with 
my effects into the Union Pacific Hotel.  A white clerk and a 
coloured gentleman whom, in my plain European way, I should call 
the boots, were installed behind a counter like bank tellers.  They 
took my name, assigned me a number, and proceeded to deal with my 
packages.  And here came the tug of war.  I wished to give up my 
packages into safe keeping; but I did not wish to go to bed.  And 
this, it appeared, was impossible in an American hotel.

It was, of course, some inane misunderstanding, and sprang from my 
unfamiliarity with the language.  For although two nations use the 
same words and read the same books, intercourse is not conducted by 
the dictionary.  The business of life is not carried on by words, 
but in set phrases, each with a special and almost a slang 
signification.  Some international obscurity prevailed between me 
and the coloured gentleman at Council Bluffs; so that what I was 
asking, which seemed very natural to me, appeared to him a 
monstrous exigency.  He refused, and that with the plainness of the 
West.  This American manner of conducting matters of business is, 
at first, highly unpalatable to the European.  When we approach a 
man in the way of his calling, and for those services by which he 
earns his bread, we consider him for the time being our hired 
servant.  But in the American opinion, two gentlemen meet and have 
a friendly talk with a view to exchanging favours if they shall 
agree to please.  I know not which is the more convenient, nor even 
which is the more truly courteous.  The English stiffness 
unfortunately tends to be continued after the particular 
transaction is at an end, and thus favours class separations.  But 
on the other hand, these equalitarian plainnesses leave an open 
field for the insolence of Jack-in-office.

I was nettled by the coloured gentleman's refusal, and unbuttoned 
my wrath under the similitude of ironical submission.  I knew 
nothing, I said, of the ways of American hotels; but I had no 
desire to give trouble.  If there was nothing for it but to get to 
bed immediately, let him say the word, and though it was not my 
habit, I should cheerfully obey.

He burst into a shout of laughter.  "Ah!" said he, "you do not know 
about America.  They are fine people in America.  Oh! you will like 
them very well.  But you mustn't get mad.  I know what you want.  
You come along with me."

And issuing from behind the counter, and taking me by the arm like 
an old acquaintance, he led me to the bar of the hotel.

"There," said he, pushing me from him by the shoulder, "go and have 
a drink!"


THE EMIGRANT TRAIN


All this while I had been travelling by mixed trains, where I might 
meet with Dutch widows and little German gentry fresh from table.  
I had been but a latent emigrant; now I was to be branded once 
more, and put apart with my fellows.  It was about two in the 
afternoon of Friday that I found myself in front of the Emigrant 
House, with more than a hundred others, to be sorted and boxed for 
the journey.  A white-haired official, with a stick under one arm, 
and a list in the other hand, stood apart in front of us, and 
called name after name in the tone of a command.  At each name you 
would see a family gather up its brats and bundles and run for the 
hindmost of the three cars that stood awaiting us, and I soon 
concluded that this was to be set apart for the women and children.  
The second or central car, it turned out, was devoted to men 
travelling alone, and the third to the Chinese.  The official was 
easily moved to anger at the least delay; but the emigrants were 
both quick at answering their names, and speedy in getting 
themselves and their effects on board.

The families once housed, we men carried the second car without 
ceremony by simultaneous assault.  I suppose the reader has some 
notion of an American railroad-car, that long, narrow wooden box, 
like a flat-roofed Noah's ark, with a stove and a convenience, one 
at either end, a passage down the middle, and transverse benches 
upon either hand.  Those destined for emigrants on the Union 
Pacific are only remarkable for their extreme plainness, nothing 
but wood entering in any part into their constitution, and for the 
usual inefficacy of the lamps, which often went out and shed but a 
dying glimmer even while they burned.  The benches are too short 
for anything but a young child.  Where there is scarce elbow-room 
for two to sit, there will not be space enough for one to lie.  
Hence the company, or rather, as it appears from certain bills 
about the Transfer Station, the company's servants, have conceived 
a plan for the better accommodation of travellers.  They prevail on 
every two to chum together.  To each of the chums they sell a board 
and three square cushions stuffed with straw, and covered with thin 
cotton.  The benches can be made to face each other in pairs, for 
the backs are reversible.  On the approach of night the boards are 
laid from bench to bench, making a couch wide enough for two, and 
long enough for a man of the middle height; and the chums lie down 
side by side upon the cushions with the head to the conductor's van 
and the feet to the engine.  When the train is full, of course this 
plan is impossible, for there must not be more than one to every 
bench, neither can it be carried out unless the chums agree.  It 
was to bring about this last condition that our white-haired 
official now bestirred himself.  He made a most active master of 
ceremonies, introducing likely couples, and even guaranteeing the 
amiability and honesty of each.  The greater the number of happy 
couples the better for his pocket, for it was he who sold the raw 
material of the beds.  His price for one board and three straw 
cushions began with two dollars and a half; but before the train 
left, and, I am sorry to say, long after I had purchased mine, it 
had fallen to one dollar and a half.

The match-maker had a difficulty with me; perhaps, like some 
ladies, I showed myself too eager for union at any price; but 
certainly the first who was picked out to be my bedfellow, declined 
the honour without thanks.  He was an old, heavy, slow-spoken man, 
I think from Yankeeland, looked me all over with great timidity, 
and then began to excuse himself in broken phrases.  He didn't know 
the young man, he said.  The young man might be very honest, but 
how was he to know that?  There was another young man whom he had 
met already in the train; he guessed he was honest, and would 
prefer to chum with him upon the whole.  All this without any sort 
of excuse, as though I had been inanimate or absent.  I began to 
tremble lest every one should refuse my company, and I be left 
rejected.  But the next in turn was a tall, strapping, long-limbed, 
small-headed, curly-haired Pennsylvania Dutchman, with a soldierly 
smartness in his manner.  To be exact, he had acquired it in the 
navy.  But that was all one; he had at least been trained to 
desperate resolves, so he accepted the match, and the white-haired 
swindler pronounced the connubial benediction, and pocketed his 
fees.

The rest of the afternoon was spent in making up the train.  I am 
afraid to say how many baggage-waggons followed the engine, 
certainly a score; then came the Chinese, then we, then the 
families, and the rear was brought up by the conductor in what, if 
I have it rightly, is called his caboose.  The class to which I 
belonged was of course far the largest, and we ran over, so to 
speak, to both sides; so that there were some Caucasians among the 
Chinamen, and some bachelors among the families.  But our own car 
was pure from admixture, save for one little boy of eight or nine 
who had the whooping-cough.  At last, about six, the long train 
crawled out of the Transfer Station and across the wide Missouri 
river to Omaha, westward bound.

It was a troubled uncomfortable evening in the cars.  There was 
thunder in the air, which helped to keep us restless.  A man played 
many airs upon the cornet, and none of them were much attended to, 
until he came to "Home, sweet home."  It was truly strange to note 
how the talk ceased at that, and the faces began to lengthen.  I 
have no idea whether musically this air is to be considered good or 
bad; but it belongs to that class of art which may be best 
described as a brutal assault upon the feelings.  Pathos must be 
relieved by dignity of treatment.  If you wallow naked in the 
pathetic, like the author of "Home, sweet home," you make your 
hearers weep in an unmanly fashion; and even while yet they are 
moved, they despise themselves and hate the occasion of their 
weakness.  It did not come to tears that night, for the experiment 
was interrupted.  An elderly, hard-looking man, with a goatee beard 
and about as much appearance of sentiment an you would expect from 
a retired slaver, turned with a start and bade the performer stop 
that "damned thing."  "I've heard about enough of that," he added; 
"give us something about the good country we're going to."  A 
murmur of adhesion ran round the car; the performer took the 
instrument from his lips, laughed and nodded, and then struck into 
a dancing measure; and, like a new Timotheus, stilled immediately 
the emotion he had raised.

The day faded; the lamps were lit; a party of wild young men, who 
got off next evening at North Platte, stood together on the stern 
platform, singing "The Sweet By-and-bye" with very tuneful voices; 
the chums began to put up their beds; and it seemed as if the 
business of the day were at an end.  But it was not so; for, the 
train stopping at some station, the cars were instantly thronged 
with the natives, wives and fathers, young men and maidens, some of 
them in little more than nightgear, some with stable lanterns, and 
all offering beds for sale.  Their charge began with twenty-five 
cents a cushion, but fell, before the train went on again, to 
fifteen, with the bed-board gratis, or less than one-fifth of what 
I had paid for mine at the Transfer.  This is my contribution to 
the economy of future emigrants.

A great personage on an American train is the newsboy.  He sells 
books (such books!), papers, fruit, lollipops, and cigars; and on 
emigrant journeys, soap, towels, tin washing dishes, tin coffee 
pitchers, coffee, tea, sugar, and tinned eatables, mostly hash or 
beans and bacon.  Early next morning the newsboy went around the 
cars, and chumming on a more extended principle became the order of 
the hour.  It requires but a copartnery of two to manage beds; but 
washing and eating can be carried on most economically by a 
syndicate of three.  I myself entered a little after sunrise into 
articles of agreement, and became one of the firm of Pennsylvania, 
Shakespeare, and Dubuque.  Shakespeare was my own nickname on the 
cars; Pennsylvania that of my bedfellow; and Dubuque, the name of a 
place in the State of Iowa, that of an amiable young fellow going 
west to cure an asthma, and retarding his recovery by incessantly 
chewing or smoking, and sometimes chewing and smoking together.  I 
have never seen tobacco so sillily abused.  Shakespeare bought a 
tin washing-dish, Dubuque a towel, and Pennsylvania a brick of 
soap.  The partners used these instruments, one after another, 
according to the order of their first awaking; and when the firm 
had finished there was no want of borrowers.  Each filled the tin 
dish at the water filter opposite the stove, and retired with the 
whole stock in trade to the platform of the car.  There he knelt 
down, supporting himself by a shoulder against the woodwork or one 
elbow crooked about the railing, and made a shift to wash his face 
and neck and hands; a cold, an insufficient, and, if the train is 
moving rapidly, a somewhat dangerous toilet.

On a similar division of expense, the firm of Pennsylvania, 
Shakespeare, and Dubuque supplied themselves with coffee, sugar, 
and necessary vessels; and their operations are a type of what went 
on through all the cars.  Before the sun was up the stove would be 
brightly burning; at the first station the natives would come on 
board with milk and eggs and coffee cakes; and soon from end to end 
the car would be filled with little parties breakfasting upon the 
bed-boards.  It was the pleasantest hour of the day.

There were meals to be had, however, by the wayside:  a breakfast 
in the morning, a dinner somewhere between eleven and two, and 
supper from five to eight or nine at night.  We had rarely less 
than twenty minutes for each; and if we had not spent many another 
twenty minutes waiting for some express upon a side track among 
miles of desert, we might have taken an hour to each repast and 
arrived at San Francisco up to time.  For haste is not the foible 
of an emigrant train.  It gets through on sufferance, running the 
gauntlet among its more considerable brethren; should there be a 
block, it is unhesitatingly sacrificed; and they cannot, in 
consequence, predict the length of the passage within a day or so.  
Civility is the main comfort that you miss.  Equality, though 
conceived very largely in America, does not extend so low down as 
to an emigrant.  Thus in all other trains, a warning cry of  "All 
aboard!" recalls the passengers to take their seats; but as soon as 
I was alone with emigrants, and from the Transfer all the way to 
San Francisco, I found this ceremony was pretermitted; the train 
stole from the station without note of warning, and you had to keep 
an eye upon it even while you ate.  The annoyance is considerable, 
and the disrespect both wanton and petty.

Many conductors, again, will hold no communication with an 
emigrant.  I asked a conductor one day at what time the train would 
stop for dinner; as he made no answer I repeated the question, with 
a like result; a third time I returned to the charge, and then 
Jack-in-office looked me coolly in the face for several seconds and 
turned ostentatiously away.  I believe he was half ashamed of his 
brutality; for when another person made the same inquiry, although 
he still refused the information, he condescended to answer, and 
even to justify his reticence in a voice loud enough for me to 
hear.  It was, he said, his principle not to tell people where they 
were to dine; for one answer led to many other questions, as what 
o'clock it was? or, how soon should we be there? and he could not 
afford to be eternally worried.

As you are thus cut off from the superior authorities, a great deal 
of your comfort depends on the character of the newsboy.  He has it 
in his power indefinitely to better and brighten the emigrant's 
lot.  The newsboy with whom we started from the Transfer was a 
dark, bullying, contemptuous, insolent scoundrel, who treated us 
like dogs.  Indeed, in his case, matters came nearly to a fight.  
It happened thus:  he was going his rounds through the cars with 
some commodities for sale, and coming to a party who were at SEVEN-
UP or CASCINO (our two games), upon a bed-board, slung down a 
cigar-box in the middle of the cards, knocking one man's hand to 
the floor.  It was the last straw.  In a moment the whole party 
were upon their feet, the cigars were upset, and he was ordered to 
"get out of that directly, or he would get more than he reckoned 
for." The fellow grumbled and muttered, but ended by making off, 
and was less openly insulting in the future.  On the other hand, 
the lad who rode with us in this capacity from Ogden to Sacramento 
made himself the friend of all, and helped us with information, 
attention, assistance, and a kind countenance.  He told us where 
and when we should have our meals, and how long the train would 
stop; kept seats at table for those who were delayed, and watched 
that we should neither be left behind nor yet unnecessarily 
hurried.  You, who live at home at ease, can hardly realise the 
greatness of this service, even had it stood alone.  When I think 
of that lad coming and going, train after train, with his bright 
face and civil words, I see how easily a good man may become the 
benefactor of his kind.  Perhaps he is discontented with himself, 
perhaps troubled with ambitions; why, if he but knew it, he is a 
hero of the old Greek stamp; and while he thinks he is only earning 
a profit of a few cents, and that perhaps exorbitant, he is doing a 
man's work, and bettering the world.

I must tell here an experience of mine with another newsboy.  I 
tell it because it gives so good an example of that uncivil 
kindness of the American, which is perhaps their most bewildering 
character to one newly landed.  It was immediately after I had left 
the emigrant train; and I am told I looked like a man at death's 
door, so much had this long journey shaken me.  I sat at the end of 
a car, and the catch being broken, and myself feverish and sick, I 
had to hold the door open with my foot for the sake of air.  In 
this attitude my leg debarred the newsboy from his box of 
merchandise.  I made haste to let him pass when I observed that he 
was coming; but I was busy with a book, and so once or twice he 
came upon me unawares.  On these occasions he most rudely struck my 
foot aside; and though I myself apologised, as if to show him the 
way, he answered me never a word.  I chafed furiously, and I fear 
the next time it would have come to words.  But suddenly I felt a 
touch upon my shoulder, and a large juicy pear was put into my 
hand.  It was the newsboy, who had observed that I was looking ill, 
and so made me this present out of a tender heart.  For the rest of 
the journey I was petted like a sick child; he lent me newspapers, 
thus depriving himself of his legitimate profit on their sale, and 
came repeatedly to sit by me and cheer me up.


THE PLAINS OF NEBRASKA


It had thundered on the Friday night, but the sun rose on Saturday 
without a cloud.  We were at sea - there is no other adequate 
expression - on the plains of Nebraska.  I made my observatory on 
the top of a fruit-waggon, and sat by the hour upon that perch to 
spy about me, and to spy in vain for something new.  It was a world 
almost without a feature; an empty sky, an empty earth; front and 
back, the line of railway stretched from horizon to horizon, like a 
cue across a billiard-board; on either hand, the green plain ran 
till it touched the skirts of heaven.  Along the track innumerable 
wild sunflowers, no bigger than a crown-piece, bloomed in a 
continuous flower-bed; grazing beasts were seen upon the prairie at 
all degrees of distance and diminution; and now and again we might 
perceive a few dots beside the railroad which grew more and more 
distinct as we drew nearer till they turned into wooden cabins, and 
then dwindled and dwindled in our wake until they melted into their 
surroundings, and we were once more alone upon the billiard-board.  
The train toiled over this infinity like a snail; and being the one 
thing moving, it was wonderful what huge proportions it began to 
assume in our regard.  It seemed miles in length, and either end of 
it within but a step of the horizon.  Even my own body or my own 
head seemed a great thing in that emptiness.  I note the feeling 
the more readily as it is the contrary of what I have read of in 
the experience of others.  Day and night, above the roar of the 
train, our ears were kept busy with the incessant chirp of 
grasshoppers - a noise like the winding up of countless clocks and 
watches, which began after a while to seem proper to that land.

To one hurrying through by steam there was a certain exhilaration 
in this spacious vacancy, this greatness of the air, this discovery 
of the whole arch of heaven, this straight, unbroken, prison-line 
of the horizon.  Yet one could not but reflect upon the weariness 
of those who passed by there in old days, at the foot's pace of 
oxen, painfully urging their teams, and with no landmark but that 
unattainable evening sun for which they steered, and which daily 
fled them by an equal stride.  They had nothing, it would seem, to 
overtake; nothing by which to reckon their advance; no sight for 
repose or for encouragement; but stage after stage, only the dead 
green waste under foot, and the mocking, fugitive horizon.  But the 
eye, as I have been told, found differences even here; and at the 
worst the emigrant came, by perseverance, to the end of his toil.  
It is the settlers, after all, at whom we have a right to marvel.  
Our consciousness, by which we live, is itself but the creature of 
variety.  Upon what food does it subsist in such a land?  What 
livelihood can repay a human creature for a life spent in this huge 
sameness?  He is cut off from books, from news, from company, from 
all that can relieve existence but the prosecution of his affairs.  
A sky full of stars is the most varied spectacle that he can hope.  
He may walk five miles and see nothing; ten, and it is as though he 
had not moved; twenty, and still he is in the midst of the same 
great level, and has approached no nearer to the one object within 
view, the flat horizon which keeps pace with his advance.  We are 
full at home of the question of agreeable wall-papers, and wise 
people are of opinion that the temper may be quieted by sedative 
surroundings.  But what is to be said of the Nebraskan settler?  
His is a wall-paper with a vengeance - one quarter of the universe 
laid bare in all its gauntness.

His eye must embrace at every glance the whole seeming concave of 
the visible world; it quails before so vast an outlook, it is 
tortured by distance; yet there is no rest or shelter till the man 
runs into his cabin, and can repose his sight upon things near at 
hand.  Hence, I am told, a sickness of the vision peculiar to these 
empty plains.

Yet perhaps with sunflowers and cicadae, summer and winter, cattle, 
wife and family, the settler may create a full and various 
existence.  One person at least I saw upon the plains who seemed in 
every way superior to her lot.  This was a woman who boarded us at 
a way station, selling milk.  She was largely formed; her features 
were more than comely; she had that great rarity - a fine 
complexion which became her; and her eyes were kind, dark, and 
steady.  She sold milk with patriarchal grace.  There was not a 
line in her countenance, not a note in her soft and sleepy voice, 
but spoke of an entire contentment with her life.  It would have 
been fatuous arrogance to pity such a woman.  Yet the place where 
she lived was to me almost ghastly.  Less than a dozen wooden 
houses, all of a shape and all nearly of a size, stood planted 
along the railway lines.  Each stood apart in its own lot.  Each 
opened direct off the billiard-board, as if it were a billiard-
board indeed, and these only models that had been set down upon it 
ready made.  Her own, into which I looked, was clean but very 
empty, and showed nothing homelike but the burning fire.  This 
extreme newness, above all in so naked and flat a country, gives a 
strong impression of artificiality.  With none of the litter and 
discoloration of human life; with the paths unworn, and the houses 
still sweating from the axe, such a settlement as this seems purely 
scenic.  The mind is loth to accept it for a piece of reality; and 
it seems incredible that life can go on with so few properties, or 
the great child, man, find entertainment in so bare a playroom.

And truly it is as yet an incomplete society in some points; or at 
least it contained, as I passed through, one person incompletely 
civilised.  At North Platte, where we supped that evening, one man 
asked another to pass the milk-jug.  This other was well-dressed 
and of what we should call a respectable appearance; a darkish man, 
high spoken, eating as though he had some usage of society; but he 
turned upon the first speaker with extraordinary vehemence of tone 
-

"There's a waiter here!" he cried.

"I only asked you to pass the milk," explained the first.

Here is the retort verbatim -

"Pass!  Hell!  I'm not paid for that business; the waiter's paid 
for it.  You should use civility at table, and, by God, I'll show 
you how!"

The other man very wisely made no answer, and the bully went on 
with his supper as though nothing had occurred.  It pleases me to 
think that some day soon he will meet with one of his own kidney; 
and that perhaps both may fall.


THE DESERT OF WYOMING


To cross such a plain is to grow homesick for the mountains.  I 
longed for the Black Hills of Wyoming, which I knew we were soon to 
enter, like an ice-bound whaler for the spring.  Alas! and it was a 
worse country than the other.  All Sunday and Monday we travelled 
through these sad mountains, or over the main ridge of the Rockies, 
which is a fair match to them for misery of aspect.  Hour after 
hour it was the same unhomely and unkindly world about our onward 
path; tumbled boulders, cliffs that drearily imitate the shape of 
monuments and fortifications - how drearily, how tamely, none can 
tell who has not seen them; not a tree, not a patch of sward, not 
one shapely or commanding mountain form; sage-brush, eternal sage-
brush; over all, the same weariful and gloomy colouring, grays 
warming into brown, grays darkening towards black; and for sole 
sign of life, here and there a few fleeing antelopes; here and 
there, but at incredible intervals, a creek running in a canon.  
The plains have a grandeur of their own; but here there is nothing 
but a contorted smallness.  Except for the air, which was light and 
stimulating, there was not one good circumstance in that God-
forsaken land.

I had been suffering in my health a good deal all the way; and at 
last, whether I was exhausted by my complaint or poisoned in some 
wayside eating-house, the evening we left Laramie, I fell sick 
outright.  That was a night which I shall not readily forget.  The 
lamps did not go out; each made a faint shining in its own 
neighbourhood, and the shadows were confounded together in the 
long, hollow box of the car.  The sleepers lay in uneasy attitudes; 
here two chums alongside, flat upon their backs like dead folk; 
there a man sprawling on the floor, with his face upon his arm; 
there another half seated with his head and shoulders on the bench.  
The most passive were continually and roughly shaken by the 
movement of the train; others stirred, turned, or stretched out 
their arms like children; it was surprising how many groaned and 
murmured in their sleep; and as I passed to and fro, stepping 
across the prostrate, and caught now a snore, now a gasp, now a 
half-formed word, it gave me a measure of the worthlessness of rest 
in that unresting vehicle.  Although it was chill, I was obliged to 
open my window, for the degradation of the air soon became 
intolerable to one who was awake and using the full supply of life.  
Outside, in a glimmering night, I saw the black, amorphous hills 
shoot by unweariedly into our wake.  They that long for morning 
have never longed for it more earnestly than I.

And yet when day came, it was to shine upon the same broken and 
unsightly quarter of the world.  Mile upon mile, and not a tree, a 
bird, or a river.  Only down the long, sterile canons, the train 
shot hooting and awoke the resting echo.  That train was the one 
piece of life in all the deadly land; it was the one actor, the one 
spectacle fit to be observed in this paralysis of man and nature.  
And when I think how the railroad has been pushed through this 
unwatered wilderness and haunt of savage tribes, and now will bear 
an emigrant for some 12 pounds from the Atlantic to the Golden 
Gates; how at each stage of the construction, roaring, impromptu 
cities, full of gold and lust and death, sprang up and then died 
away again, and are now but wayside stations in the desert; how in 
these uncouth places pig-tailed Chinese pirates worked side by side 
with border ruffians and broken men from Europe, talking together 
in a mixed dialect, mostly oaths, gambling, drinking, quarrelling 
and murdering like wolves; how the plumed hereditary lord of all 
America heard, in this last fastness, the scream of the "bad 
medicine waggon" charioting his foes; and then when I go on to 
remember that all this epical turmoil was conducted by gentlemen in 
frock coats, and with a view to nothing more extraordinary than a 
fortune and a subsequent visit to Paris, it seems to me, I own, as 
if this railway were the one typical achievement of the age in 
which we live, as if it brought together into one plot all the ends 
of the world and all the degrees of social rank, and offered to 
some great writer the busiest, the most extended, and the most 
varied subject for an enduring literary work.  If it be romance, if 
it be contrast, if it be heroism that we require, what was Troy 
town to this?  But, alas! it is not these things that are necessary 
- it is only Homer.

Here also we are grateful to the train, as to some god who conducts 
us swiftly through these shades and by so many hidden perils.  
Thirst, hunger, the sleight and ferocity of Indians are all no more 
feared, so lightly do we skim these horrible lands; as the gull, 
who wings safely through the hurricane and past the shark.  Yet we 
should not be forgetful of these hardships of the past; and to keep 
the balance true, since I have complained of the trifling 
discomforts of my journey, perhaps more than was enough, let me add 
an original document.  It was not written by Homer, but by a boy of 
eleven, long since dead, and is dated only twenty years ago.  I 
shall punctuate, to make things clearer, but not change the 
spelling.

"My dear Sister Mary, - I am afraid you will go nearly crazy when 
you read my letter.  If Jerry" (the writer's eldest brother) "has 
not written to you before now, you will be surprised to heare that 
we are in California, and that poor Thomas" (another brother, of 
fifteen) "is dead.  We started from - in July, with plenly of 
provisions and too yoke oxen.  We went along very well till we got 
within six or seven hundred miles of California, when the Indians 
attacked us.  We found places where they had killed the emigrants.  
We had one passenger with us, too guns, and one revolver; so we ran 
all the lead We had into bullets (and) hung the guns up in the 
wagon so that we could get at them in a minit.  It was about two 
o'clock in the afternoon; droave the cattel a little way; when a 
prairie chicken alited a little way from the wagon.

"Jerry took out one of the guns to shoot it, and told Tom drive the 
oxen.  Tom and I drove the oxen, and Jerry and the passenger went 
on.  Then, after a little, I left Tom and caught up with Jerry and 
the other man.  Jerry stopped Tom to come up; me and the man went 
on and sit down by a little stream.  In a few minutes, we heard 
some noise; then three shots (they all struck poor Tom, I suppose); 
then they gave the war hoop, and as many as twenty of the redskins 
came down upon us.  The three that shot Tom was hid by the side of 
the road in the bushes.

"I thought the Tom and Jerry were shot; so I told the other man 
that Tom and Jerry were dead, and that we had better try to escape, 
if possible.  I had no shoes on; having a sore foot, I thought I 
would not put them on.  The man and me run down the road, but We 
was soon stopped by an Indian on a pony.  We then turend the other 
way, and run up the side of the Mountain, and hid behind some cedar 
trees, and stayed there till dark.  The Indians hunted all over 
after us, and verry close to us, so close that we could here there 
tomyhawks Jingle.  At dark the man and me started on, I stubing my 
toes against sticks and stones.  We traveld on all night; and next 
morning, just as it was getting gray, we saw something in the shape 
of a man.  It layed Down in the grass.  We went up to it, and it 
was Jerry.  He thought we ware Indians.  You can imagine how glad 
he was to see me.  He thought we was all dead but him, and we 
thought him and Tom was dead.  He had the gun that he took out of 
the wagon to shoot the prairie Chicken; all he had was the load 
that was in it.

"We traveld on till about eight o'clock, We caught up with one 
wagon with too men with it.  We had traveld with them before one 
day; we stopt and they Drove on; we knew that they was ahead of us, 
unless they had been killed to.  My feet was so sore when we caught 
up with them that I had to ride; I could not step.  We traveld on 
for too days, when the men that owned the cattle said they would 
(could) not drive them another inch.  We unyoked the oxen; we had 
about seventy pounds of flour; we took it out and divided it into 
four packs.  Each of the men took about 18 pounds apiece and a 
blanket.  I carried a little bacon, dried meat, and little quilt; I 
had in all about twelve pounds.  We had one pint of flour a day for 
our alloyance.  Sometimes we made soup of it; sometimes we (made) 
pancakes; and sometimes mixed it up with cold water and eat it that 
way.  We traveld twelve or fourteen days.  The time came at last 
when we should have to reach some place or starve.  We saw fresh 
horse and cattle tracks.  The morning come, we scraped all the 
flour out of the sack, mixed it up, and baked it into bread, and 
made some soup, and eat everything we had.  We traveld on all day 
without anything to eat, and that evening we Caught up with a sheep 
train of eight wagons.  We traveld with them till we arrived at the 
settlements; and know I am safe in California, and got to good 
home, and going to school.

"Jerry is working in - .  It is a good country.  You can get from 
50 to 60 and 75 Dollars for cooking.  Tell me all about the affairs 
in the States, and how all the folks get along."

And so ends this artless narrative.  The little man was at school 
again, God bless him, while his brother lay scalped upon the 
deserts.


FELLOW-PASSENGERS


At Ogden we changed cars from the Union Pacific to the Central 
Pacific line of railroad.  The change was doubly welcome; for, 
first, we had better cars on the new line; and, second, those in 
which we had been cooped for more than ninety hours had begun to 
stink abominably.  Several yards away, as we returned, let us say 
from dinner, our nostrils were assailed by rancid air.  I have 
stood on a platform while the whole train was shunting; and as the 
dwelling-cars drew near, there would come a whiff of pure 
menagerie, only a little sourer, as from men instead of monkeys.  I 
think we are human only in virtue of open windows.  Without fresh 
air, you only require a bad heart, and a remarkable command of the 
Queen's English, to become such another as Dean Swift; a kind of 
leering, human goat, leaping and wagging your scut on mountains of 
offence.  I do my best to keep my head the other way, and look for 
the human rather than the bestial in this Yahoo-like business of 
the emigrant train.  But one thing I must say, the car of the 
Chinese was notably the least offensive.

The cars on the Central Pacific were nearly twice as high, and so 
proportionally airier; they were freshly varnished, which gave us 
all a sense of cleanliness an though we had bathed; the seats drew 
out and joined in the centre, so that there was no more need for 
bed boards; and there was an upper tier of berths which could be 
closed by day and opened at night.

I had by this time some opportunity of seeing the people whom I was 
among.  They were in rather marked contrast to the emigrants I had 
met on board ship while crossing the Atlantic.  They were mostly 
lumpish fellows, silent and noisy, a common combination; somewhat 
sad, I should say, with an extraordinary poor taste in humour, and 
little interest in their fellow-creatures beyond that of a cheap 
and merely external curiosity.  If they heard a man's name and 
business, they seemed to think they had the heart of that mystery; 
but they were as eager to know that much as they were indifferent 
to the rest.  Some of them were on nettles till they learned your 
name was Dickson and you a journeyman baker; but beyond that, 
whether you were Catholic or Mormon, dull or clever, fierce or 
friendly, was all one to them.  Others who were not so stupid, 
gossiped a little, and, I am bound to say, unkindly.  A favourite 
witticism was for some lout to raise the alarm of  "All aboard!" 
while the rest of us were dining, thus contributing his mite to the 
general discomfort.  Such a one was always much applauded for his 
high spirits.  When I was ill coming through Wyoming, I was 
astonished - fresh from the eager humanity on board ship - to meet 
with little but laughter.  One of the young men even amused himself 
by incommoding me, as was then very easy; and that not from ill-
nature, but mere clodlike incapacity to think, for he expected me 
to join the laugh.  I did so, but it was phantom merriment.  Later 
on, a man from Kansas had three violent epileptic fits, and though, 
of course, there were not wanting some to help him, it was rather 
superstitious terror than sympathy that his case evoked among his 
fellow-passengers.  "Oh, I hope he's not going to die!" cried a 
woman; "it would be terrible to have a dead body!"  And there was a 
very general movement to leave the man behind at the next station.  
This, by good fortune, the conductor negatived.

There was a good deal of story-telling in some quarters; in others, 
little but silence.  In this society, more than any other that ever 
I was in, it was the narrator alone who seemed to enjoy the 
narrative.  It was rarely that any one listened for the listening.  
If he lent an ear to another man's story, it was because he was in 
immediate want of a hearer for one of his own.  Food and the 
progress of the train were the subjects most generally treated; 
many joined to discuss these who otherwise would hold their 
tongues.  One small knot had no better occupation than to worm out 
of me my name; and the more they tried, the more obstinately fixed 
I grew to baffle them.  They assailed me with artful questions and 
insidious offers of correspondence in the future; but I was 
perpetually on my guard, and parried their assaults with inward 
laughter.  I am sure Dubuque would have given me ten dollars for 
the secret.  He owed me far more, had he understood life, for thus 
preserving him a lively interest throughout the journey.  I met one 
of my fellow-passengers months after, driving a street tramway car 
in San Francisco; and, as the joke was now out of season, told him 
my name without subterfuge.  You never saw a man more chapfallen.  
But had my name been Demogorgon, after so prolonged a mystery he 
had still been disappointed.

There were no emigrants direct from Europe - save one German family 
and a knot of Cornish miners who kept grimly by themselves, one 
reading the New Testament all day long through steel spectacles, 
the rest discussing privately the secrets of their old-world, 
mysterious race.  Lady Hester Stanhope believed she could make 
something great of the Cornish; for my part, I can make nothing of 
them at all.  A division of races, older and more original than 
that of Babel, keeps this close, esoteric family apart from 
neighbouring Englishmen.  Not even a Red Indian seems more foreign 
in my eyes.  This is one of the lessons of travel - that some of 
the strangest races dwell next door to you at home.

The rest were all American born, but they came from almost every 
quarter of that Continent.  All the States of the North had sent 
out a fugitive to cross the plains with me.  From Virginia, from 
Pennsylvania, from New York, from far western Iowa and Kansas, from 
Maime that borders on the Canadas, and from the Canadas themselves 
- some one or two were fleeing in quest of a better land and better 
wages.  The talk in the train, like the talk I heard on the 
steamer, ran upon hard times, short commons, and hope that moves 
ever westward.  I thought of my shipful from Great Britain with a 
feeling of despair.  They had come 3000 miles, and yet not far 
enough.  Hard times bowed them out of the Clyde, and stood to 
welcome them at Sandy Hook.  Where were they to go?  Pennsylvania, 
Maine, Iowa, Kansas?  These were not places for immigration, but 
for emigration, it appeared; not one of them, but I knew a man who 
had lifted up his heel and left it for an ungrateful country.  And 
it was still westward that they ran.  Hunger, you would have 
thought, came out of the east like the sun, and the evening was 
made of edible gold.  And, meantime, in the car in front of me, 
were there not half a hundred emigrants from the opposite quarter?  
Hungry Europe and hungry China, each pouring from their gates in 
search of provender, had here come face to face.  The two waves had 
met; east and west had alike failed; the whole round world had been 
prospected and condemned; there was no El Dorado anywhere; and till 
one could emigrate to the moon, it seemed as well to stay patiently 
at home.  Nor was there wanting another sign, at once more 
picturesque and more disheartening; for, as we continued to steam 
westward toward the land of gold, we were continually passing other 
emigrant trains upon the journey east; and these were as crowded as 
our own.  Had all these return voyagers made a fortune in the 
mines?  Were they all bound for Paris, and to be in Rome by Easter?  
It would seem not, for, whenever we met them, the passengers ran on 
the platform and cried to us through the windows, in a kind of 
wailing chorus, to "come back."  On the plains of Nebraska, in the 
mountains of Wyoming, it was still the same cry, and dismal to my 
heart, "Come back!"  That was what we heard by the way "about the 
good country we were going to."  And at that very hour the Sand-lot 
of San Francisco was crowded with the unemployed, and the echo from 
the other side of Market Street was repeating the rant of 
demagogues.

If, in truth, it were only for the sake of wages that men emigrate, 
how many thousands would regret the bargain!  But wages, indeed, 
are only one consideration out of many; for we are a race of 
gipsies, and love change and travel for themselves.


DESPISED RACES


Of all stupid ill-feelings, the sentiment of my fellow Caucasians 
towards our companions in the Chinese car was the most stupid and 
the worst.  They seemed never to have looked at them, listened to 
them, or thought of them, but hated them A PRIORI.  The Mongols 
were their enemies in that cruel and treacherous battle-field of 
money.  They could work better and cheaper in half a hundred 
industries, and hence there was no calumny too idle for the 
Caucasians to repeat, and even to believe.  They declared them 
hideous vermin, and affected a kind of choking in the throat when 
they beheld them.  Now, as a matter of fact, the young Chinese man 
is so like a large class of European women, that on raising my head 
and suddenly catching sight of one at a considerable distance, I 
have for an instant been deceived by the resemblance.  I do not say 
it is the most attractive class of our women, but for all that many 
a man's wife is less pleasantly favoured.  Again, my emigrants 
declared that the Chinese were dirty.  I cannot say they were 
clean, for that was impossible upon the journey; but in their 
efforts after cleanliness they put the rest of us to shame.  We all 
pigged and stewed in one infamy, wet our hands and faces for half a 
minute daily on the platform, and were unashamed.  But the Chinese 
never lost an opportunity, and you would see them washing their 
feet - an act not dreamed of among ourselves - and going as far as 
decency permitted to wash their whole bodies.  I may remark by the 
way that the dirtier people are in their persons the more delicate 
is their sense of modesty.  A clean man strips in a crowded 
boathouse; but he who is unwashed slinks in and out of bed without 
uncovering an inch of skin.  Lastly, these very foul and malodorous 
Caucasians entertained the surprising illusion that it was the 
Chinese waggon, and that alone, which stank.  I have said already 
that it was the exceptions and notably the freshest of the three.

These judgments are typical of the feeling in all Western America.  
The Chinese are considered stupid, because they are imperfectly 
acquainted with English.  They are held to be base, because their 
dexterity and frugality enable them to underbid the lazy, luxurious 
Caucasian.  They are said to be thieves; I am sure they have no 
monopoly of that.  They are called cruel; the Anglo-Saxon and the 
cheerful Irishman may each reflect before he bears the accusation.  
I am told, again, that they are of the race of river pirates, and 
belong to the most despised and dangerous class in the Celestial 
Empire.  But if this be so, what remarkable pirates have we here! 
and what must be the virtues, the industry, the education, and the 
intelligence of their superiors at home!

Awhile ago it was the Irish, now it is the Chinese that must go.  
Such is the cry.  It seems, after all, that no country is bound to 
submit to immigration any more than to invasion; each is war to the 
knife, and resistance to either but legitimate defence.  Yet we may 
regret the free tradition of the republic, which loved to depict 
herself with open arms, welcoming all unfortunates.  And certainly, 
as a man who believes that he loves freedom, I may be excused some 
bitterness when I find her sacred name misused in the contention.  
It was but the other day that I heard a vulgar fellow in the Sand-
lot, the popular tribune of San Francisco, roaring for arms and 
butchery.  "At the call of Abraham Lincoln," said the orator, "ye 
rose in the name of freedom to set free the negroes; can ye not 
rise and liberate yourselves from a few dirty Mongolians?"

For my own part, I could not look but with wonder and respect on 
the Chinese.  Their forefathers watched the stars before mine had 
begun to keep pigs.  Gun-powder and printing, which the other day 
we imitated, and a school of manners which we never had the 
delicacy so much as to desire to imitate, were theirs in a long-
past antiquity.  They walk the earth with us, but it seems they 
must be of different clay.  They hear the clock strike the same 
hour, yet surely of a different epoch.  They travel by steam 
conveyance, yet with such a baggage of old Asiatic thoughts and 
superstitions as might check the locomotive in its course.  
Whatever is thought within the circuit of the Great Wall; what the 
wry-eyed, spectacled schoolmaster teaches in the hamlets round 
Pekin; religions so old that our language looks a halfing boy 
alongside; philosophy so wise that our best philosophers find 
things therein to wonder at; all this travelled alongside of me for 
thousands of miles over plain and mountain.  Heaven knows if we had 
one common thought or fancy all that way, or whether our eyes, 
which yet were formed upon the same design, beheld the same world 
out of the railway windows.  And when either of us turned his 
thoughts to home and childhood, what a strange dissimilarity must 
there not have been in these pictures of the mind - when I beheld 
that old, gray, castled city, high throned above the firth, with 
the flag of Britain flying, and the red-coat sentry pacing over 
all; and the man in the next car to me would conjure up some junks 
and a pagoda and a fort of porcelain, and call it, with the same 
affection, home.

Another race shared among my fellow-passengers in the disfavour of 
the Chinese; and that, it is hardly necessary to say, was the noble 
red man of old story - over whose own hereditary continent we had 
been steaming all these days.  I saw no wild or independent Indian; 
indeed, I hear that such avoid the neighbourhood of the train; but 
now and again at way stations, a husband and wife and a few 
children, disgracefully dressed out with the sweepings of 
civilisation, came forth and stared upon the emigrants.  The silent 
stoicism of their conduct, and the pathetic degradation of their 
appearance, would have touched any thinking creature, but my 
fellow-passengers danced and jested round them with a truly Cockney 
baseness.  I was ashamed for the thing we call civilisation.  We 
should carry upon our consciences so much, at least, of our 
forefathers' misconduct as we continue to profit by ourselves.

If oppression drives a wise man mad, what should be raging in the 
hearts of these poor tribes, who have been driven back and back, 
step after step, their promised reservations torn from them one 
after another as the States extended westward, until at length they 
are shut up into these hideous mountain deserts of the centre - and 
even there find themselves invaded, insulted, and hunted out by 
ruffianly diggers?  The eviction of the Cherokees (to name but an 
instance), the extortion of Indian agents, the outrages of the 
wicked, the ill-faith of all, nay, down to the ridicule of such 
poor beings as were here with me upon the train, make up a chapter 
of injustice and indignity such as a man must be in some ways base 
if his heart will suffer him to pardon or forget.  These old, well-
founded, historical hatreds have a savour of nobility for the 
independent.  That the Jew should not love the Christian, nor the 
Irishman love the English, nor the Indian brave tolerate the 
thought of the American, is not disgraceful to the nature of man; 
rather, indeed, honourable, since it depends on wrongs ancient like 
the race, and not personal to him who cherishes the indignation.


TO THE GOLDEN GATES


A little corner of Utah is soon traversed, and leaves no particular 
impressions on the mind.  By an early hour on Wednesday morning we 
stopped to breakfast at Toano, a little station on a bleak, high-
lying plateau in Nevada.  The man who kept the station eating-house 
was a Scot, and learning that I was the same, he grew very 
friendly, and gave me some advice on the country I was now 
entering.  "You see," said he, "I tell you this, because I come 
from your country."  Hail, brither Scots!

His most important hint was on the moneys of this part of the 
world.  There is something in the simplicity of a decimal coinage 
which is revolting to the human mind; thus the French, in small 
affairs, reckon strictly by halfpence; and you have to solve, by a 
spasm of mental arithmetic, such posers as thirty-two, forty-five, 
or even a hundred halfpence.  In the Pacific States they have made 
a bolder push for complexity, and settle their affairs by a coin 
that no longer that no longer exists - the BIT, or old Mexican 
real.  The supposed value of the bit is twelve and a half cents, 
eight to the dollar.  When it comes to two bits, the quarter-dollar 
stands for the required amount.  But how about an odd bit?  The 
nearest coin to it is a dime, which is, short by a fifth.  That, 
then, is called a SHORT bit.  If you have one, you lay it 
triumphantly down, and save two and a half cents.  But if you have 
not, and lay down a quarter, the bar-keeper or shopman calmly 
tenders you a dime by way of change; and thus you have paid what is 
called a LONG BIT, and lost two and a half cents, or even, by 
comparison with a short bit, five cents.  In country places all 
over the Pacific coast, nothing lower than a bit is ever asked or 
taken, which vastly increases the cost of life; as even for a glass 
of beer you must pay fivepence or sevenpence-halfpenny, as the case 
may be.  You would say that this system of mutual robbery was as 
broad as it was long; but I have discovered a plan to make it 
broader, with which I here endow the public.  It is brief and 
simple - radiantly simple.  There is one place where five cents are 
recognised, and that is the post-office.  A quarter is only worth 
two bits, a short and a long.  Whenever you have a quarter, go to 
the post-office and buy five cents worth of postage-stamps; you 
will receive in change two dimes, that is, two short bits.  The 
purchasing power of your money is undiminished.  You can go and 
have your two glasses of beer all the same; and you have made 
yourself a present of five cents worth of postage-stamps into the 
bargain.  Benjamin Franklin would have patted me on the head for 
this discovery.

From Toano we travelled all day through deserts of alkali and sand, 
horrible to man, and bare sage-brush country that seemed little 
kindlier, and came by supper-time to Elko.  As we were standing, 
after our manner, outside the station, I saw two men whip suddenly 
from underneath the cars, and take to their heels across country.  
They were tramps, it appeared, who had been riding on the beams 
since eleven of the night before; and several of my fellow-
passengers had already seen and conversed with them while we broke 
our fast at Toano.  These land stowaways play a great part over 
here in America, and I should have liked dearly to become 
acquainted with them.

At Elko an odd circumstance befell me.  I was coming out from 
supper, when I was stopped by a small, stout, ruddy man, followed 
by two others taller and ruddier than himself.

"Excuse me, sir," he said, "but do you happen to be going on?"

I said I was, whereupon he said he hoped to persuade me to desist 
from that intention.  He had a situation to offer me, and if we 
could come to terms, why, good and well.  "You see," he continued, 
"I'm running a theatre here, and we're a little short in the 
orchestra.  You're a musician, I guess?"

I assured him that, beyond a rudimentary acquaintance with "Auld 
Lang Syne" and "The Wearing of the Green," I had no pretension 
whatever to that style.  He seemed much put out of countenance; and 
one of his taller companions asked him, on the nail, for five 
dollars.

"You see, sir," added the latter to me, "he bet you were a 
musician; I bet you weren't.  No offence, I hope?"

"None whatever," I said, and the two withdrew to the bar, where I 
presume the debt was liquidated.

This little adventure woke bright hopes in my fellow-travellers, 
who thought they had now come to a country where situations went a-
begging.  But I am not so sure that the offer was in good faith.  
Indeed, I am more than half persuaded it was but a feeler to decide 
the bet.

Of all the next day I will tell you nothing, for the best of all 
reasons, that I remember no more than that we continued through 
desolate and desert scenes, fiery hot and deadly weary.  But some 
time after I had fallen asleep that night, I was awakened by one of 
my companions.  It was in vain that I resisted.  A fire of 
enthusiasm and whisky burned in his eyes; and he declared we were 
in a new country, and I must come forth upon the platform and see 
with my own eyes.  The train was then, in its patient way, standing 
halted in a by-track.  It was a clear, moonlit night; but the 
valley was too narrow to admit the moonshine direct, and only a 
diffused glimmer whitened the tall rocks and relieved the blackness 
of the pines.  A hoarse clamour filled the air; it was the 
continuous plunge of a cascade somewhere near at hand among the 
mountains.  The air struck chill, but tasted good and vigorous in 
the nostrils - a fine, dry, old mountain atmosphere.  I was dead 
sleepy, but I returned to roost with a grateful mountain feeling at 
my heart.

When I awoke next morning, I was puzzled for a while to know if it 
were day or night, for the illumination was unusual.  I sat up at 
last, and found we were grading slowly downward through a long 
snowshed; and suddenly we shot into an open; and before we were 
swallowed into the next length of wooden tunnel, I had one glimpse 
of a huge pine-forested ravine upon my left, a foaming river, and a 
sky already coloured with the fires of dawn.  I am usually very 
calm over the displays of nature; but you will scarce believe how 
my heart leaped at this.  It was like meeting one's wife.  I had 
come home again - home from unsightly deserts to the green and 
habitable corners of the earth.  Every spire of pine along the 
hill-top, every trouty pool along that mountain river, was more 
dear to me than a blood relation.  Few people have praised God more 
happily than I did.  And thenceforward, down by Blue Canon, Alta, 
Dutch Flat, and all the old mining camps, through a sea of mountain 
forests, dropping thousands of feet toward the far sea-level as we 
went, not I only, but all the passengers on board, threw off their 
sense of dirt and heat and weariness, and bawled like schoolboys, 
and thronged with shining eyes upon the platform and became new 
creatures within and without.  The sun no longer oppressed us with 
heat, it only shone laughingly along the mountain-side, until we 
were fain to laugh ourselves for glee.  At every turn we could see 
farther into the land and our own happy futures.  At every town the 
cocks were tossing their clear notes into the golden air, and 
crowing for the new day and the new country.  For this was indeed 
our destination; this was "the good country" we had been going to 
so long.

By afternoon we were at Sacramento, the city of gardens in a plain 
of corn; and the next day before the dawn we were lying to upon the 
Oakland side of San Francisco Bay.  The day was breaking as we 
crossed the ferry; the fog was rising over the citied hills of San 
Francisco; the bay was perfect - not a ripple, scarce a stain, upon 
its blue expanse; everything was waiting, breathless, for the sun.  
A spot of cloudy gold lit first upon the head of Tamalpais, and 
then widened downward on its shapely shoulder; the air seemed to 
awaken, and began to sparkle; and suddenly

"The tall hills Titan discovered,"

and the city of San Francisco, and the bay of gold and corn, were 
lit from end to end with summer daylight.

[1879.]



CHAPTER II - THE OLD PACIFIC CAPITAL



THE WOODS AND THE PACIFIC


THE Bay of Monterey has been compared by no less a person than 
General Sherman to a bent fishing-hook; and the comparison, if less 
important than the march through Georgia, still shows the eye of a 
soldier for topography.  Santa Cruz sits exposed at the shank; the 
mouth of the Salinas river is at the middle of the bend; and 
Monterey itself is cosily ensconced beside the barb.  Thus the 
ancient capital of California faces across the bay, while the 
Pacific Ocean, though hidden by low hills and forest, bombards her 
left flank and rear with never-dying surf.  In front of the town, 
the long line of sea-beach trends north and north-west, and then 
westward to enclose the bay.  The waves which lap so quietly about 
the jetties of Monterey grow louder and larger in the distance; you 
can see the breakers leaping high and white by day; at night, the 
outline of the shore is traced in transparent silver by the 
moonlight and the flying foam; and from all round, even in quiet 
weather, the distant, thrilling roar of the Pacific hangs over the 
coast and the adjacent country like smoke above a battle.

These long beaches are enticing to the idle man.  It would be hard 
to find a walk more solitary and at the same time more exciting to 
the mind.  Crowds of ducks and sea-gulls hover over the sea.  
Sandpipers trot in and out by troops after the retiring waves, 
trilling together in a chorus of infinitesimal song.  Strange sea-
tangles, new to the European eye, the bones of whales, or sometimes 
a whole whale's carcase, white with carrion-gulls and poisoning the 
wind, lie scattered here and there along the sands.  The waves come 
in slowly, vast and green, curve their translucent necks, and burst 
with a surprising uproar, that runs, waxing and waning, up and down 
the long key-board of the beach.  The foam of these great ruins 
mounts in an instant to the ridge of the sand glacis, swiftly 
fleets back again, and is met and buried by the next breaker.  The 
interest is perpetually fresh.  On no other coast that I know shall 
you enjoy, in calm, sunny weather, such a spectacle of Ocean's 
greatness, such beauty of changing colour, or such degrees of 
thunder in the sound.  The very air is more than usually salt by 
this Homeric deep.

Inshore, a tract of sand-hills borders on the beach.  Here and 
there a lagoon, more or less brackish, attracts the birds and 
hunters.  A rough, undergrowth partially conceals the sand.  The 
crouching, hardy live-oaks flourish singly or in thickets - the 
kind of wood for murderers to crawl among - and here and there the 
skirts of the forest extend downward from the hills with a floor of 
turf and long aisles of pine-trees hung with Spaniard's Beard.  
Through this quaint desert the railway cars drew near to Monterey 
from the junction at Salinas City - though that and so many other 
things are now for ever altered - and it was from here that you had 
the first view of the old township lying in the sands, its white 
windmills bickering in the chill, perpetual wind, and the first 
fogs of the evening drawing drearily around it from the sea.

The one common note of all this country is the haunting presence of 
the ocean.  A great faint sound of breakers follows you high up 
into the inland canons; the roar of water dwells in the clean, 
empty rooms of Monterey as in a shell upon the chimney; go where 
you will, you have but to pause and listen to hear the voice of the 
Pacific.  You pass out of the town to the south-west, and mount the 
hill among pine-woods.  Glade, thicket, and grove surround you.  
You follow winding sandy tracks that lead nowhither.  You see a 
deer; a multitude of quail arises.  But the sound of the sea still 
follows you as you advance, like that of wind among the trees, only 
harsher and stranger to the ear; and when at length you gain the 
summit, out breaks on every hand and with freshened vigour that 
same unending, distant, whispering rumble of the ocean; for now you 
are on the top of Monterey peninsula, and the noise no longer only 
mounts to you from behind along the beach towards Santa Cruz, but 
from your right also, round by Chinatown and Pinos lighthouse, and 
from down before you to the mouth of the Carmello river.  The whole 
woodland is begirt with thundering surges.  The silence that 
immediately surrounds you where you stand is not so much broken as 
it is haunted by this distant, circling rumour.  It sets your 
senses upon edge; you strain your attention; you are clearly and 
unusually conscious of small sounds near at hand; you walk 
listening like an Indian hunter; and that voice of the Pacific is a 
sort of disquieting company to you in your walk.

When once I was in these woods I found it difficult to turn 
homeward.  All woods lure a rambler onward; but in those of 
Monterey it was the surf that particularly invited me to prolong my 
walks.  I would push straight for the shore where I thought it to 
be nearest.  Indeed, there was scarce a direction that would not, 
sooner or later, have brought me forth on the Pacific.  The 
emptiness of the woods gave me a sense of freedom and discovery in 
these excursions.  I never in all my visits met but one man.  He 
was a Mexican, very dark of hue, but smiling and fat, and he 
carried an axe, though his true business at that moment was to seek 
for straying cattle.  I asked him what o'clock it was, but he 
seemed neither to know nor care; and when he in his turn asked me 
for news of his cattle, I showed myself equally indifferent.  We 
stood and smiled upon each other for a few seconds, and then turned 
without a word and took our several ways across the forest.

One day - I shall never forget it - I had taken a trail that was 
new to me.  After a while the woods began to open, the sea to sound 
nearer hand.  I came upon a road, and, to my surprise, a stile.  A 
step or two farther, and, without leaving the woods, I found myself 
among trim houses.  I walked through street after street, parallel 
and at right angles, paved with sward and dotted with trees, but 
still undeniable streets, and each with its name posted at the 
corner, as in a real town.  Facing down the main thoroughfare - 
"Central Avenue," as it was ticketed - I saw an open-air temple, 
with benches and sounding-board, as though for an orchestra.  The 
houses were all tightly shuttered; there was no smoke, no sound but 
of the waves, no moving thing.  I have never been in any place that 
seemed so dreamlike.  Pompeii is all in a bustle with visitors, and 
its antiquity and strangeness deceive the imagination; but this 
town had plainly not been built above a year or two, and perhaps 
had been deserted overnight.  Indeed, it was not so much like a 
deserted town as like a scene upon the stage by daylight, and with 
no one on the boards.  The barking of a dog led me at last to the 
only house still occupied, where a Scotch pastor and his wife pass 
the winter alone in this empty theatre.  The place was "The Pacific 
Camp Grounds, the Christian Seaside Resort."  Thither, in the warm 
season, crowds come to enjoy a life of teetotalism, religion, and 
flirtation, which I am willing to think blameless and agreeable.  
The neighbourhood at least is well selected.  The Pacific booms in 
front.  Westward is Point Pinos, with the lighthouse in a 
wilderness of sand, where you will find the lightkeeper playing the 
piano, making models and bows and arrows, studying dawn and sunrise 
in amateur oil-painting, and with a dozen other elegant pursuits 
and interests to surprise his brave, old-country rivals.  To the 
east, and still nearer, you will come upon a space of open down, a 
hamlet, a haven among rocks, a world of surge and screaming sea-
gulls.  Such scenes are very similar in different climates; they 
appear homely to the eyes of all; to me this was like a dozen spots 
in Scotland.  And yet the boats that ride in the haven are of 
strange outlandish design; and, if you walk into the hamlet, you 
will behold costumes and faces and hear a tongue that are 
unfamiliar to the memory.  The joss-stick burns, the opium pipe is 
smoked, the floors are strewn with slips of coloured paper - 
prayers, you would say, that had somehow missed their destination - 
and a man guiding his upright pencil from right to left across the 
sheet, writes home the news of Monterey to the Celestial Empire.

The woods and the Pacific rule between them the climate of this 
seaboard region.  On the streets of Monterey, when the air does not 
smell salt from the one, it will be blowing perfumed from the 
resinous tree-tops of the other.  For days together a hot, dry air 
will overhang the town, close as from an oven, yet healthful and 
aromatic in the nostrils.  The cause is not far to seek, for the 
woods are afire, and the hot wind is blowing from the hills.  These 
fires are one of the great dangers of California.  I have seen from 
Monterey as many as three at the same time, by day a cloud of 
smoke, by night a red coal of conflagration in the distance.  A 
little thing will start them, and, if the wind be favourable, they 
gallop over miles of country faster than a horse.  The inhabitants 
must turn out and work like demons, for it is not only the pleasant 
groves that are destroyed; the climate and the soil are equally at 
stake, and these fires prevent the rains of the next winter and dry 
up perennial fountains.  California has been a land of promise in 
its time, like Palestine; but if the woods continue so swiftly to 
perish, it may become, like Palestine, a land of desolation.

To visit the woods while they are languidly burning is a strange 
piece of experience.  The fire passes through the underbrush at a 
run.  Every here and there a tree flares up instantaneously from 
root to summit, scattering tufts of flame, and is quenched, it 
seems, as quickly.  But this last is only in semblance.  For after 
this first squib-like conflagration of the dry moss and twigs, 
there remains behind a deep-rooted and consuming fire in the very 
entrails of the tree.  The resin of the pitch-pine is principally 
condensed at the base of the bole and in the spreading roots.  
Thus, after the light, showy, skirmishing flames, which are only as 
the match to the explosion, have already scampered down the wind 
into the distance, the true harm is but beginning for this giant of 
the woods.  You may approach the tree from one side, and see it 
scorched indeed from top to bottom, but apparently survivor of the 
peril.  Make the circuit, and there, on the other side of the 
column, is a clear mass of living coal, spreading like an ulcer; 
while underground, to their most extended fibre, the roots are 
being eaten out by fire, and the smoke is rising through the 
fissures to the surface.  A little while, and, without a nod of 
warning, the huge pine-tree snaps off short across the ground and 
falls prostrate with a crash.  Meanwhile the fire continues its 
silent business; the roots are reduced to a fine ash; and long 
afterwards, if you pass by, you will find the earth pierced with 
radiating galleries, and preserving the design of all these 
subterranean spurs, as though it were the mould for a new tree 
instead of the print of an old one.  These pitch-pines of Monterey 
are, with the single exception of the Monterey cypress, the most 
fantastic of forest trees.  No words can give an idea of the 
contortion of their growth; they might figure without change in a 
circle of the nether hell as Dante pictured it; and at the rate at 
which trees grow, and at which forest fires spring up and gallop 
through the hills of California, we may look forward to a time when 
there will not be one of them left standing in that land of their 
nativity.  At least they have not so much to fear from the axe, but 
perish by what may be called a natural although a violent death; 
while it is man in his short-sighted greed that robs the country of 
the nobler redwood.  Yet a little while and perhaps all the hills 
of seaboard California may be as bald as Tamalpais.

I have an interest of my own in these forest fires, for I came so 
near to lynching on one occasion, that a braver man might have 
retained a thrill from the experience.  I wished to be certain 
whether it was the moss, that quaint funereal ornament of 
Californian forests, which blazed up so rapidly when the flame 
first touched the tree.  I suppose I must have been under the 
influence of Satan, for instead of plucking off a piece for my 
experiment what should I do but walk up to a great pine-tree in a 
portion of the wood which had escaped so much as scorching, strike 
a match, and apply the flame gingerly to one of the tassels.  The 
tree went off simply like a rocket; in three seconds it was a 
roaring pillar of fire.  Close by I could hear the shouts of those 
who were at work combating the original conflagration.  I could see 
the waggon that had brought them tied to a live oak in a piece of 
open; I could even catch the flash of an axe as it swung up through 
the underwood into the sunlight.  Had any one observed the result 
of my experiment my neck was literally not worth a pinch of snuff; 
after a few minutes of passionate expostulation I should have been 
run up to convenient bough.

To die for faction is a common evil;
But to be hanged for nonsense is the devil.

I have run repeatedly, but never as I ran that day.  At night I 
went out of town, and there was my own particular fire, quite 
distinct from the other, and burning as I thought with even greater 
vigour.

But it is the Pacific that exercises the most direct and obvious 
power upon the climate.  At sunset, for months together, vast, wet, 
melancholy fogs arise and come shoreward from the ocean.  From the 
hill-top above Monterey the scene is often noble, although it is 
always sad.  The upper air is still bright with sunlight; a glow 
still rests upon the Gabelano Peak; but the fogs are in possession 
of the lower levels; they crawl in scarves among the sandhills; 
they float, a little higher, in clouds of a gigantic size and often 
of a wild configuration; to the south, where they have struck the 
seaward shoulder of the mountains of Santa Lucia, they double back 
and spire up skyward like smoke.  Where their shadow touches, 
colour dies out of the world.  The air grows chill and deadly as 
they advance.  The trade-wind freshens, the trees begin to sigh, 
and all the windmills in Monterey are whirling and creaking and 
filling their cisterns with the brackish water of the sands.  It 
takes but a little while till the invasion is complete.  The sea, 
in its lighter order, has submerged the earth.  Monterey is 
curtained in for the night in thick, wet, salt, and frigid clouds, 
so to remain till day returns; and before the sun's rays they 
slowly disperse and retreat in broken squadrons to the bosom of the 
sea.  And yet often when the fog is thickest and most chill, a few 
steps out of the town and up the slope, the night will be dry and 
warm and full of inland perfume.


MEXICANS, AMERICANS, AND INDIANS


The history of Monterey has yet to be written.  Founded by Catholic 
missionaries, a place of wise beneficence to Indians, a place of 
arms, a Mexican capital continually wrested by one faction from 
another, an American capital when the first House of 
Representatives held its deliberations, and then falling lower and 
lower from the capital of the State to the capital of a county, and 
from that again, by the loss of its charter and town lands, to a 
mere bankrupt village, its rise and decline is typical of that of 
all Mexican institutions and even Mexican families in California.

Nothing is stranger in that strange State than the rapidity with 
which the soil has changed-hands.  The Mexicans, you may say, are 
all poor and landless, like their former capital; and yet both it 
and they hold themselves apart and preserve their ancient customs 
and something of their ancient air.

The town, when I was there, was a place of two or three streets, 
economically paved with sea-sand, and two or three lanes, which 
were watercourses in the rainy season, and were, at all times, rent 
up by fissures four or five feet deep.  There were no street 
lights.  Short sections of wooden sidewalk only added to the 
dangers of the night, for they were often high above the level of 
the roadway, and no one could tell where they would be likely to 
begin or end.  The houses were, for the most part, built of unbaked 
adobe brick, many of them old for so new a country, some of very 
elegant proportions, with low, spacious, shapely rooms, and walls 
so thick that the heat of summer never dried them to the heart.  At 
the approach of the rainy season a deathly chill and a graveyard 
smell began to hang about the lower floors; and diseases of the 
chest are common and fatal among house-keeping people of either 
sex.

There was no activity but in and around the saloons, where people 
sat almost all day long playing cards.  The smallest excursion was 
made on horseback.  You would scarcely ever see the main street 
without a horse or two tied to posts, and making a fine figure with 
their Mexican housings.  It struck me oddly to come across some of 
the CORNHILL illustrations to Mr. Blackmore's EREMA, and see all 
the characters astride on English saddles.  As a matter of fact, an 
English saddle is a rarity even in San Francisco, and, you may say, 
a thing unknown in all the rest of California.  In a place so 
exclusively Mexican as Monterey, you saw not only Mexican saddles 
but true Vaquero riding - men always at the hand-gallop up hill and 
down dale, and round the sharpest corner, urging their horses with 
cries and gesticulations and cruel rotatory spurs, checking them 
dead with a touch, or wheeling them right-about-face in a square 
yard.  The type of face and character of bearing are surprisingly 
un-American.  The first ranged from something like the pure 
Spanish, to something, in its sad fixity, not unlike the pure 
Indian, although I do not suppose there was one pure blood of 
either race in all the country.  As for the second, it was a matter 
of perpetual surprise to find, in that world of absolutely 
mannerless Americans, a people full of deportment, solemnly 
courteous, and doing all things with grace and decorum.  In dress 
they ran to colour and bright sashes.  Not even the most 
Americanised could always resist the temptation to stick a red rose 
into his hat-band.  Not even the most Americanised would descend to 
wear the vile dress hat of civilisation.  Spanish was the language 
of the streets.  It was difficult to get along without a word or 
two of that language for an occasion.  The only communications in 
which the population joined were with a view to amusement.  A 
weekly public ball took place with great etiquette, in addition to 
the numerous fandangoes in private houses.  There was a really fair 
amateur brass band.  Night after night serenaders would be going 
about the street, sometimes in a company and with several 
instruments and voice together, sometimes severally, each guitar 
before a different window.  It was a strange thing to lie awake in 
nineteenth-century America, and hear the guitar accompany, and one 
of these old, heart-breaking Spanish love-songs mount into the 
night air, perhaps in a deep baritone, perhaps in that high-
pitched, pathetic, womanish alto which is so common among Mexican 
men, and which strikes on the unaccustomed ear as something not 
entirely human but altogether sad.

The town, then, was essentially and wholly Mexican; and yet almost 
all the land in the neighbourhood was held by Americans, and it was 
from the same class, numerically so small, that the principal 
officials were selected.  This Mexican and that Mexican would 
describe to you his old family estates, not one rood of which 
remained to him.  You would ask him how that came about, and elicit 
some tangled story back-foremost, from which you gathered that the 
Americans had been greedy like designing men, and the Mexicans 
greedy like children, but no other certain fact.  Their merits and 
their faults contributed alike to the ruin of the former 
landholders.  It is true they were improvident, and easily dazzled 
with the sight of ready money; but they were gentlefolk besides, 
and that in a way which curiously unfitted them to combat Yankee 
craft.  Suppose they have a paper to sign, they would think it a 
reflection on the other party to examine the terms with any great 
minuteness; nay, suppose them to observe some doubtful clause, it 
is ten to one they would refuse from delicacy to object to it.  I 
know I am speaking within the mark, for I have seen such a case 
occur, and the Mexican, in spite of the advice of his lawyer, has 
signed the imperfect paper like a lamb.  To have spoken in the 
matter, he said, above all to have let the other party guess that 
he had seen a lawyer, would have "been like doubting his word."  
The scruple sounds oddly to one of ourselves, who have been brought 
up to understand all business as a competition in fraud, and 
honesty itself to be a virtue which regards the carrying out but 
not the creation of agreements.  This single unworldly trait will 
account for much of that revolution of which we are speaking.  The 
Mexicans have the name of being great swindlers, but certainly the 
accusation cuts both ways.  In a contest of this sort, the entire 
booty would scarcely have passed into the hands of the more 
scupulous race.

Physically the Americans have triumphed; but it is not entirely 
seen how far they have themselves been morally conquered.  This is, 
of course, but a part of a part of an extraordinary problem now in 
the course of being solved in the various States of the American 
Union.  I am reminded of an anecdote.  Some years ago, at a great 
sale of wine, all the odd lots were purchased by a grocer in a 
small way in the old town of Edinburgh.  The agent had the 
curiosity to visit him some time after and inquire what possible 
use he could have for such material.  He was shown, by way of 
answer, a huge vat where all the liquors, from humble Gladstone to 
imperial Tokay, were fermenting together.  "And what," he asked, 
"do you propose to call this?"  "I'm no very sure," replied the 
grocer, "but I think it's going to turn out port."  In the older 
Eastern States, I think we may say that this hotch-potch of races 
in going to turn out English, or thereabout.  But the problem is 
indefinitely varied in other zones.  The elements are differently 
mingled in the south, in what we may call the Territorial belt and 
in the group of States on the Pacific coast.  Above all, in these 
last, we may look to see some monstrous hybrid - Whether good or 
evil, who shall forecast? but certainly original and all their own.  
In my little restaurant at Monterey, we have sat down to table day 
after day, a Frenchman, two Portuguese, an Italian, a Mexican, and 
a Scotchman:  we had for common visitors an American from Illinois, 
a nearly pure blood Indian woman, and a naturalised Chinese; and 
from time to time a Switzer and a German came down from country 
ranches for the night.  No wonder that the Pacific coast is a 
foreign land to visitors from the Eastern States, for each race 
contributes something of its own.  Even the despised Chinese have 
taught the youth of California, none indeed of their virtues, but 
the debasing use of opium.  And chief among these influences is 
that of the Mexicans.

The Mexicans although in the State are out of it.  They still 
preserve a sort of international independence, and keep their 
affairs snug to themselves.  Only four or five years ago Vasquez, 
the bandit, his troops being dispersed and the hunt too hot for him 
in other parts of California, returned to his native Monterey, and 
was seen publicly in her streets and saloons, fearing no man.  The 
year that I was there, there occurred two reputed murders.  As the 
Montereyans are exceptionally vile speakers of each other and of 
every one behind his back, it is not possible for me to judge how 
much truth there may have been in these reports; but in the one 
case every one believed, and in the other some suspected, that 
there had been foul play; and nobody dreamed for an instant of 
taking the authorities into their counsel.  Now this is, of course, 
characteristic enough of the Mexicans; but it is a noteworthy 
feature that all the Americans in Monterey acquiesced without a 
word in this inaction.  Even when I spoke to them upon the subject, 
they seemed not to understand my surprise; they had forgotten the 
traditions of their own race and upbringing, and become, in a word, 
wholly Mexicanised.

Again, the Mexicans, having no ready money to speak of, rely almost 
entirely in their business transactions upon each other's worthless 
paper.  Pedro the penniless pays you with an I O U from the equally 
penniless Miguel.  It is a sort of local currency by courtesy.  
Credit in these parts has passed into a superstition.  I have seen 
a strong, violent man struggling for months to recover a debt, and 
getting nothing but an exchange of waste paper.  The very 
storekeepers are averse to asking for cash payments, and are more 
surprised than pleased when they are offered.  They fear there must 
be something under it, and that you mean to withdraw your custom 
from them.  I have seen the enterprising chemist and stationer 
begging me with fervour to let my account run on, although I had my 
purse open in my hand; and partly from the commonness of the case, 
partly from some remains of that generous old Mexican tradition 
which made all men welcome to their tables, a person may be 
notoriously both unwilling and unable to pay, and still find credit 
for the necessaries of life in the stores of Monterey.  Now this 
villainous habit of living upon "tick" has grown into Californian 
nature.  I do not mean that the American and European storekeepers 
of Monterey are as lax as Mexicans; I mean that American farmers in 
many parts of the State expect unlimited credit, and profit by it 
in the meanwhile, without a thought for consequences.  Jew 
storekeepers have already learned the advantage to be gained from 
this; they lead on the farmer into irretrievable indebtedness, and 
keep him ever after as their bond-slave hopelessly grinding in the 
mill.  So the whirligig of time brings in its revenges, and except 
that the Jew knows better than to foreclose, you may see Americans 
bound in the same chains with which they themselves had formerly 
bound the Mexican.  It seems as if certain sorts of follies, like 
certain sorts of grain, were natural to the soil rather than to the 
race that holds and tills it for the moment.

In the meantime, however, the Americans rule in Monterey County.  
The new county seat, Salinas City, in the bald, corn-bearing plain 
under the Gabelano Peak, is a town of a purely American character.  
The land is held, for the most part, in those enormous tracts which 
are another legacy of Mexican days, and form the present chief 
danger and disgrace of California; and the holders are mostly of 
American or British birth.  We have here in England no idea of the 
troubles and inconveniences which flow from the existence of these 
large landholders - land-thieves, land-sharks, or land-grabbers, 
they are more commonly and plainly called.  Thus the townlands of 
Monterey are all in the hands of a single man.  How they came there 
is an obscure, vexatious question, and, rightly or wrongly, the man 
is hated with a great hatred.  His life has been repeatedly in 
danger.  Not very long ago, I was told, the stage was stopped and 
examined three evenings in succession by disguised horsemen 
thirsting for his blood.  A certain house on the Salinas road, they 
say, he always passes in his buggy at full speed, for the squatter 
sent him warning long ago.  But a year since he was publicly 
pointed out for death by no less a man than Mr. Dennis Kearney.  
Kearney is a man too well known in California, but a word of 
explanation is required for English readers.  Originally an Irish 
dray-man, he rose, by his command of bad language, to almost 
dictatorial authority in the State; throned it there for six months 
or so, his mouth full of oaths, gallowses, and conflagrations; was 
first snuffed out last winter by Mr. Coleman, backed by his San 
Francisco Vigilantes and three gatling guns; completed his own ruin 
by throwing in his lot with the grotesque Green-backer party; and 
had at last to be rescued by his old enemies, the police, out of 
the hands of his rebellious followers.  It was while he was at the 
top of his fortune that Kearney visited Monterey with his battle-
cry against Chinese labour, the railroad monopolists, and the land-
thieves; and his one articulate counsel to the Montereyans was to 
"hang David Jacks."  Had the town been American, in my private 
opinion, this would have been done years ago.  Land is a subject on 
which there is no jesting in the West, and I have seen my friend 
the lawyer drive out of Monterey to adjust a competition of titles 
with the face of a captain going into battle and his Smith-and-
Wesson convenient to his hand.

On the ranche of another of these landholders you may find our old 
friend, the truck system, in full operation.  Men live there, year 
in year out, to cut timber for a nominal wage, which is all 
consumed in supplies.  The longer they remain in this desirable 
service the deeper they will fall in debt - a burlesque injustice 
in a new country, where labour should be precious, and one of those 
typical instances which explains the prevailing discontent and the 
success of the demagogue Kearney.

In a comparison between what was and what is in California, the 
praisers of times past will fix upon the Indians of Carmel.  The 
valley drained by the river so named is a true Californian valley, 
bare, dotted with chaparal, overlooked by quaint, unfinished hills.  
The Carmel runs by many pleasant farms, a clear and shallow river, 
loved by wading kine; and at last, as it is falling towards a 
quicksand and the great Pacific, passes a ruined mission on a hill.  
From the mission church the eye embraces a great field of ocean, 
and the ear is filled with a continuous sound of distant breakers 
on the shore.  But the day of the Jesuit has gone by, the day of 
the Yankee has succeeded, and there is no one left to care for the 
converted savage.  The church is roofless and ruinous, sea-breezes 
and sea-fogs, and the alternation of the rain and sunshine, daily 
widening the breaches and casting the crockets from the wall.  As 
an antiquity in this new land, a quaint specimen of missionary 
architecture, and a memorial of good deeds, it had a triple claim 
to preservation from all thinking people; but neglect and abuse 
have been its portion.  There is no sign of American interference, 
save where a headboard has been torn from a grave to be a mark for 
pistol bullets.  So it is with the Indians for whom it was erected.  
Their lands, I was told, are being yearly encroached upon by the 
neighbouring American proprietor, and with that exception no man 
troubles his head for the Indians of Carmel.  Only one day in the 
year, the day before our Guy Fawkes, the PADRE drives over the hill 
from Monterey; the little sacristy, which is the only covered 
portion of the church, is filled with seats and decorated for the 
service; the Indians troop together, their bright dresses 
contrasting with their dark and melancholy faces; and there, among 
a crowd of somewhat unsympathetic holiday-makers, you may hear God 
served with perhaps more touching circumstances than in any other 
temple under heaven.  An Indian, stone-blind and about eighty years 
of age, conducts the singing; other Indians compose the choir; yet 
they have the Gregorian music at their finger ends, and pronounce 
the Latin so correctly that I could follow the meaning as they 
sang.  The pronunciation was odd and nasal, the singing hurried and 
staccato.  "In saecula saeculoho-horum," they went, with a vigorous 
aspirate to every additional syllable.  I have never seen faces 
more vividly lit up with joy than the faces of these Indian 
singers.  It was to them not only the worship of God, nor an act by 
which they recalled and commemorated better days, but was besides 
an exercise of culture, where all they knew of art and letters was 
united and expressed.  And it made a man's heart sorry for the good 
fathers of yore who had taught them to dig and to reap, to read and 
to sing, who had given them European mass-books which they still 
preserve and study in their cottages, and who had now passed away 
from all authority and influence in that land - to be succeeded by 
greedy land-thieves and sacrilegious pistol-shots.  So ugly a thing 
may our Anglo-Saxon Protestantism appear beside the doings of the 
Society of Jesus.

But revolution in this world succeeds to revolution.  All that I 
say in this paper is in a paulo-past tense.  The Monterey of last 
year exists no longer.  A huge hotel has sprung up in the desert by 
the railway.  Three sets of diners sit down successively to table.  
Invaluable toilettes figure along the beach and between the live 
oaks; and Monterey is advertised in the newspapers, and posted in 
the waiting-rooms at railway stations, as a resort for wealth and 
fashion.  Alas for the little town! it is not strong enough to 
resist the influence of the flaunting caravanserai, and the poor, 
quaint, penniless native gentlemen of Monterey must perish, like a 
lower race, before the millionaire vulgarians of the Big Bonanza.

[1880]



CHAPTER III - FONTAINEBLEAU - VILLAGE COMMUNITIES OF PAINTERS



I


THE charm of Fontainebleau is a thing apart.  It is a place that 
people love even more than they admire.  The vigorous forest air, 
the silence, the majestic avenues of highway, the wilderness of 
tumbled boulders, the great age and dignity of certain groves - 
these are but ingredients, they are not the secret of the philtre.  
The place is sanative; the air, the light, the perfumes, and the 
shapes of things concord in happy harmony.  The artist may be idle 
and not fear the "blues."  He may dally with his life.  Mirth, 
lyric mirth, and a vivacious classical contentment are of the very 
essence of the better kind of art; and these, in that most smiling 
forest, he has the chance to learn or to remember.  Even on the 
plain of Biere, where the Angelus of Millet still tolls upon the 
ear of fancy, a larger air, a higher heaven, something ancient and 
healthy in the face of nature, purify the mind alike from dulness 
and hysteria.  There is no place where the young are more gladly 
conscious of their youth, or the old better contented with their 
age.

The fact of its great and special beauty further recommends this 
country to the artist.  The field was chosen by men in whose blood 
there still raced some of the gleeful or solemn exultation of great 
art - Millet who loved dignity like Michelangelo, Rousseau whose 
modern brush was dipped in the glamour of the ancients.  It was 
chosen before the day of that strange turn in the history of art, 
of which we now perceive the culmination in impressionistic tales 
and pictures - that voluntary aversion of the eye from all 
speciously strong and beautiful effects - that disinterested love 
of dulness which has set so many Peter Bells to paint the river-
side primrose.  It was then chosen for its proximity to Paris.  And 
for the same cause, and by the force of tradition, the painter of 
to-day continues to inhabit and to paint it.  There is in France 
scenery incomparable for romance and harmony.  Provence, and the 
valley of the Rhone from Vienne to Tarascon, are one succession of 
masterpieces waiting for the brush.  The beauty is not merely 
beauty; it tells, besides, a tale to the imagination, and surprises 
while it charms.  Here you shall see castellated towns that would 
befit the scenery of dreamland; streets that glow with colour like 
cathedral windows; hills of the most exquisite proportions; flowers 
of every precious colour, growing thick like grass.  All these, by 
the grace of railway travel, are brought to the very door of the 
modern painter; yet he does not seek them; he remains faithful to 
Fontainebleau, to the eternal bridge of Gretz, to the watering-pot 
cascade in Cernay valley.  Even Fontainebleau was chosen for him; 
even in Fontainebleau he shrinks from what is sharply charactered.  
But one thing, at least, is certain, whatever he may choose to 
paint and in whatever manner, it is good for the artist to dwell 
among graceful shapes.  Fontainebleau, if it be but quiet scenery, 
is classically graceful; and though the student may look for 
different qualities, this quality, silently present, will educate 
his hand and eye.

But, before all its other advantages - charm, loveliness, or 
proximity to Paris - comes the great fact that it is already 
colonised.  The institution of a painters' colony is a work of time 
and tact.  The population must be conquered.  The innkeeper has to 
be taught, and he soon learns, the lesson of unlimited credit; he 
must be taught to welcome as a favoured guest a young gentleman in 
a very greasy coat, and with little baggage beyond a box of colours 
and a canvas; and he must learn to preserve his faith in customers 
who will eat heartily and drink of the best, borrow money to buy 
tobacco, and perhaps not pay a stiver for a year.  A colour 
merchant has next to be attracted.  A certain vogue must be given 
to the place, lest the painter, most gregarious of animals, should 
find himself alone.  And no sooner are these first difficulties 
overcome, than fresh perils spring up upon the other side; and the 
bourgeois and the tourist are knocking at the gate.  This is the 
crucial moment for the colony.  If these intruders gain a footing, 
they not only banish freedom and amenity; pretty soon, by means of 
their long purses, they will have undone the education of the 
innkeeper; prices will rise and credit shorten; and the poor 
painter must fare farther on and find another hamlet.  "Not here, O 
Apollo!" will become his song.  Thus Trouville and, the other day, 
St. Raphael were lost to the arts.  Curious and not always edifying 
are the shifts that the French student uses to defend his lair; 
like the cuttlefish, he must sometimes blacken the waters of his 
chosen pool; but at such a time and for so practical a purpose Mrs. 
Grundy must allow him licence.  Where his own purse and credit are 
not threatened, he will do the honours of his village generously.  
Any artist is made welcome, through whatever medium he may seek 
expression; science is respected; even the idler, if he prove, as 
he so rarely does, a gentleman, will soon begin to find himself at 
home.  And when that essentially modern creature, the English or 
American girl-student, began to walk calmly into his favourite inns 
as if into a drawing-room at home, the French painter owned himself 
defenceless; he submitted or he fled.  His French respectability, 
quite as precise as ours, though covering different provinces of 
life, recoiled aghast before the innovation.  But the girls were 
painters; there was nothing to be done; and Barbizon, when I last 
saw it and for the time at least, was practically ceded to the fair 
invader.  Paterfamilias, on the other hand, the common tourist, the 
holiday shopman, and the cheap young gentleman upon the spree, he 
hounded from his villages with every circumstance of contumely.

This purely artistic society is excellent for the young artist.  
The lads are mostly fools; they hold the latest orthodoxy in its 
crudeness; they are at that stage of education, for the most part, 
when a man is too much occupied with style to be aware of the 
necessity for any matter; and this, above all for the Englishman, 
is excellent.  To work grossly at the trade, to forget sentiment, 
to think of his material and nothing else, is, for awhile at least, 
the king's highway of progress.  Here, in England, too many 
painters and writers dwell dispersed, unshielded, among the 
intelligent bourgeois.  These, when they are not merely 
indifferent, prate to him about the lofty aims and moral influence 
of art.  And this is the lad's ruin.  For art is, first of all and 
last of all, a trade.  The love of words and not a desire to 
publish new discoveries, the love of form and not a novel reading 
of historical events, mark the vocation of the writer and the 
painter.  The arabesque, properly speaking, and even in literature, 
is the first fancy of the artist; he first plays with his material 
as a child plays with a kaleidoscope; and he is already in a second 
stage when he begins to use his pretty counters for the end of 
representation.  In that, he must pause long and toil faithfully; 
that is his apprenticeship; and it is only the few who will really 
grow beyond it, and go forward, fully equipped, to do the business 
of real art - to give life to abstractions and significance and 
charm to facts.  In the meanwhile, let him dwell much among his 
fellow-craftsmen.  They alone can take a serious interest in the 
childish tasks and pitiful successes of these years.  They alone 
can behold with equanimity this fingering of the dumb keyboard, 
this polishing of empty sentences, this dull and literal painting 
of dull and insignificant subjects.  Outsiders will spur him on.  
They will say, "Why do you not write a great book? paint a great 
picture?"  If his guardian angel fail him, they may even persuade 
him to the attempt, and, ten to one, his hand is coarsened and his 
style falsified for life.

And this brings me to a warning.  The life of the apprentice to any 
art is both unstrained and pleasing; it is strewn with small 
successes in the midst of a career of failure, patiently supported; 
the heaviest scholar is conscious of a certain progress; and if he 
come not appreciably nearer to the art of Shakespeare, grows 
letter-perfect in the domain of A-B, ab.  But the time comes when a 
man should cease prelusory gymnastic, stand up, put a violence upon 
his will, and, for better or worse, begin the business of creation.  
This evil day there is a tendency continually to postpone:  above 
all with painters.  They have made so many studies that it has 
become a habit; they make more, the walls of exhibitions blush with 
them; and death finds these aged students still busy with their 
horn-book.  This class of man finds a congenial home in artist 
villages; in the slang of the English colony at Barbizon we used to 
call them "Snoozers."  Continual returns to the city, the society 
of men farther advanced, the study of great works, a sense of 
humour or, if such a thing is to be had, a little religion or 
philosophy, are the means of treatment.  It will be time enough to 
think of curing the malady after it has been caught; for to catch 
it is the very thing for which you seek that dream-land of the 
painters' village.  "Snoozing" is a part of the artistic education; 
and the rudiments must be learned stupidly, all else being 
forgotten, as if they were an object in themselves.

Lastly, there is something, or there seems to be something, in the 
very air of France that communicates the love of style.  Precision, 
clarity, the cleanly and crafty employment of material, a grace in 
the handling, apart from any value in the thought, seem to be 
acquired by the mere residence; or if not acquired, become at least 
the more appreciated.  The air of Paris is alive with this 
technical inspiration.  And to leave that airy city and awake next 
day upon the borders of the forest is but to change externals.  The 
same spirit of dexterity and finish breathes from the long alleys 
and the lofty groves, from the wildernesses that are still pretty 
in their confusion, and the great plain that contrives to be 
decorative in its emptiness.


II


In spite of its really considerable extent, the forest of 
Fontainebleau is hardly anywhere tedious.  I know the whole western 
side of it with what, I suppose, I may call thoroughness; well 
enough at least to testify that there is no square mile without 
some special character and charm.  Such quarters, for instance, as 
the Long Rocher, the Bas-Breau, and the Reine Blanche, might be a 
hundred miles apart; they have scarce a point in common beyond the 
silence of the birds.  The two last are really conterminous; and in 
both are tall and ancient trees that have outlived a thousand 
political vicissitudes.  But in the one the great oaks prosper 
placidly upon an even floor; they beshadow a great field; and the 
air and the light are very free below their stretching boughs.  In 
the other the trees find difficult footing; castles of white rock 
lie tumbled one upon another, the foot slips, the crooked viper 
slumbers, the moss clings in the crevice; and above it all the 
great beech goes spiring and casting forth her arms, and, with a 
grace beyond church architecture, canopies this rugged chaos.  
Meanwhile, dividing the two cantons, the broad white causeway of 
the Paris road runs in an avenue:  a road conceived for pageantry 
and for triumphal marches, an avenue for an army; but, its days of 
glory over, it now lies grilling in the sun between cool groves, 
and only at intervals the vehicle of the cruising tourist is seen 
far away and faintly audible along its ample sweep.  A little upon 
one side, and you find a district of sand and birch and boulder; a 
little upon the other lies the valley of Apremont, all juniper and 
heather; and close beyond that you may walk into a zone of pine 
trees.  So artfully are the ingredients mingled.  Nor must it be 
forgotten that, in all this part, you come continually forth upon a 
hill-top, and behold the plain, northward and westward, like an 
unrefulgent sea; nor that all day long the shadows keep changing; 
and at last, to the red fires of sunset, night succeeds, and with 
the night a new forest, full of whisper, gloom, and fragrance.  
There are few things more renovating than to leave Paris, the 
lamplit arches of the Carrousel, and the long alignment of the 
glittering streets, and to bathe the senses in this fragrant 
darkness of the wood.

In this continual variety the mind is kept vividly alive.  It is a 
changeful place to paint, a stirring place to live in.  As fast as 
your foot carries you, you pass from scene to scene, each 
vigorously painted in the colours of the sun, each endeared by that 
hereditary spell of forests on the mind of man who still remembers 
and salutes the ancient refuge of his race.

And yet the forest has been civilised throughout.  The most savage 
corners bear a name, and have been cherished like antiquities; in 
the most remote, Nature has prepared and balanced her effects as if 
with conscious art; and man, with his guiding arrows of blue paint, 
has countersigned the picture.  After your farthest wandering, you 
are never surprised to come forth upon the vast avenue of highway, 
to strike the centre point of branching alleys, or to find the 
aqueduct trailing, thousand-footed, through the brush.  It is not a 
wilderness; it is rather a preserve.  And, fitly enough, the centre 
of the maze is not a hermit's cavern.  In the midst, a little 
mirthful town lies sunlit, humming with the business of pleasure; 
and the palace, breathing distinction and peopled by historic 
names, stands smokeless among gardens.

Perhaps the last attempt at savage life was that of the harmless 
humbug who called himself the hermit.  In a great tree, close by 
the highroad, he had built himself a little cabin after the manner 
of the Swiss Family Robinson; thither he mounted at night, by the 
romantic aid of a rope ladder; and if dirt be any proof of 
sincerity, the man was savage as a Sioux.  I had the pleasure of 
his acquaintance; he appeared grossly stupid, not in his perfect 
wits, and interested in nothing but small change; for that he had a 
great avidity.  In the course of time he proved to be a chicken-
stealer, and vanished from his perch; and perhaps from the first he 
was no true votary of forest freedom, but an ingenious, 
theatrically-minded beggar, and his cabin in the tree was only 
stock-in-trade to beg withal.  The choice of his position would 
seem to indicate so much; for if in the forest there are no places 
still to be discovered, there are many that have been forgotten, 
and that lie unvisited.  There, to be sure, are the blue arrows 
waiting to reconduct you, now blazed upon a tree, now posted in the 
corner of a rock.  But your security from interruption is complete; 
you might camp for weeks, if there were only water, and not a soul 
suspect your presence; and if I may suppose the reader to have 
committed some great crime and come to me for aid, I think I could 
still find my way to a small cavern, fitted with a hearth and 
chimney, where he might lie perfectly concealed.  A confederate 
landscape-painter might daily supply him with food; for water, he 
would have to make a nightly tramp as far as to the nearest pond; 
and at last, when the hue and cry began to blow over, he might get 
gently on the train at some side station, work round by a series of 
junctions, and be quietly captured at the frontier.

Thus Fontainebleau, although it is truly but a pleasure-ground, and 
although, in favourable weather, and in the more celebrated 
quarters, it literally buzzes with the tourist, yet has some of the 
immunities and offers some of the repose of natural forests.  And 
the solitary, although he must return at night to his frequented 
inn, may yet pass the day with his own thoughts in the 
companionable silence of the trees.  The demands of the imagination 
vary; some can be alone in a back garden looked upon by windows; 
others, like the ostrich, are content with a solitude that meets 
the eye; and others, again, expand in fancy to the very borders of 
their desert, and are irritably conscious of a hunter's camp in an 
adjacent county.  To these last, of course, Fontainebleau will seem 
but an extended tea-garden:  a Rosherville on a by-day.  But to the 
plain man it offers solitude:  an excellent thing in itself, and a 
good whet for company.


III


I was for some time a consistent Barbizonian; ET EGO IN ARCADIA 
VIXI, it was a pleasant season; and that noiseless hamlet lying 
close among the borders of the wood is for me, as for so many 
others, a green spot in memory.  The great Millet was just dead, 
the green shutters of his modest house were closed; his daughters 
were in mourning.  The date of my first visit was thus an epoch in 
the history of art:  in a lesser way, it was an epoch in the 
history of the Latin Quarter.  The PETIT CENACLE was dead and 
buried; Murger and his crew of sponging vagabonds were all at rest 
from their expedients; the tradition of their real life was nearly 
lost; and the petrified legend of the VIE DE BOHEME had become a 
sort of gospel, and still gave the cue to zealous imitators.  But 
if the book be written in rose-water, the imitation was still 
farther expurgated; honesty was the rule; the innkeepers gave, as I 
have said, almost unlimited credit; they suffered the seediest 
painter to depart, to take all his belongings, and to leave his 
bill unpaid; and if they sometimes lost, it was by English and 
Americans alone.  At the same time, the great influx of Anglo-
Saxons had begun to affect the life of the studious.  There had 
been disputes; and, in one instance at least, the English and the 
Americans had made common cause to prevent a cruel pleasantry.  It 
would be well if nations and races could communicate their 
qualities; but in practice when they look upon each other, they 
have an eye to nothing but defects.  The Anglo-Saxon is essentially 
dishonest; the French is devoid by nature of the principle that we 
call "Fair Play."  The Frenchman marvelled at the scruples of his 
guest, and, when that defender of innocence retired over-seas and 
left his bills unpaid, he marvelled once again; the good and evil 
were, in his eyes, part and parcel of the same eccentricity; a 
shrug expressed his judgment upon both.

At Barbizon there was no master, no pontiff in the arts.  Palizzi 
bore rule at Gretz - urbane, superior rule - his memory rich in 
anecdotes of the great men of yore, his mind fertile in theories; 
sceptical, composed, and venerable to the eye; and yet beneath 
these outworks, all twittering with Italian superstition, his eye 
scouting for omens, and the whole fabric of his manners giving way 
on the appearance of a hunchback.  Cernay had Pelouse, the 
admirable, placid Pelouse, smilingly critical of youth, who, when a 
full-blown commercial traveller, suddenly threw down his samples, 
bought a colour-box, and became the master whom we have all 
admired.  Marlotte, for a central figure, boasted Olivier de Penne.  
Only Barbizon, since the death of Millet, was a headless 
commonwealth.  Even its secondary lights, and those who in my day 
made the stranger welcome, have since deserted it.  The good 
Lachevre has departed, carrying his household gods; and long before 
that Gaston Lafenestre was taken from our midst by an untimely 
death.  He died before he had deserved success; it may be, he would 
never have deserved it; but his kind, comely, modest countenance 
still haunts the memory of all who knew him.  Another - whom I will 
not name - has moved farther on, pursuing the strange Odyssey of 
his decadence.  His days of royal favour had departed even then; 
but he still retained, in his narrower life at Barbizon, a certain 
stamp of conscious importance, hearty, friendly, filling the room, 
the occupant of several chairs; nor had he yet ceased his losing 
battle, still labouring upon great canvases that none would buy, 
still waiting the return of fortune.  But these days also were too 
good to last; and the former favourite of two sovereigns fled, if I 
heard the truth, by night.  There was a time when he was counted a 
great man, and Millet but a dauber; behold, how the whirligig of 
time brings in his revenges!  To pity Millet is a piece of 
arrogance; if life be hard for such resolute and pious spirits, it 
is harder still for us, had we the wit to understand it; but we may 
pity his unhappier rival, who, for no apparent merit, was raised to 
opulence and momentary fame, and, through no apparent fault was 
suffered step by step to sink again to nothing.  No misfortune can 
exceed the bitterness of such back-foremost progress, even bravely 
supported as it was; but to those also who were taken early from 
the easel, a regret is due.  From all the young men of this period, 
one stood out by the vigour of his promise; he was in the age of 
fermentation, enamoured of eccentricities.  "Il faut faire de la 
peinture nouvelle," was his watchword; but if time and experience 
had continued his education, if he had been granted health to 
return from these excursions to the steady and the central, I must 
believe that the name of Hills had become famous.

Siron's inn, that excellent artists' barrack, was managed upon easy 
principles.  At any hour of the night, when you returned from 
wandering in the forest, you went to the billiard-room and helped 
yourself to liquors, or descended to the cellar and returned laden 
with beer or wine.  The Sirons were all locked in slumber; there 
was none to check your inroads; only at the week's end a 
computation was made, the gross sum was divided, and a varying 
share set down to every lodger's name under the rubric:  ESTRATS.  
Upon the more long-suffering the larger tax was levied; and your 
bill lengthened in a direct proportion to the easiness of your 
disposition.  At any hour of the morning, again, you could get your 
coffee or cold milk, and set forth into the forest.  The doves had 
perhaps wakened you, fluttering into your chamber; and on the 
threshold of the inn you were met by the aroma of the forest.  
Close by were the great aisles, the mossy boulders, the 
interminable field of forest shadow.  There you were free to dream 
and wander.  And at noon, and again at six o'clock, a good meal 
awaited you on Siron's table.  The whole of your accommodation, set 
aside that varying item of the ESTRALS, cost you five francs a day; 
your bill was never offered you until you asked it; and if you were 
out of luck's way, you might depart for where you pleased and leave 
it pending.


IV


Theoretically, the house was open to all corners; practically, it 
was a kind of club.  The guests protected themselves, and, in so 
doing, they protected Siron.  Formal manners being laid aside, 
essential courtesy was the more rigidly exacted; the new arrival 
had to feel the pulse of the society; and a breach of its undefined 
observances was promptly punished.  A man might be as plain, as 
dull, as slovenly, as free of speech as he desired; but to a touch 
of presumption or a word of hectoring these free Barbizonians were 
as sensitive as a tea-party of maiden ladies.  I have seen people 
driven forth from Barbizon; it would be difficult to say in words 
what they had done, but they deserved their fate.  They had shown 
themselves unworthy to enjoy these corporate freedoms; they had 
pushed themselves; they had "made their head"; they wanted tact to 
appreciate the "fine shades" of Barbizonian etiquette.  And once 
they were condemned, the process of extrusion was ruthless in its 
cruelty; after one evening with the formidable Bodmer, the Baily of 
our commonwealth, the erring stranger was beheld no more; he rose 
exceeding early the next day, and the first coach conveyed him from 
the scene of his discomfiture.  These sentences of banishment were 
never, in my knowledge, delivered against an artist; such would, I 
believe, have been illegal; but the odd and pleasant fact is this, 
that they were never needed.  Painters, sculptors, writers, 
singers, I have seen all of these in Barbizon; and some were sulky, 
and some blatant and inane; but one and all entered at once into 
the spirit of the association.  This singular society is purely 
French, a creature of French virtues, and possibly of French 
defects.  It cannot be imitated by the English.  The roughness, the 
impatience, the more obvious selfishness, and even the more ardent 
friendships of the Anglo-Saxon, speedily dismember such a 
commonwealth.  But this random gathering of young French painters, 
with neither apparatus nor parade of government, yet kept the life 
of the place upon a certain footing, insensibly imposed their 
etiquette upon the docile, and by caustic speech enforced their 
edicts against the unwelcome.  To think of it is to wonder the more 
at the strange failure of their race upon the larger theatre.  This 
inbred civility - to use the word in its completest meaning - this 
natural and facile adjustment of contending liberties, seems all 
that is required to make a governable nation and a just and 
prosperous country.

Our society, thus purged and guarded, was full of high spirits, of 
laughter, and of the initiative of youth.  The few elder men who 
joined us were still young at heart, and took the key from their 
companions.  We returned from long stations in the fortifying air, 
our blood renewed by the sunshine, our spirits refreshed by the 
silence of the forest; the Babel of loud voices sounded good; we 
fell to eat and play like the natural man; and in the high inn 
chamber, panelled with indifferent pictures and lit by candles 
guttering in the night air, the talk and laughter sounded far into 
the night.  It was a good place and a good life for any naturally-
minded youth; better yet for the student of painting, and perhaps 
best of all for the student of letters.  He, too, was saturated in 
this atmosphere of style; he was shut out from the disturbing 
currents of the world, he might forget that there existed other and 
more pressing interests than that of art.  But, in such a place, it 
was hardly possible to write; he could not drug his conscience, 
like the painter, by the production of listless studies; he saw 
himself idle among many who were apparently, and some who were 
really, employed; and what with the impulse of increasing health 
and the continual provocation of romantic scenes, he became 
tormented with the desire to work.  He enjoyed a strenuous idleness 
full of visions, hearty meals, long, sweltering walks, mirth among 
companions; and still floating like music through his brain, 
foresights of great works that Shakespeare might be proud to have 
conceived, headless epics, glorious torsos of dramas, and words 
that were alive with import.  So in youth, like Moses from the 
mountain, we have sights of that House Beautiful of art which we 
shall never enter.  They are dreams and unsubstantial; visions of 
style that repose upon no base of human meaning; the last heart-
throbs of that excited amateur who has to die in all of us before 
the artist can be born.  But they come to us in such a rainbow of 
glory that all subsequent achievement appears dull and earthly in 
comparison.  We were all artists; almost all in the age of 
illusion, cultivating an imaginary genius, and walking to the 
strains of some deceiving Ariel; small wonder, indeed, if we were 
happy!  But art, of whatever nature, is a kind mistress; and though 
these dreams of youth fall by their own baselessness, others 
succeed, graver and more substantial; the symptoms change, the 
amiable malady endures; and still, at an equal distance, the House 
Beautiful shines upon its hill-top.


V


Gretz lies out of the forest, down by the bright river.  It boasts 
a mill, an ancient church, a castle, and a bridge of many 
sterlings.  And the bridge is a piece of public property; 
anonymously famous; beaming on the incurious dilettante from the 
walls of a hundred exhibitions.  I have seen it in the Salon; I 
have seen it in the Academy; I have seen it in the last French 
Exposition, excellently done by Bloomer; in a black-and-white by 
Mr. A. Henley, it once adorned this essay in the pages of the 
MAGAZINE OF ART.  Long-suffering bridge!  And if you visit Gretz 
to-morrow, you shall find another generation, camped at the bottom 
of Chevillon's garden under their white umbrellas, and doggedly 
painting it again.

The bridge taken for granted, Gretz is a less inspiring place than 
Barbizon.  I give it the palm over Cernay.  There is something 
ghastly in the great empty village square of Cernay, with the inn 
tables standing in one corner, as though the stage were set for 
rustic opera, and in the early morning all the painters breaking 
their fast upon white wine under the windows of the villagers.  It 
is vastly different to awake in Gretz, to go down the green inn-
garden, to find the river streaming through the bridge, and to see 
the dawn begin across the poplared level.  The meals are laid in 
the cool arbour, under fluttering leaves.  The splash of oars and 
bathers, the bathing costumes out to dry, the trim canoes beside 
the jetty, tell of a society that has an eye to pleasure.  There is 
"something to do" at Gretz.  Perhaps, for that very reason, I can 
recall no such enduring ardours, no such glories of exhilaration, 
as among the solemn groves and uneventful hours of Barbizon.  This 
"something to do" is a great enemy to joy; it is a way out of it; 
you wreak your high spirits on some cut-and-dry employment, and 
behold them gone!  But Gretz is a merry place after its kind:  
pretty to see, merry to inhabit.  The course of its pellucid river, 
whether up or down, is full of gentle attractions for the 
navigator:  islanded reed-mazes where, in autumn, the red berries 
cluster; the mirrored and inverted images of trees, lilies, and 
mills, and the foam and thunder of weirs.  And of all noble sweeps 
of roadway, none is nobler, on a windy dusk, than the highroad to 
Nemours between its lines of talking poplar.

But even Gretz is changed.  The old inn, long shored and trussed 
and buttressed, fell at length under the mere weight of years, and 
the place as it was is but a fading image in the memory of former 
guests.  They, indeed, recall the ancient wooden stair; they recall 
the rainy evening, the wide hearth, the blaze of the twig fire, and 
the company that gathered round the pillar in the kitchen.  But the 
material fabric is now dust; soon, with the last of its 
inhabitants, its very memory shall follow; and they, in their turn, 
shall suffer the same law, and, both in name and lineament, vanish 
from the world of men.  "For remembrance of the old house' sake," 
as Pepys once quaintly put it, let me tell one story.  When the 
tide of invasion swept over France, two foreign painters were left 
stranded and penniless in Gretz; and there, until the war was over, 
the Chevillons ungrudgingly harboured them.  It was difficult to 
obtain supplies; but the two waifs were still welcome to the best, 
sat down daily with the family to table, and at the due intervals 
were supplied with clean napkins, which they scrupled to employ.  
Madame Chevillon observed the fact and reprimanded them.  But they 
stood firm; eat they must, but having no money they would soil no 
napkins.


VI


Nemours and Moret, for all they are so picturesque, have been 
little visited by painters.  They are, indeed, too populous; they 
have manners of their own, and might resist the drastic process of 
colonisation.  Montigny has been somewhat strangely neglected, I 
never knew it inhabited but once, when Will H. Low installed 
himself there with a barrel of PIQUETTE, and entertained his 
friends in a leafy trellis above the weir, in sight of the green 
country and to the music of the falling water.  It was a most airy, 
quaint, and pleasant place of residence, just too rustic to be 
stagey; and from my memories of the place in general, and that 
garden trellis in particular - at morning, visited by birds, or at 
night, when the dew fell and the stars were of the party - I am 
inclined to think perhaps too favourably of the future of Montigny.  
Chailly-en-Biere has outlived all things, and lies dustily 
slumbering in the plain - the cemetery of itself.  The great road 
remains to testify of its former bustle of postilions and carriage 
bells; and, like memorial tablets, there still hang in the inn room 
the paintings of a former generation, dead or decorated long ago.  
In my time, one man only, greatly daring, dwelt there.  From time 
to time he would walk over to Barbizon like a shade revisiting the 
glimpses of the moon, and after some communication with flesh and 
blood return to his austere hermitage.  But even he, when I last 
revisited the forest, had come to Barbizon for good, and closed the 
roll of Chaillyites.  It may revive - but I much doubt it.  Acheres 
and Recloses still wait a pioneer; Bourron is out of the question, 
being merely Gretz over again, without the river, the bridge, or 
the beauty; and of all the possible places on the western side, 
Marlotte alone remains to be discussed.  I scarcely know Marlotte, 
and, very likely for that reason, am not much in love with it.  It 
seems a glaring and unsightly hamlet.  The inn of Mother Antonie is 
unattractive; and its more reputable rival, though comfortable 
enough, is commonplace.  Marlotte has a name; it is famous; if I 
were the young painter I would leave it alone in its glory.


VII


These are the words of an old stager; and though time is a good 
conservative in forest places, much may be untrue to-day.  Many of 
us have passed Arcadian days there and moved on, but yet left a 
portion of our souls behind us buried in the woods.  I would not 
dig for these reliquiae; they are incommunicable treasures that 
will not enrich the finder; and yet there may lie, interred below 
great oaks or scattered along forest paths, stores of youth's 
dynamite and dear remembrances.  And as one generation passes on 
and renovates the field of tillage for the next, I entertain a 
fancy that when the young men of to-day go forth into the forest 
they shall find the air still vitalised by the spirits of their 
predecessors, and, like those "unheard melodies" that are the 
sweetest of all, the memory of our laughter shall still haunt the 
field of trees.  Those merry voices that in woods call the wanderer 
farther, those thrilling silences and whispers of the groves, 
surely in Fontainebleau they must be vocal of me and my companions?  
We are not content to pass away entirely from the scenes of our 
delight; we would leave, if but in gratitude, a pillar and a 
legend.

One generation after another fall like honey-bees upon this 
memorable forest, rifle its sweets, pack themselves with vital 
memories, and when the theft is consummated depart again into life 
richer, but poorer also.  The forest, indeed, they have possessed, 
from that day forward it is theirs indissolubly, and they will 
return to walk in it at night in the fondest of their dreams, and 
use it for ever in their books and pictures.  Yet when they made 
their packets, and put up their notes and sketches, something, it 
should seem, had been forgotten.  A projection of themselves shall 
appear to haunt unfriended these scenes of happiness, a natural 
child of fancy, begotten and forgotten unawares.  Over the whole 
field of our wanderings such fetches are still travelling like 
indefatigable bagmen; but the imps of Fontainebleau, as of all 
beloved spots, are very long of life, and memory is piously 
unwilling to forget their orphanage.  If anywhere about that wood 
you meet my airy bantling, greet him with tenderness.  He was a 
pleasant lad, though now abandoned.  And when it comes to your own 
turn to quit the forest, may you leave behind you such another; no 
Antony or Werther, let us hope, no tearful whipster, but, as 
becomes this not uncheerful and most active age in which we figure, 
the child of happy hours.

No art, it may be said, was ever perfect, and not many noble, that 
has not been mirthfully conceived.

And no man, it may be added, was ever anything but a wet blanket 
and a cross to his companions who boasted not a copious spirit of 
enjoyment.  Whether as man or artist let the youth make haste to 
Fontainebleau, and once there let him address himself to the spirit 
of the place; he will learn more from exercise than from studies, 
although both are necessary; and if he can get into his heart the 
gaiety and inspiration of the woods he will have gone far to undo 
the evil of his sketches.  A spirit once well strung up to the 
concert-pitch of the primeval out-of-doors will hardly dare to 
finish a study and magniloquently ticket it a picture.  The 
incommunicable thrill of things, that is the tuning-fork by which 
we test the flatness of our art.  Here it is that Nature teaches 
and condemns, and still spurs up to further effort and new failure.  
Thus it is that she sets us blushing at our ignorant and tepid 
works; and the more we find of these inspiring shocks the less 
shall we be apt to love the literal in our productions.  In all 
sciences and senses the letter kills; and to-day, when cackling 
human geese express their ignorant condemnation of all studio 
pictures, it is a lesson most useful to be learnt.  Let the young 
painter go to Fontainebleau, and while he stupefies himself with 
studies that teach him the mechanical side of his trade, let him 
walk in the great air, and be a servant of mirth, and not pick and 
botanise, but wait upon the moods of nature.  So he will learn - or 
learn not to forget - the poetry of life and earth, which, when he 
has acquired his track, will save him from joyless reproduction.

[1882.]



CHAPTER IV - EPILOGUE TO "AN INLAND VOYAGE"



THE country where they journeyed, that green, breezy valley of the 
Loing, is one very attractive to cheerful and solitary people.  The 
weather was superb; all night it thundered and lightened, and the 
rain fell in sheets; by day, the heavens were cloudless, the sun 
fervent, the air vigorous and pure.  They walked separate:  the 
Cigarette plodding behind with some philosophy, the lean Arethusa 
posting on ahead.  Thus each enjoyed his own reflections by the 
way; each had perhaps time to tire of them before he met his 
comrade at the designated inn; and the pleasures of society and 
solitude combined to fill the day.  The Arethusa carried in his 
knapsack the works of Charles of Orleans, and employed some of the 
hours of travel in the concoction of English roundels.  In this 
path, he must thus have preceded Mr. Lang, Mr. Dobson, Mr. Henley, 
and all contemporary roundeleers; but for good reasons, he will be 
the last to publish the result.  The Cigarette walked burthened 
with a volume of Michelet.  And both these books, it will be seen, 
played a part in the subsequent adventure.

The Arethusa was unwisely dressed.  He is no precisian in attire; 
but by all accounts, he was never so ill-inspired as on that tramp; 
having set forth indeed, upon a moment's notice, from the most 
unfashionable spot in Europe, Barbizon.  On his head he wore a 
smoking-cap of Indian work, the gold lace pitifully frayed and 
tarnished.  A flannel shirt of an agreeable dark hue, which the 
satirical called black; a light tweed coat made by a good English 
tailor; ready-made cheap linen trousers and leathern gaiters 
completed his array.  In person, he is exceptionally lean; and his 
face is not, like those of happier mortals, a certificate.  For 
years he could not pass a frontier or visit a bank without 
suspicion; the police everywhere, but in his native city, looked 
askance upon him; and (though I am sure it will not be credited) he 
is actually denied admittance to the casino of Monte Carlo.  If you 
will imagine him, dressed as above, stooping under his knapsack, 
walking nearly five miles an hour with the folds of the ready-made 
trousers fluttering about his spindle shanks, and still looking 
eagerly round him as if in terror of pursuit - the figure, when 
realised, is far from reassuring.  When Villon journeyed (perhaps 
by the same pleasant valley) to his exile at Roussillon, I wonder 
if he had not something of the same appearance.  Something of the 
same preoccupation he had beyond a doubt, for he too must have 
tinkered verses as he walked, with more success than his successor.  
And if he had anything like the same inspiring weather, the same 
nights of uproar, men in armour rolling and resounding down the 
stairs of heaven, the rain hissing on the village streets, the wild 
bull's-eye of the storm flashing all night long into the bare inn-
chamber - the same sweet return of day, the same unfathomable blue 
of noon, the same high-coloured, halcyon eves - and above all, if 
he had anything like as good a comrade, anything like as keen a 
relish for what he saw, and what he ate, and the rivers that he 
bathed in, and the rubbish that he wrote, I would exchange estates 
to-day with the poor exile, and count myself a gainer.

But there was another point of similarity between the two journeys, 
for which the Arethusa was to pay dear:  both were gone upon in 
days of incomplete security.  It was not long after the Franco-
Prussian war.  Swiftly as men forget, that country-side was still 
alive with tales of uhlans, and outlying sentries, and hairbreadth 
'scapes from the ignominious cord, and pleasant momentary 
friendships between invader and invaded.  A year, at the most two 
years later, you might have tramped all that country over and not 
heard one anecdote.  And a year or two later, you would - if you 
were a rather ill-looking young man in nondescript array - have 
gone your rounds in greater safety; for along with more interesting 
matter, the Prussian spy would have somewhat faded from men's 
imaginations.

For all that, our voyager had got beyond Chateau Renard before he 
was conscious of arousing wonder.  On the road between that place 
and Chatillon-sur-Loing, however, he encountered a rural postman; 
they fell together in talk, and spoke of a variety of subjects; but 
through one and all, the postman was still visibly preoccupied, and 
his eyes were faithful to the Arethusa's knapsack.  At last, with 
mysterious roguishness, he inquired what it contained, and on being 
answered, shook his head with kindly incredulity.  "NON," said he, 
"NON, VOUS AVEZ DES PORTRAITS."  And then with a languishing 
appeal, "VOYONS, show me the portraits!"  It was some little while 
before the Arethusa, with a shout of laughter, recognised his 
drift.  By portraits he meant indecent photographs; and in the 
Arethusa, an austere and rising author, he thought to have 
identified a pornographic colporteur.  When countryfolk in France 
have made up their minds as to a person's calling, argument is 
fruitless.  Along all the rest of the way, the postman piped and 
fluted meltingly to get a sight of the collection; now he would 
upbraid, now he would reason - "VOYONS, I will tell nobody"; then 
he tried corruption, and insisted on paying for a glass of wine; 
and, at last when their ways separated - "NON," said he, "CE N'EST 
PAS BIEN DE VOTRE PART.  O NON, CE N'EST PAS BIEN."  And shaking 
his head with quite a sentimental sense of injury, he departed 
unrefreshed.

On certain little difficulties encountered by the Arethusa at 
Chatillon-sur-Loing, I have not space to dwell; another Chatillon, 
of grislier memory, looms too near at hand.  But the next day, in a 
certain hamlet called La Jussiere, he stopped to drink a glass of 
syrup in a very poor, bare drinking shop.  The hostess, a comely 
woman, suckling a child, examined the traveller with kindly and 
pitying eyes.  "You are not of this department?" she asked.  The 
Arethusa told her he was English.  "Ah!" she said, surprised.  "We 
have no English.  We have many Italians, however, and they do very 
well; they do not complain of the people of hereabouts.  An 
Englishman may do very well also; it will be something new."  Here 
was a dark saying, over which the Arethusa pondered as he drank his 
grenadine; but when he rose and asked what was to pay, the light 
came upon him in a flash.  "O, POUR VOUS," replied the landlady,  
"a halfpenny!"  POUR VOUS?  By heaven, she took him for a beggar!  
He paid his halfpenny, feeling that it were ungracious to correct 
her.  But when he was forth again upon the road, he became vexed in 
spirit.  The conscience is no gentleman, he is a rabbinical fellow; 
and his conscience told him he had stolen the syrup.

That night the travellers slept in Gien; the next day they passed 
the river and set forth (severally, as their custom was) on a short 
stage through the green plain upon the Berry side, to Chatillon-
sur-Loire.  It was the first day of the shooting; and the air rang 
with the report of firearms and the admiring cries of sportsmen.  
Overhead the birds were in consternation, wheeling in clouds, 
settling and re-arising.  And yet with all this bustle on either 
hand, the road itself lay solitary.  The Arethusa smoked a pipe 
beside a milestone, and I remember he laid down very exactly all he 
was to do at Chatillon:  how he was to enjoy a cold plunge, to 
change his shirt, and to await the Cigarette's arrival, in sublime 
inaction, by the margin of the Loire.  Fired by these ideas, he 
pushed the more rapidly forward, and came, early in the afternoon 
and in a breathing heat, to the entering-in of that ill-fated town.  
Childe Roland to the dark tower came.

A polite gendarme threw his shadow on the path.

"MONSIEUR EST VOYAGEUR?" he asked.

And the Arethusa, strong in his innocence, forgetful of his vile 
attire, replied - I had almost said with gaiety:  "So it would 
appear."

 "His papers are in order?" said the gendarme.  And when the 
Arethusa, with a slight change of voice, admitted he had none, he 
was informed (politely enough) that he must appear before the 
Commissary.

The Commissary sat at a table in his bedroom, stripped to the shirt 
and trousers, but still copiously perspiring; and when he turned 
upon the prisoner a large meaningless countenance, that was (like 
Bardolph's) "all whelks and bubuckles," the dullest might have been 
prepared for grief.  Here was a stupid man, sleepy with the heat 
and fretful at the interruption, whom neither appeal nor argument 
could reach.

THE COMMISSARY.  You have no papers?

THE ARETHUSA.  Not here.

THE COMMISSARY.  Why?

THE ARETHUSA.  I have left them behind in my valise.

THE COMMISSARY.  You know, however, that it is forbidden to 
circulate without papers?

THE ARETHUSA.  Pardon me:  I am convinced of the contrary.  I am 
here on my rights as an English subject by international treaty.

THE COMMISSARY (WITH SCORN).  You call yourself an Englishman?

THE ARETHUSA.  I do.

THE COMMISSARY.  Humph. - What is your trade?

THE ARETHUSA.  I am a Scotch advocate.

THE COMMISSARY (WITH SINGULAR ANNOYANCE).  A Scotch advocate!  Do 
you then pretend to support yourself by that in this department?

The Arethusa modestly disclaimed the pretension.  The Commissary 
had scored a point.

THE COMMISSARY.  Why, then, do you travel?

THE ARETHUSA.  I travel for pleasure.

THE COMMISSARY (POINTING TO THE KNAPSACK, AND WITH SUBLIME 
INCREDULITY).  AVEC CA?  VOYEZ-VOUS, JE SUIS UN HOMME INTELLIGENT!  
(With that?  Look here, I am a person of intelligence!)

The culprit remaining silent under this home thrust, the Commissary 
relished his triumph for a while, and then demanded (like the 
postman, but with what different expectations!) to see the contents 
of the knapsack.  And here the Arethusa, not yet sufficiently awake 
to his position, fell into a grave mistake.  There was little or no 
furniture in the room except the Commissary's chair and table; and 
to facilitate matters, the Arethusa (with all the innocence on 
earth) leant the knapsack on a corner of the bed.  The Commissary 
fairly bounded from his seat; his face and neck flushed past 
purple, almost into blue; and he screamed to lay the desecrating 
object on the floor.

The knapsack proved to contain a change of shirts, of shoes, of 
socks, and of linen trousers, a small dressing-case, a piece of 
soap in one of the shoes, two volumes of the COLLECTION JANNET 
lettered POESIES DE CHARLES D'ORLEANS, a map, and a version book 
containing divers notes in prose and the remarkable English 
roundels of the voyager, still to this day unpublished:  the 
Commissary of Chatillon is the only living man who has clapped an 
eye on these artistic trifles.  He turned the assortment over with 
a contumelious finger; it was plain from his daintiness that he 
regarded the Arethusa and all his belongings as the very temple of 
infection.  Still there was nothing suspicious about the map, 
nothing really criminal except the roundels; as for Charles of 
Orleans, to the ignorant mind of the prisoner, he seemed as good as 
a certificate; and it was supposed the farce was nearly over.

The inquisitor resumed his seat.

THE COMMISSARY (AFTER A PAUSE).  EH BIEN, JE VAIS VOUS DIRE CE QUE 
VOUS ETES.  VOUS ETES ALLEMAND ET VOUS VENEZ CHANTER A LA FOIRE.  
(Well, then, I will tell you what you are.  You are a German and 
have come to sing at the fair.)

THE ARETHUSA.  Would you like to hear me sing?  I believe I could 
convince you of the contrary.

THE COMMISSARY.  PAS DE PLAISANTERIE, MONSIEUR!

THE ARETHUSA.  Well, sir, oblige me at least by looking at this 
book.  Here, I open it with my eyes shut.  Read one of these songs 
- read this one - and tell me, you who are a man of intelligence, 
if it would be possible to sing it at a fair?

THE COMMISSARY (CRITICALLY).  MAIS OUI.  TRES BIEN.

THE ARETHUSA.  COMMENT, MONSIEUR!  What!  But do you not observe it 
is antique.  It is difficult to understand, even for you and me; 
but for the audience at a fair, it would be meaningless.

THE COMMISSARY (TAKING A PEN).  ENFIN, IL FAUI EN FINIR.  What is 
your name?

THE ARETHUSA (SPEAKING WITH THE SWALLOWING VIVACITY OF THE 
ENGLISH).  Robert-Louis-Stev'ns'n.

THE COMMISSARY (AGHAST).  HE!  QUOI?

THE ARETHUSA (PERCEIVING AND IMPROVING HIS ADVANTAGE).  Rob'rt-
Lou's-Stev'ns'n.

THE COMMISSARY (AFTER SEVERAL CONFLICTS WITH HIS PEN).  EH BIEN, IL 
FAUT SE PASSER DU NOM.  CA NE S'ECRIT PAS.  (Well, we must do 
without the name:  it is unspellable.)

The above is a rough summary of this momentous conversation, in 
which I have been chiefly careful to preserve the plums of the 
Commissary; but the remainder of the scene, perhaps because of his 
rising anger, has left but little definite in the memory of the 
Arethusa.  The Commissary was not, I think, a practised literary 
man; no sooner, at least, had he taken pen in hand and embarked on 
the composition of the PROCES-VERBAL, than he became distinctly 
more uncivil and began to show a predilection for that simplest of 
all forms of repartee:  "You lie!"  Several times the Arethusa let 
it pass, and then suddenly flared up, refused to accept more 
insults or to answer further questions, defied the Commissary to do 
his worst, and promised him, if he did, that he should bitterly 
repent it.  Perhaps if he had worn this proud front from the first, 
instead of beginning with a sense of entertainment and then going 
on to argue, the thing might have turned otherwise; for even at 
this eleventh hour the Commissary was visibly staggered.  But it 
was too late; he had been challenged the PROCES-VERBAL was begun; 
and he again squared his elbows over his writing, and the Arethusa 
was led forth a prisoner.

A step or two down the hot road stood the gendarmerie.  Thither was 
our unfortunate conducted, and there he was bidden to empty forth 
the contents of his pockets.  A handkerchief, a pen, a pencil, a 
pipe and tobacco, matches, and some ten francs of change:  that was 
all.  Not a file, not a cipher, not a scrap of writing whether to 
identify or to condemn.  The very gendarme was appalled before such 
destitution.

"I regret," he said, "that I arrested you, for I see that you are 
no VOYOU."  And he promised him every indulgence.

The Arethusa, thus encouraged, asked for his pipe.  That he was 
told was impossible, but if he chewed, he might have some tobacco.  
He did not chew, however, and asked instead to have his 
handkerchief.

"NON," said the gendarme.  "NOUS AVONS EU DES HISTOIRES DE GENS QUI 
SE SONT PENDUS."  (No, we have had histories of people who hanged 
themselves.)

"What," cried the Arethusa.  "And is it for that you refuse me my 
handkerchief?  But see how much more easily I could hang myself in 
my trousers!"

The man was struck by the novelty of the idea; but he stuck to his 
colours, and only continued to repeat vague offers of service.

"At least," said the Arethusa, "be sure that you arrest my comrade; 
he will follow me ere long on the same road, and you can tell him 
by the sack upon his shoulders."

This promised, the prisoner was led round into the back court of 
the building, a cellar door was opened, he was motioned down the 
stair, and bolts grated and chains clanged behind his descending 
person.

The philosophic and still more the imaginative mind is apt to 
suppose itself prepared for any mortal accident.  Prison, among 
other ills, was one that had been often faced by the undaunted 
Arethusa.  Even as he went down the stairs, he was telling himself 
that here was a famous occasion for a roundel, and that like the 
committed linnets of the tuneful cavalier, he too would make his 
prison musical.  I will tell the truth at once:  the roundel was 
never written, or it should be printed in this place, to raise a 
smile.  Two reasons interfered:  the first moral, the second 
physical.

It is one of the curiosities of human nature, that although all men 
are liars, they can none of them bear to be told so of themselves.  
To get and take the lie with equanimity is a stretch beyond the 
stoic; and the Arethusa, who had been surfeited upon that insult, 
was blazing inwardly with a white heat of smothered wrath.  But the 
physical had also its part.  The cellar in which he was confined 
was some feet underground, and it was only lighted by an unglazed, 
narrow aperture high up in the wall and smothered in the leaves of 
a green vine.  The walls were of naked masonry, the floor of bare 
earth; by way of furniture there was an earthenware basin, a water-
jug, and a wooden bedstead with a blue-gray cloak for bedding.  To 
be taken from the hot air of a summer's afternoon, the 
reverberation of the road and the stir of rapid exercise, and 
plunged into the gloom and damp of this receptacle for vagabonds, 
struck an instant chill upon the Arethusa's blood.  Now see in how 
small a matter a hardship may consist:  the floor was exceedingly 
uneven underfoot, with the very spade-marks, I suppose, of the 
labourers who dug the foundations of the barrack; and what with the 
poor twilight and the irregular surface, walking was impossible.  
The caged author resisted for a good while; but the chill of the 
place struck deeper and deeper; and at length, with such reluctance 
as you may fancy, he was driven to climb upon the bed and wrap 
himself in the public covering.  There, then, he lay upon the verge 
of shivering, plunged in semi-darkness, wound in a garment whose 
touch he dreaded like the plague, and (in a spirit far removed from 
resignation) telling the roll of the insults he had just received.  
These are not circumstances favourable to the muse.

Meantime (to look at the upper surface where the sun was still 
shining and the guns of sportsmen were still noisy through the 
tufted plain) the Cigarette was drawing near at his more 
philosophic pace.  In those days of liberty and health he was the 
constant partner of the Arethusa, and had ample opportunity to 
share in that gentleman's disfavour with the police.  Many a bitter 
bowl had he partaken of with that disastrous comrade.  He was 
himself a man born to float easily through life, his face and 
manner artfully recommending him to all.  There was but one 
suspicious circumstance he could not carry off, and that was his 
companion.  He will not readily forget the Commissary in what is 
ironically called the free town of Frankfort-on-the-Main ; nor the 
Franco-Belgian frontier; nor the inn at La Fere; last, but not 
least, he is pretty certain to remember Chatillon-sur-Loire.

At the town entry, the gendarme culled him like a wayside flower; 
and a moment later, two persons, in a high state of surprise, were 
confronted in the Commissary's office.  For if the Cigarette was 
surprised to be arrested, the Commissary was no less taken aback by 
the appearance and appointments of his captive.  Here was a man 
about whom there could be no mistake:  a man of an unquestionable 
and unassailable manner, in apple-pie order, dressed not with 
neatness merely but elegance, ready with his passport, at a word, 
and well supplied with money:  a man the Commissary would have 
doffed his hat to on chance upon the highway; and this BEAU 
CAVALIER unblushingly claimed the Arethusa for his comrade!  The 
conclusion of the interview was foregone; of its humours, I 
remember only one.  "Baronet?" demanded the magistrate, glancing up 
from the passport.  "ALORS, MONSIEUR, VOUS ETES LE FIRS D'UN 
BARON?"  And when the Cigarette (his one mistake throughout the 
interview) denied the soft impeachment, "ALORS," from the 
Commissary, "CE N'EST PAS VOTRE PASSEPORT!"  But these were 
ineffectual thunders; he never dreamed of laying hands upon the 
Cigarette; presently he fell into a mood of unrestrained 
admiration, gloating over the contents of the knapsack, commanding 
our friend's tailor.  Ah, what an honoured guest was the Commissary 
entertaining! what suitable clothes he wore for the warm weather! 
what beautiful maps, what an attractive work of history he carried 
in his knapsack!  You are to understand there was now but one point 
of difference between them:  what was to be done with the Arethusa? 
the Cigarette demanding his release, the Commissary still claiming 
him as the dungeon's own.  Now it chanced that the Cigarette had 
passed some years of his life in Egypt, where he had made 
acquaintance with two very bad things, cholera morbus and pashas; 
and in the eye of the Commissary, as he fingered the volume of 
Michelet, it seemed to our traveller there was something Turkish.  
I pass over this lightly; it is highly possible there was some 
misunderstanding, highly possible that the Commissary (charmed with 
his visitor) supposed the attraction to be mutual and took for an 
act of growing friendship what the Cigarette himself regarded as a 
bribe.  And at any rate, was there ever a bribe more singular than 
an odd volume of Michelet's history?  The work was promised him for 
the morrow, before our departure; and presently after, either 
because he had his price, or to show that he was not the man to be 
behind in friendly offices - "EH BIEN," he said, "JE SUPPOSE QU'IL 
FAUT LAHER VOIRE CAMARADE."  And he tore up that feast of humour, 
the unfinished PROCES-VERBAL.  Ah, if he had only torn up instead 
the Arethusa's roundels!  There were many works burnt at 
Alexandria, there are many treasured in the British Museum, that I 
could better spare than the PROCES-VERBAL of Chatillon.  Poor 
bubuckled Commissary!  I begin to be sorry that he never had his 
Michelet:  perceiving in him fine human traits, a broad-based 
stupidity, a gusto in his magisterial functions, a taste for 
letters, a ready admiration for the admirable.  And if he did not 
admire the Arethusa, he was not alone in that.

To the imprisoned one, shivering under the public covering, there 
came suddenly a noise of bolts and chains.  He sprang to his feet, 
ready to welcome a companion in calamity; and instead of that, the 
door was flung wide, the friendly gendarme appeared above in the 
strong daylight, and with a magnificent gesture (being probably a 
student of the drama) - "VOUS ETES LIBRE!" he said.  None too soon 
for the Arethusa.  I doubt if he had been half-an-hour imprisoned; 
but by the watch in a man's brain (which was the only watch he 
carried) he should have been eight times longer; and he passed 
forth with ecstasy up the cellar stairs into the healing warmth of 
the afternoon sun; and the breath of the earth came as sweet as a 
cow's into his nostril; and he heard again (and could have laughed 
for pleasure) the concord of delicate noises that we call the hum 
of life.

And here it might be thought that my history ended; but not so, 
this was an act-drop and not the curtain.  Upon what followed in 
front of the barrack, since there was a lady in the case, I scruple 
to expatiate.  The wife of the Marechal-des-logis was a handsome 
woman, and yet the Arethusa was not sorry to be gone from her 
society.  Something of her image, cool as a peach on that hot 
afternoon, still lingers in his memory:  yet more of her 
conversation.  "You have there a very fine parlour," said the poor 
gentleman. - "Ah," said Madame la Marechale (des-logis), "you are 
very well acquainted with such parlours!"  And you should have seen 
with what a hard and scornful eye she measured the vagabond before 
her!  I do not think he ever hated the Commissary; but before that 
interview was at an end, he hated Madame la Marechale.  His passion 
(as I am led to understand by one who was present) stood confessed 
in a burning eye, a pale cheek, and a trembling utterance; Madame 
meanwhile tasting the joys of the matador, goading him with barbed 
words and staring him coldly down.

It was certainly good to be away from this lady, and better still 
to sit down to an excellent dinner in the inn.  Here, too, the 
despised travellers scraped acquaintance with their next neighbour, 
a gentleman of these parts, returned from the day's sport, who had 
the good taste to find pleasure in their society.  The dinner at an 
end, the gentleman proposed the acquaintance should be ripened in 
the cafe.

The cafe was crowded with sportsmen conclamantly explaining to each 
other and the world the smallness of their bags.  About the centre 
of the room, the Cigarette and the Arethusa sat with their new 
acquaintance; a trio very well pleased, for the travellers (after 
their late experience) were greedy of consideration, and their 
sportsman rejoiced in a pair of patient listeners.  Suddenly the 
glass door flew open with a crash; the Marechal-des-logis appeared 
in the interval, gorgeously belted and befrogged, entered without 
salutation, strode up the room with a clang of spurs and weapons, 
and disappeared through a door at the far end.  Close at his heels 
followed the Arethusa's gendarme of the afternoon, imitating, with 
a nice shade of difference, the imperial bearing of his chief; 
only, as he passed, he struck lightly with his open hand on the 
shoulder of his late captive, and with that ringing, dramatic 
utterance of which he had the secret - "SUIVEZ!" said he.

The arrest of the members, the oath of the Tennis Court, the 
signing of the declaration of independence, Mark Antony's oration, 
all the brave scenes of history, I conceive as having been not 
unlike that evening in the cafe at Chatillon.  Terror breathed upon 
the assembly.  A moment later, when the Arethusa had followed his 
recaptors into the farther part of the house, the Cigarette found 
himself alone with his coffee in a ring of empty chairs and tables, 
all the lusty sportsmen huddled into corners, all their clamorous 
voices hushed in whispering, all their eyes shooting at him 
furtively as at a leper.

And the Arethusa?  Well, he had a long, sometimes a trying, 
interview in the back kitchen.  The Marechal-des-logis, who was a 
very handsome man, and I believe both intelligent and honest, had 
no clear opinion on the case.  He thought the Commissary had done 
wrong, but he did not wish to get his subordinates into trouble; 
and he proposed this, that, and the other, to all of which the 
Arethusa (with a growing sense of his position) demurred.

"In short," suggested the Arethusa, "you want to wash your hands of 
further responsibility?  Well, then, let me go to Paris."

The Marechal-des-logis looked at his watch.

"You may leave," said he, "by the ten o'clock train for Paris."

And at noon the next day the travellers were telling their 
misadventure in the dining-room at Siron's.



CHAPTER V - RANDOM MEMORIES



I. - THE COAST OF FIFE


MANY writers have vigorously described the pains of the first day 
or the first night at school; to a boy of any enterprise, I 
believe, they are more often agreeably exciting.  Misery - or at 
least misery unrelieved - is confined to another period, to the 
days of suspense and the "dreadful looking-for" of departure; when 
the old life is running to an end, and the new life, with its new 
interests, not yet begun:  and to the pain of an imminent parting, 
there is added the unrest of a state of conscious pre-existence.  
The area railings, the beloved shop-window, the smell of semi-
suburban tanpits, the song of the church bells upon a Sunday, the 
thin, high voices of compatriot children in a playing-field - what 
a sudden, what an overpowering pathos breathes to him from each 
familiar circumstance!  The assaults of sorrow come not from 
within, as it seems to him, but from without.  I was proud and glad 
to go to school; had I been let alone, I could have borne up like 
any hero; but there was around me, in all my native town, a 
conspiracy of lamentation:  "Poor little boy, he is going away - 
unkind little boy, he is going to leave us"; so the unspoken 
burthen followed me as I went, with yearning and reproach.  And at 
length, one melancholy afternoon in the early autumn, and at a 
place where it seems to me, looking back, it must be always autumn 
and generally Sunday, there came suddenly upon the face of all I 
saw - the long empty road, the lines of the tall houses, the church 
upon the hill, the woody hillside garden - a look of such a 
piercing sadness that my heart died; and seating myself on a door-
step, I shed tears of miserable sympathy.  A benevolent cat 
cumbered me the while with consolations - we two were alone in all 
that was visible of the London Road:  two poor waifs who had each 
tasted sorrow - and she fawned upon the weeper, and gambolled for 
his entertainment, watching the effect it seemed, with motherly 
eyes.

For the sake of the cat, God bless her!  I confessed at home the 
story of my weakness; and so it comes about that I owed a certain 
journey, and the reader owes the present paper, to a cat in the 
London Road.  It was judged, if I had thus brimmed over on the 
public highway, some change of scene was (in the medical sense) 
indicated; my father at the time was visiting the harbour lights of 
Scotland; and it was decided he should take me along with him 
around a portion of the shores of Fife; my first professional tour, 
my first journey in the complete character of man, without the help 
of petticoats.

The Kingdom of Fife (that royal province) may be observed by the 
curious on the map, occupying a tongue of land between the firths 
of Forth and Tay.  It may be continually seen from many parts of 
Edinburgh (among the rest, from the windows of my father's house) 
dying away into the distance and the easterly HAAR with one smoky 
seaside town beyond another, or in winter printing on the gray 
heaven some glittering hill-tops.  It has no beauty to recommend 
it, being a low, sea-salted, wind-vexed promontory; trees very 
rare, except (as common on the east coast) along the dens of 
rivers; the fields well cultivated, I understand, but not lovely to 
the eye.  It is of the coast I speak:  the interior may be the 
garden of Eden.  History broods over that part of the world like 
the easterly HAAR.  Even on the map, its long row of Gaelic place-
names bear testimony to an old and settled race.  Of these little 
towns, posted along the shore as close as sedges, each with its bit 
of harbour, its old weather-beaten church or public building, its 
flavour of decayed prosperity and decaying fish, not one but has 
its legend, quaint or tragic:  Dunfermline, in whose royal towers 
the king may be still observed (in the ballad) drinking the blood-
red wine; somnolent Inverkeithing, once the quarantine of Leith; 
Aberdour, hard by the monastic islet of Inchcolm, hard by 
Donibristle where the "bonny face was spoiled"; Burntisland where, 
when Paul Jones was off the coast, the Reverend Mr. Shirra had a 
table carried between tidemarks, and publicly prayed against the 
rover at the pitch of his voice and his broad lowland dialect; 
Kinghorn, where Alexander "brak's neckbane" and left Scotland to 
the English wars; Kirkcaldy, where the witches once prevailed 
extremely and sank tall ships and honest mariners in the North Sea; 
Dysart, famous - well famous at least to me for the Dutch ships 
that lay in its harbour, painted like toys and with pots of flowers 
and cages of song-birds in the cabin windows, and for one 
particular Dutch skipper who would sit all day in slippers on the 
break of the poop, smoking a long German pipe; Wemyss (pronounce 
Weems) with its bat-haunted caves, where the Chevalier Johnstone, 
on his flight from Culloden, passed a night of superstitious 
terrors; Leven, a bald, quite modern place, sacred to summer 
visitors, whence there has gone but yesterday the tall figure and 
the white locks of the last Englishman in Delhi, my uncle Dr. 
Balfour, who was still walking his hospital rounds, while the 
troopers from Meerut clattered and cried "Deen Deen" along the 
streets of the imperial city, and Willoughby mustered his handful 
of heroes at the magazine, and the nameless brave one in the 
telegraph office was perhaps already fingering his last despatch; 
and just a little beyond Leven, Largo Law and the smoke of Largo 
town mounting about its feet, the town of Alexander Selkirk, better 
known under the name of Robinson Crusoe.  So on, the list might be 
pursued (only for private reasons, which the reader will shortly 
have an opportunity to guess) by St. Monance, and Pittenweem, and 
the two Anstruthers, and Cellardyke, and Crail, where Primate 
Sharpe was once a humble and innocent country minister:  on to the 
heel of the land, to Fife Ness, overlooked by a sea-wood of matted 
elders and the quaint old mansion of Balcomie, itself overlooking 
but the breach or the quiescence of the deep - the Carr Rock beacon 
rising close in front, and as night draws in, the star of the 
Inchcape reef springing up on the one hand, and the star of the May 
Island on the other, and farther off yet a third and a greater on 
the craggy foreland of St. Abb's.  And but a little way round the 
corner of the land, imminent itself above the sea, stands the gem 
of the province and the light of mediaeval Scotland, St. Andrews, 
where the great Cardinal Beaton held garrison against the world, 
and the second of the name and title perished (as you may read in 
Knox's jeering narrative) under the knives of true-blue 
Protestants, and to this day (after so many centuries) the current 
voice of the professor is not hushed.

Here it was that my first tour of inspection began, early on a 
bleak easterly morning.  There was a crashing run of sea upon the 
shore, I recollect, and my father and the man of the harbour light 
must sometimes raise their voices to be audible.  Perhaps it is 
from this circumstance, that I always imagine St. Andrews to be an 
ineffectual seat of learning, and the sound of the east wind and 
the bursting surf to linger in its drowsy classrooms and confound 
the utterance of the professor, until teacher and taught are alike 
drowned in oblivion, and only the sea-gull beats on the windows and 
the draught of the sea-air rustles in the pages of the open 
lecture.  But upon all this, and the romance of St. Andrews in 
general, the reader must consult the works of Mr. Andrew Lang; who 
has written of it but the other day in his dainty prose and with 
his incommunicable humour, and long ago in one of his best poems, 
with grace, and local truth, and a note of unaffected pathos.  Mr. 
Lang knows all about the romance, I say, and the educational 
advantages, but I doubt if he had turned his attention to the 
harbour lights; and it may be news even to him, that in the year 
1863 their case was pitiable.  Hanging about with the east wind 
humming in my teeth, and my hands (I make no doubt) in my pockets, 
I looked for the first time upon that tragi-comedy of the visiting 
engineer which I have seen so often re-enacted on a more important 
stage.  Eighty years ago, I find my grandfather writing:  "It is 
the most painful thing that can occur to me to have a 
correspondence of this kind with any of the keepers, and when I 
come to the Light House, instead of having the satisfaction to meet 
them with approbation and welcome their Family, it is distressing 
when one-is obliged to put on a most angry countenance and 
demeanour."  This painful obligation has been hereditary in my 
race.  I have myself, on a perfectly amateur and unauthorised 
inspection of Turnberry Point, bent my brows upon the keeper on the 
question of storm-panes; and felt a keen pang of self-reproach, 
when we went down stairs again and I found he was making a coffin 
for his infant child; and then regained my equanimity with the 
thought that I had done the man a service, and when the proper 
inspector came, he would be readier with his panes.  The human race 
is perhaps credited with more duplicity than it deserves.  The 
visitation of a lighthouse at least is a business of the most 
transparent nature.  As soon as the boat grates on the shore, and 
the keepers step forward in their uniformed coats, the very slouch 
of the fellows' shoulders tells their story, and the engineer may 
begin at once to assume his "angry countenance."  Certainly the 
brass of the handrail will be clouded; and if the brass be not 
immaculate, certainly all will be to match - the reflectors 
scratched, the spare lamp unready, the storm-panes in the 
storehouse.  If a light is not rather more than middling good, it 
will be radically bad.  Mediocrity (except in literature) appears 
to be unattainable by man.  But of course the unfortunate of St. 
Andrews was only an amateur, he was not in the Service, he had no 
uniform coat, he was (I believe) a plumber by his trade and stood 
(in the mediaeval phrase) quite out of the danger of my father; but 
he had a painful interview for all that, and perspired extremely.

From St. Andrews, we drove over Magus Muir.  My father had 
announced we were "to post," and the phrase called up in my hopeful 
mind visions of top-boots and the pictures in Rowlandson's DANCE OF 
DEATH; but it was only a jingling cab that came to the inn door, 
such as I had driven in a thousand times at the low price of one 
shilling on the streets of Edinburgh.  Beyond this disappointment, 
I remember nothing of that drive.  It is a road I have often 
travelled, and of not one of these journeys do I remember any 
single trait.  The fact has not been suffered to encroach on the 
truth of the imagination.  I still see Magus Muir two hundred years 
ago; a desert place, quite uninclosed; in the midst, the primate's 
carriage fleeing at the gallop; the assassins loose-reined in 
pursuit, Burley Balfour, pistol in hand, among the first.  No scene 
of history has ever written itself so deeply on my mind; not 
because Balfour, that questionable zealot, was an ancestral cousin 
of my own; not because of the pleadings of the victim and his 
daughter; not even because of the live bum-bee that flew out of 
Sharpe's 'bacco-box, thus clearly indicating his complicity with 
Satan; nor merely because, as it was after all a crime of a fine 
religious flavour, it figured in Sunday books and afforded a 
grateful relief from MINISTERING CHILDREN or the MEMOIRS OF MRS. 
KATHATINE WINSLOWE.  The figure that always fixed my attention is 
that of Hackston of Rathillet, sitting in the saddle with his cloak 
about his mouth, and through all that long, bungling, vociferous 
hurly-burly, revolving privately a case of conscience.  He would 
take no hand in the deed, because he had a private spite against 
the victim, and "that action" must be sullied with no suggestion of 
a worldly motive; on the other hand, "that action," in itself, was 
highly justified, he had cast in his lot with "the actors," and he 
must stay there, inactive but publicly sharing the responsibility.  
"You are a gentleman - you will protect me!" cried the wounded old 
man, crawling towards him.  "I will never lay a hand on you," said 
Hackston, and put his cloak about his mouth.  It is an old 
temptation with me, to pluck away that cloak and see the face - to 
open that bosom and to read the heart.  With incomplete romances 
about Hackston, the drawers of my youth were lumbered.  I read him 
up in every printed book that I could lay my hands on.  I even dug 
among the Wodrow manuscripts, sitting shame-faced in the very room 
where my hero had been tortured two centuries before, and keenly 
conscious of my youth in the midst of other and (as I fondly 
thought) more gifted students.  All was vain:  that he had passed a 
riotous nonage, that he was a zealot, that he twice displayed 
(compared with his grotesque companions) some tincture of soldierly 
resolution and even of military common sense, and that he figured 
memorably in the scene on Magus Muir, so much and no more could I 
make out.  But whenever I cast my eyes backward, it is to see him 
like a landmark on the plains of history, sitting with his cloak 
about his mouth, inscrutable.  How small a thing creates an 
immortality!  I do not think he can have been a man entirely 
commonplace; but had he not thrown his cloak about his mouth, or 
had the witnesses forgot to chronicle the action, he would not thus 
have haunted the imagination of my boyhood, and to-day he would 
scarce delay me for a paragraph.  An incident, at once romantic and 
dramatic, which at once awakes the judgment and makes a picture for 
the eye, how little do we realise its perdurable power!  Perhaps no 
one does so but the author, just as none but he appreciates the 
influence of jingling words; so that he looks on upon life, with 
something of a covert smile, seeing people led by what they fancy 
to be thoughts and what are really the accustomed artifices of his 
own trade, or roused by what they take to be principles and are 
really picturesque effects.  In a pleasant book about a school-
class club, Colonel Fergusson has recently told a little anecdote.  
A "Philosophical Society" was formed by some Academy boys - among 
them, Colonel Fergusson himself, Fleeming Jenkin, and Andrew 
Wilson, the Christian Buddhist and author of THE ABODE OF SNOW.  
Before these learned pundits, one member laid the following 
ingenious problem:  "What would be the result of putting a pound of 
potassium in a pot of porter?"  "I should think there would be a 
number of interesting bi-products," said a smatterer at my elbow; 
but for me the tale itself has a bi-product, and stands as a type 
of much that is most human.  For this inquirer who conceived 
himself to burn with a zeal entirely chemical, was really immersed 
in a design of a quite different nature; unconsciously to his own 
recently breeched intelligence, he was engaged in literature.  
Putting, pound, potassium, pot, porter; initial p, mediant t - that 
was his idea, poor little boy!  So with politics and that which 
excites men in the present, so with history and that which rouses 
them in the past:  there lie at the root of what appears, most 
serious unsuspected elements.

The triple town of Anstruther Wester, Anstruther Easter, and 
Cellardyke, all three Royal Burghs - or two Royal Burghs and a less 
distinguished suburb, I forget which - lies continuously along the 
seaside, and boasts of either two or three separate parish 
churches, and either two or three separate harbours.  These 
ambiguities are painful; but the fact is (although it argue me 
uncultured), I am but poorly posted upon Cellardyke.  My business 
lay in the two Anstruthers.  A tricklet of a stream divides them, 
spanned by a bridge; and over the bridge at the time of my 
knowledge, the celebrated Shell House stood outpost on the west.  
This had been the residence of an agreeable eccentric; during his 
fond tenancy, he had illustrated the outer walls, as high (if I 
remember rightly) as the roof, with elaborate patterns and 
pictures, and snatches of verse in the vein of EXEGI MONUMENTUM; 
shells and pebbles, artfully contrasted and conjoined, had been his 
medium; and I like to think of him standing back upon the bridge, 
when all was finished, drinking in the general effect and (like 
Gibbon) already lamenting his employment.

The same bridge saw another sight in the seventeenth century.  Mr. 
Thomson, the "curat" of Anstruther Easter, was a man highly 
obnoxious to the devout:  in the first place, because he was a 
"curat"; in the second place, because he was a person of irregular 
and scandalous life; and in the third place, because he was 
generally suspected of dealings with the Enemy of Man.  These three 
disqualifications, in the popular literature of the time, go hand 
in hand; but the end of Mr. Thomson was a thing quite by itself, 
and in the proper phrase, a manifest judgment.  He had been at a 
friend's house in Anstruther Wester, where (and elsewhere, I 
suspect) he had partaken of the bottle; indeed, to put the thing in 
our cold modern way, the reverend gentleman was on the brink of 
DELIRIUM TREMENS.  It was a dark night, it seems; a little lassie 
came carrying a lantern to fetch the curate home; and away they 
went down the street of Anstruther Wester, the lantern swinging a 
bit in the child's hand, the barred lustre tossing up and down 
along the front of slumbering houses, and Mr. Thomson not 
altogether steady on his legs nor (to all appearance) easy in his 
mind.  The pair had reached the middle of the bridge when (as I 
conceive the scene) the poor tippler started in some baseless fear 
and looked behind him; the child, already shaken by the minister's 
strange behaviour, started also; in so doing, she would jerk the 
lantern; and for the space of a moment the lights and the shadows 
would be all confounded.  Then it was that to the unhinged toper 
and the twittering child, a huge bulk of blackness seemed to sweep 
down, to pass them close by as they stood upon the bridge, and to 
vanish on the farther side in the general darkness of the night.  
"Plainly the devil come for Mr. Thomson!" thought the child.  What 
Mr. Thomson thought himself, we have no ground of knowledge; but he 
fell upon his knees in the midst of the bridge like a man praying.  
On the rest of the journey to the manse, history is silent; but 
when they came to the door, the poor caitiff, taking the lantern 
from the child, looked upon her with so lost a countenance that her 
little courage died within her, and she fled home screaming to her 
parents.  Not a soul would venture out; all that night, the 
minister dwelt alone with his terrors in the manse; and when the 
day dawned, and men made bold to go about the streets, they found 
the devil had come indeed for Mr. Thomson.

This manse of Anstruther Easter has another and a more cheerful 
association.  It was early in the morning, about a century before 
the days of Mr. Thomson, that his predecessor was called out of bed 
to welcome a Grandee of Spain, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, just 
landed in the harbour underneath.  But sure there was never seen a 
more decayed grandee; sure there was never a duke welcomed from a 
stranger place of exile.  Half-way between Orkney and Shetland, 
there lies a certain isle; on the one hand the Atlantic, on the 
other the North Sea, bombard its pillared cliffs; sore-eyed, short-
living, inbred fishers and their families herd in its few huts; in 
the graveyard pieces of wreck-wood stand for monuments; there is 
nowhere a more inhospitable spot.  BELLE-ISLE-EN-MER - Fair-Isle-
at-Sea - that is a name that has always rung in my mind's ear like 
music; but the only "Fair Isle" on which I ever set my foot, was 
this unhomely, rugged turret-top of submarine sierras.  Here, when 
his ship was broken, my lord Duke joyfully got ashore; here for 
long months he and certain of his men were harboured; and it was 
from this durance that he landed at last to be welcomed (as well as 
such a papist deserved, no doubt) by the godly incumbent of 
Anstruther Easter; and after the Fair Isle, what a fine city must 
that have appeared! and after the island diet, what a hospitable 
spot the minister's table!  And yet he must have lived on friendly 
terms with his outlandish hosts.  For to this day there still 
survives a relic of the long winter evenings when the sailors of 
the great Armada crouched about the hearths of the Fair-Islanders, 
the planks of their own lost galleon perhaps lighting up the scene, 
and the gale and the surf that beat about the coast contributing 
their melancholy voices.  All the folk of the north isles are great 
artificers of knitting:  the Fair-Islanders alone dye their fabrics 
in the Spanish manner.  To this day, gloves and nightcaps, 
innocently decorated, may be seen for sale in the Shetland 
warehouse at Edinburgh, or on the Fair Isle itself in the 
catechist's house; and to this day, they tell the story of the Duke 
of Medina Sidonia's adventure.

It would seem as if the Fair Isle had some attraction for "persons 
of quality."  When I landed there myself, an elderly gentleman, 
unshaved, poorly attired, his shoulders wrapped in a plaid, was 
seen walking to and fro, with a book in his hand, upon the beach.  
He paid no heed to our arrival, which we thought a strange thing in 
itself; but when one of the officers of the PHAROS, passing 
narrowly by him, observed his book to be a Greek Testament, our 
wonder and interest took a higher flight.  The catechist was cross-
examined; he said the gentleman had been put across some time 
before in Mr. Bruce of Sumburgh's schooner, the only link between 
the Fair Isle and the rest of the world; and that he held services 
and was doing "good."  So much came glibly enough; but when pressed 
a little farther, the catechist displayed embarrassment.  A 
singular diffidence appeared upon his face:  "They tell me," said 
he, in low tones, "that he's a lord."  And a lord he was; a peer of 
the realm pacing that inhospitable beach with his Greek Testament, 
and his plaid about his shoulders, set upon doing good, as he 
understood it, worthy man!  And his grandson, a good-looking little 
boy, much better dressed than the lordly evangelist, and speaking 
with a silken English accent very foreign to the scene, accompanied 
me for a while in my exploration of the island.  I suppose this 
little fellow is now my lord, and wonder how much he remembers of 
the Fair Isle.  Perhaps not much; for he seemed to accept very 
quietly his savage situation; and under such guidance, it is like 
that this was not his first nor yet his last adventure.



CHAPTER VI - RANDOM MEMORIES



II. - THE EDUCATION OF AN ENGINEER


ANSTRUTHER is a place sacred to the Muse; she inspired (really to a 
considerable extent) Tennant's vernacular poem ANST'ER FAIR; and I 
have there waited upon her myself with much devotion.  This was 
when I came as a young man to glean engineering experience from the 
building of the breakwater.  What I gleaned, I am sure I do not 
know; but indeed I had already my own private determination to be 
an author; I loved the art of words and the appearances of life; 
and TRAVELLERS, and HEADERS, and RUBBLE, and POLISHED ASHLAR, and 
PIERRES PERDUES, and even the thrilling question of the STRING-
COURSE, interested me only (if they interested me at all) as 
properties for some possible romance or as words to add to my 
vocabulary.  To grow a little catholic is the compensation of 
years; youth is one-eyed; and in those days, though I haunted the 
breakwater by day, and even loved the place for the sake of the 
sunshine, the thrilling seaside air, the wash of waves on the sea-
face, the green glimmer of the divers' helmets far below, and the 
musical chinking of the masons, my one genuine preoccupation lay 
elsewhere, and my only industry was in the hours when I was not on 
duty.  I lodged with a certain Bailie Brown, a carpenter by trade; 
and there, as soon as dinner was despatched, in a chamber scented 
with dry rose-leaves, drew in my chair to the table and proceeded 
to pour forth literature, at such a speed, and with such 
intimations of early death and immortality, as I now look back upon 
with wonder.  Then it was that I wrote VOCES FIDELIUM, a series of 
dramatic monologues in verse; then that I indited the bulk of a 
covenanting novel - like so many others, never finished.  Late I 
sat into the night, toiling (as I thought) under the very dart of 
death, toiling to leave a memory behind me.  I feel moved to thrust 
aside the curtain of the years, to hail that poor feverish idiot, 
to bid him go to bed and clap VOCES FIDELIUM on the fire before he 
goes; so clear does he appear before me, sitting there between his 
candles in the rose-scented room and the late night; so ridiculous 
a picture (to my elderly wisdom) does the fool present!  But he was 
driven to his bed at last without miraculous intervention; and the 
manner of his driving sets the last touch upon this eminently 
youthful business.  The weather was then so warm that I must keep 
the windows open; the night without was populous with moths.  As 
the late darkness deepened, my literary tapers beaconed forth more 
brightly; thicker and thicker came the dusty night-fliers, to 
gyrate for one brilliant instant round the flame and fall in 
agonies upon my paper.  Flesh and blood could not endure the 
spectacle; to capture immortality was doubtless a noble enterprise, 
but not to capture it at such a cost of suffering; and out would go 
the candles, and off would I go to bed in the darkness raging to 
think that the blow might fall on the morrow, and there was VOCES 
FIDELIUM still incomplete.  Well, the moths are - all gone, and 
VOCES FIDELIUM along with them; only the fool is still on hand and 
practises new follies.

Only one thing in connection with the harbour tempted me, and that 
was the diving, an experience I burned to taste of.  But this was 
not to be, at least in Anstruther; and the subject involves a 
change of scene to the sub-arctic town of Wick.  You can never have 
dwelt in a country more unsightly than that part of Caithness, the 
land faintly swelling, faintly falling, not a tree, not a hedgerow, 
the fields divided by single slate stones set upon their edge, the 
wind always singing in your ears and (down the long road that led 
nowhere) thrumming in the telegraph wires.  Only as you approached 
the coast was there anything to stir the heart.  The plateau broke 
down to the North Sea in formidable cliffs, the tall out-stacks 
rose like pillars ringed about with surf, the coves were over-
brimmed with clamorous froth, the sea-birds screamed, the wind sang 
in the thyme on the cliff's edge; here and there, small ancient 
castles toppled on the brim; here and there, it was possible to dip 
into a dell of shelter, where you might lie and tell yourself you 
were a little warm, and hear (near at hand) the whin-pods bursting 
in the afternoon sun, and (farther off) the rumour of the turbulent 
sea.  As for Wick itself, it is one of the meanest of man's towns, 
and situate certainly on the baldest of God's bays.  It lives for 
herring, and a strange sight it is to see (of an afternoon) the 
heights of Pulteney blackened by seaward-looking fishers, as when a 
city crowds to a review - or, as when bees have swarmed, the ground 
is horrible with lumps and clusters; and a strange sight, and a 
beautiful, to see the fleet put silently out against a rising moon, 
the sea-line rough as a wood with sails, and ever and again and one 
after another, a boat flitting swiftly by the silver disk.  This 
mass of fishers, this great fleet of boats, is out of all 
proportion to the town itself; and the oars are manned and the nets 
hauled by immigrants from the Long Island (as we call the outer 
Hebrides), who come for that season only, and depart again, if "the 
take" be poor, leaving debts behind them.  In a bad year, the end 
of the herring fishery is therefore an exciting time; fights are 
common, riots often possible; an apple knocked from a child's hand 
was once the signal for something like a war; and even when I was 
there, a gunboat lay in the bay to assist the authorities.  To 
contrary interests, it should be observed, the curse of Babel is 
here added; the Lews men are Gaelic speakers.  Caithness has 
adopted English; an odd circumstance, if you reflect that both must 
be largely Norsemen by descent.  I remember seeing one of the 
strongest instances of this division:  a thing like a Punch-and-
Judy box erected on the flat grave-stones of the churchyard; from 
the hutch or proscenium - I know not what to call it - an eldritch-
looking preacher laying down the law in Gaelic about some one of 
the name of POWL, whom I at last divined to be the apostle to the 
Gentiles; a large congregation of the Lews men very devoutly 
listening; and on the outskirts of the crowd, some of the town's 
children (to whom the whole affair was Greek and Hebrew) profanely 
playing tigg.  The same descent, the same country, the same narrow 
sect of the same religion, and all these bonds made very largely 
nugatory by an accidental difference of dialect!

Into the bay of Wick stretched the dark length of the unfinished 
breakwater, in its cage of open staging; the travellers (like 
frames of churches) over-plumbing all; and away at the extreme end, 
the divers toiling unseen on the foundation.  On a platform of 
loose planks, the assistants turned their air-mills; a stone might 
be swinging between wind and water; underneath the swell ran gaily; 
and from time to time, a mailed dragon with a window-glass snout 
came dripping up the ladder.  Youth is a blessed season after all; 
my stay at Wick was in the year of VOCES FIDELIUM and the rose-leaf 
room at Bailie Brown's; and already I did not care two straws for 
literary glory.  Posthumous ambition perhaps requires an atmosphere 
of roses; and the more rugged excitant of Wick east winds had made 
another boy of me.  To go down in the diving-dress, that was my 
absorbing fancy; and with the countenance of a certain handsome 
scamp of a diver, Bob Bain by name, I gratified the whim.

It was gray, harsh, easterly weather, the swell ran pretty high, 
and out in the open there were "skipper's daughters," when I found 
myself at last on the diver's platform, twenty pounds of lead upon 
each foot and my whole person swollen with ply and ply of woollen 
underclothing.  One moment, the salt wind was whistling round my 
night-capped head; the next, I was crushed almost double under the 
weight of the helmet.  As that intolerable burthern was laid upon 
me, I could have found it in my heart (only for shame's sake) to 
cry off from the whole enterprise.  But it was too late.  The 
attendants began to turn the hurdy-gurdy, and the air to whistle 
through the tube; some one screwed in the barred window of the 
vizor; and I was cut off in a moment from my fellow-men; standing 
there in their midst, but quite divorced from intercourse:  a 
creature deaf and dumb, pathetically looking forth upon them from a 
climate of his own.  Except that I could move and feel, I was like 
a man fallen in a catalepsy.  But time was scarce given me to 
realise my isolation; the weights were hung upon my back and 
breast, the signal rope was thrust into my unresisting hand; and 
setting a twenty-pound foot upon the ladder, I began ponderously to 
descend.

Some twenty rounds below the platform, twilight fell.  Looking up, 
I saw a low green heaven mottled with vanishing bells of white; 
looking around, except for the weedy spokes and shafts of the 
ladder, nothing but a green gloaming, somewhat opaque but very 
restful and delicious.  Thirty rounds lower, I stepped off on the 
PIERRES PERDUES of the foundation; a dumb helmeted figure took me 
by the hand, and made a gesture (as I read it) of encouragement; 
and looking in at the creature's window, I beheld the face of Bain.  
There we were, hand to hand and (when it pleased us) eye to eye; 
and either might have burst himself with shouting, and not a 
whisper come to his companion's hearing.  Each, in his own little 
world of air, stood incommunicably separate.

Bob had told me ere this a little tale, a five minutes' drama at 
the bottom of the sea, which at that moment possibly shot across my 
mind.  He was down with another, settling a stone of the sea-wall.  
They had it well adjusted, Bob gave the signal, the scissors were 
slipped, the stone set home; and it was time to turn to something 
else.  But still his companion remained bowed over the block like a 
mourner on a tomb, or only raised himself to make absurd 
contortions and mysterious signs unknown to the vocabulary of the 
diver.  There, then, these two stood for awhile, like the dead and 
the living; till there flashed a fortunate thought into Bob's mind, 
and he stooped, peered through the window of that other world, and 
beheld the face of its inhabitant wet with streaming tears.  Ah! 
the man was in pain!  And Bob, glancing downward, saw what was the 
trouble:  the block had been lowered on the foot of that 
unfortunate - he was caught alive at the bottom of the sea under 
fifteen tons of rock.

That two men should handle a stone so heavy, even swinging in the 
scissors, may appear strange to the inexpert.  These must bear in 
mind the great density of the water of the sea, and the surprising 
results of transplantation to that medium.  To understand a little 
what these are, and how a man's weight, so far from being an 
encumbrance, is the very ground of his agility, was the chief 
lesson of my submarine experience.  The knowledge came upon me by 
degrees.  As I began to go forward with the hand of my estranged 
companion, a world of tumbled stones was visible, pillared with the 
weedy uprights of the staging:  overhead, a flat roof of green:  a 
little in front, the sea-wall, like an unfinished rampart.  And 
presently in our upward progress, Bob motioned me to leap upon a 
stone; I looked to see if he were possibly in earnest, and he only 
signed to me the more imperiously.  Now the block stood six feet 
high; it would have been quite a leap to me unencumbered; with the 
breast and back weights, and the twenty pounds upon each foot, and 
the staggering load of the helmet, the thing was out of reason.  I 
laughed aloud in my tomb; and to prove to Bob how far he was 
astray, I gave a little impulse from my toes.  Up I soared like a 
bird, my companion soaring at my side.  As high as to the stone, 
and then higher, I pursued my impotent and empty flight.  Even when 
the strong arm of Bob had checked my shoulders, my heels continued 
their ascent; so that I blew out sideways like an autumn leaf, and 
must be hauled in, hand over hand, as sailors haul in the slack of 
a sail, and propped upon my feet again like an intoxicated sparrow.  
Yet a little higher on the foundation, and we began to be affected 
by the bottom of the swell, running there like a strong breeze of 
wind.  Or so I must suppose; for, safe in my cushion of air, I was 
conscious of no impact; only swayed idly like a weed, and was now 
borne helplessly abroad, and now swiftly - and yet with dream-like 
gentleness - impelled against my guide.  So does a child's balloon 
divagate upon the currents of the air, and touch, and slide off 
again from every obstacle.  So must have ineffectually swung, so 
resented their inefficiency, those light crowds that followed the 
Star of Hades, and uttered exiguous voices in the land beyond 
Cocytus.

There was something strangely exasperating, as well as strangely 
wearying, in these uncommanded evolutions.  It is bitter to return 
to infancy, to be supported, and directed, and perpetually set upon 
your feet, by the hand of some one else.  The air besides, as it is 
supplied to you by the busy millers on the platform, closes the 
eustachian tubes and keeps the neophyte perpetually swallowing, 
till his throat is grown so dry that he can swallow no longer.  And 
for all these reasons-although I had a fine, dizzy, muddle-headed 
joy in my surroundings, and longed, and tried, and always failed, 
to lay hands on the fish that darted here and there about me, swift 
as humming-birds - yet I fancy I was rather relieved than otherwise 
when Bain brought me back to the ladder and signed to me to mount.  
And there was one more experience before me even then.  Of a 
sudden, my ascending head passed into the trough of a swell.  Out 
of the green, I shot at once into a glory of rosy, almost of 
sanguine light - the multitudinous seas incarnadined, the heaven 
above a vault of crimson.  And then the glory faded into the hard, 
ugly daylight of a Caithness autumn, with a low sky, a gray sea, 
and a whistling wind.

Bob Bain had five shillings for his trouble, and I had done what I 
desired.  It was one of the best things I got from my education as 
an engineer:  of which, however, as a way of life, I wish to speak 
with sympathy.  It takes a man into the open air; it keeps him 
hanging about harbour-sides, which is the richest form of idling; 
it carries him to wild islands; it gives him a taste of the genial 
dangers of the sea; it supplies him with dexterities to exercise; 
it makes demands upon his ingenuity; it will go far to cure him of 
any taste (if ever he had one) for the miserable life of cities.  
And when it has done so, it carries him back and shuts him in an 
office!  From the roaring skerry and the wet thwart of the tossing 
boat, he passes to the stool and desk; and with a memory full of 
ships, and seas, and perilous headlands, and the shining pharos, he 
must apply his long-sighted eyes to the petty niceties of drawing, 
or measure his inaccurate mind with several pages of consecutive 
figures.  He is a wise youth, to be sure, who can balance one part 
of genuine life against two parts of drudgery between four walls, 
and for the sake of the one, manfully accept the other.

Wick was scarce an eligible place of stay.  But how much better it 
was to hang in the cold wind upon the pier, to go down with Bob 
Bain among the roots of the staging, to be all day in a boat 
coiling a wet rope and shouting orders - not always very wise - 
than to be warm and dry, and dull, and dead-alive, in the most 
comfortable office.  And Wick itself had in those days a note of 
originality.  It may have still, but I misdoubt it much.  The old 
minister of Keiss would not preach, in these degenerate times, for 
an hour and a half upon the clock.  The gipsies must be gone from 
their cavern; where you might see, from the mouth, the women 
tending their fire, like Meg Merrilies, and the men sleeping off 
their coarse potations; and where, in winter gales, the surf would 
beleaguer them closely, bursting in their very door.  A traveller 
to-day upon the Thurso coach would scarce observe a little cloud of 
smoke among the moorlands, and be told, quite openly, it marked a 
private still.  He would not indeed make that journey, for there is 
now no Thurso coach.  And even if he could, one little thing that 
happened to me could never happen to him, or not with the same 
trenchancy of contrast.

We had been upon the road all evening; the coach-top was crowded 
with Lews fishers going home, scarce anything but Gaelic had 
sounded in my ears; and our way had lain throughout over a moorish 
country very northern to behold.  Latish at night, though it was 
still broad day in our subarctic latitude, we came down upon the 
shores of the roaring Pentland Firth, that grave of mariners; on 
one hand, the cliffs of Dunnet Head ran seaward; in front was the 
little bare, white town of Castleton, its streets full of blowing 
sand; nothing beyond, but the North Islands, the great deep, and 
the perennial ice-fields of the Pole.  And here, in the last 
imaginable place, there sprang up young outlandish voices and a 
chatter of some foreign speech; and I saw, pursuing the coach with 
its load of Hebridean fishers - as they had pursued VETTURINI up 
the passes of the Apennines or perhaps along the grotto under 
Virgil's tomb - two little dark-eyed, white-toothed Italian 
vagabonds, of twelve to fourteen years of age, one with a hurdy-
gurdy, the other with a cage of white mice.  The coach passed on, 
and their small Italian chatter died in the distance; and I was 
left to marvel how they had wandered into that country, and how 
they fared in it, and what they thought of it, and when (if ever) 
they should see again the silver wind-breaks run among the olives, 
and the stone-pine stand guard upon Etruscan sepulchres.

Upon any American, the strangeness of this incident is somewhat 
lost.  For as far back as he goes in his own land, he will find 
some alien camping there; the Cornish miner, the French or Mexican 
half-blood, the negro in the South, these are deep in the woods and 
far among the mountains.  But in an old, cold, and rugged country 
such as mine, the days of immigration are long at an end; and away 
up there, which was at that time far beyond the northernmost 
extreme of railways, hard upon the shore of that ill-omened strait 
of whirlpools, in a land of moors where no stranger came, unless it 
should be a sportsman to shoot grouse or an antiquary to decipher 
runes, the presence of these small pedestrians struck the mind as 
though a bird-of-paradise had risen from the heather or an 
albatross come fishing in the bay of Wick.  They were as strange to 
their surroundings as my lordly evangelist or the old Spanish 
grandee on the Fair Isle.



CHAPTER VII - THE LANTERN-BEARERS



I


THESE boys congregated every autumn about a certain easterly 
fisher-village, where they tasted in a high degree the glory of 
existence.  The place was created seemingly on purpose for the 
diversion of young gentlemen.  A street or two of houses, mostly 
red and many of, them tiled; a number of fine trees clustered about 
the manse and the kirkyard, and turning the chief street into a 
shady alley; many little gardens more than usually bright with 
flowers; nets a-drying, and fisher-wives scolding in the backward 
parts; a smell of fish, a genial smell of seaweed; whiffs of 
blowing sand at the street-corners; shops with golf-balls and 
bottled lollipops; another shop with penny pickwicks (that 
remarkable cigar) and the LONDON JOURNAL, dear to me for its 
startling pictures, and a few novels, dear for their suggestive 
names:  such, as well as memory serves me, were the ingredients of 
the town.  These, you are to conceive posted on a spit between two 
sandy bays, and sparsely flanked with villas enough for the boys to 
lodge in with their subsidiary parents, not enough (not yet enough) 
to cocknify the scene:  a haven in the rocks in front:  in front of 
that, a file of gray islets:  to the left, endless links and sand 
wreaths, a wilderness of hiding-holes, alive with popping rabbits 
and soaring gulls:  to the right, a range of seaward crags, one 
rugged brow beyond another; the ruins of a mighty and ancient 
fortress on the brink of one; coves between - now charmed into 
sunshine quiet, now whistling with wind and clamorous with bursting 
surges; the dens and sheltered hollows redolent of thyme and 
southernwood, the air at the cliff's edge brisk and clean and 
pungent of the sea - in front of all, the Bass Rock, tilted seaward 
like a doubtful bather, the surf ringing it with white, the solan-
geese hanging round its summit like a great and glittering smoke.  
This choice piece of seaboard was sacred, besides, to the wrecker; 
and the Bass, in the eye of fancy, still flew the colours of King 
James; and in the ear of fancy the arches of Tantallon still rang 
with horse-shoe iron, and echoed to the commands of Bell-the-Cat.

There was nothing to mar your days, if you were a boy summering in 
that part, but the embarrassment of pleasure.  You might golf if 
you wanted; but I seem to have been better employed.  You might 
secrete yourself in the Lady's Walk, a certain sunless dingle of 
elders, all mossed over by the damp as green as grass, and dotted 
here and there by the stream-side with roofless walls, the cold 
homes of anchorites.  To fit themselves for life, and with a 
special eye to acquire the art of smoking, it was even common for 
the boys to harbour there; and you might have seen a single penny 
pickwick, honestly shared in lengths with a blunt knife, bestrew 
the glen with these apprentices.  Again, you might join our fishing 
parties, where we sat perched as thick as solan-geese, a covey of 
little anglers, boy and girl, angling over each other's heads, to 
the to the much entanglement of lines and loss of podleys and 
consequent shrill recrimination - shrill as the geese themselves.  
Indeed, had that been all, you might have done this often; but 
though fishing be a fine pastime, the podley is scarce to be 
regarded as a dainty for the table; and it was a point of honour 
that a boy should eat all that he had taken.  Or again, you might 
climb the Law, where the whale's jawbone stood landmark in the 
buzzing wind, and behold the face of many counties, and the smoke 
and spires of many towns, and the sails of distant ships.  You 
might bathe, now in the flaws of fine weather, that we pathetically 
call our summer, now in a gale of wind, with the sand scourging 
your bare hide, your clothes thrashing abroad from underneath their 
guardian stone, the froth of the great breakers casting you 
headlong ere it had drowned your knees.  Or you might explore the 
tidal rocks, above all in the ebb of springs, when the very roots 
of the hills were for the nonce discovered; following my leader 
from one group to another, groping in slippery tangle for the wreck 
of ships, wading in pools after the abominable creatures of the 
sea, and ever with an eye cast backward on the march off the tide 
and the menaced line of your retreat.  And then you might go 
Crusoeing, a word that covers all extempore eating in the open air:  
digging perhaps a house under the margin of the links, kindling a 
fire of the sea-ware, and cooking apples there - if they were truly 
apples, for I sometimes suppose the merchant must have played us 
off with some inferior and quite local fruit capable of resolving, 
in the neighbourhood of fire, into mere sand and smoke and iodine; 
or perhaps pushing to Tantallon, you might lunch on sandwiches and 
visions in the grassy court, while the wind hummed in the crumbling 
turrets; or clambering along the coast, eat geans (the worst, I 
must suppose, in Christendom) from an adventurous gean tree that 
had taken root under a cliff, where it was shaken with an ague of 
east wind, and silvered after gales with salt, and grew so foreign 
among its bleak surroundings that to eat of its produce was an 
adventure in itself.

There are mingled some dismal memories with so many that were 
joyous.  Of the fisher-wife, for instance, who had cut her throat 
at Canty Bay; and of how I ran with the other children to the top 
of the Quadrant, and beheld a posse of silent people escorting a 
cart, and on the cart, bound in a chair, her throat bandaged, and 
the bandage all bloody - horror! - the fisher-wife herself, who 
continued thenceforth to hag-ride my thoughts, and even to-day (as 
I recall the scene) darkens daylight.  She was lodged in the little 
old jail in the chief street; but whether or no she died there, 
with a wise terror of the worst, I never inquired.  She had been 
tippling; it was but a dingy tragedy; and it seems strange and hard 
that, after all these years, the poor crazy sinner should be still 
pilloried on her cart in the scrap-book of my memory.  Nor shall I 
readily forget a certain house in the Quadrant where a visitor 
died, and a dark old woman continued to dwell alone with the dead 
body; nor how this old woman conceived a hatred to myself and one 
of my cousins, and in the dread hour of the dusk, as we were 
clambering on the garden-walls, opened a window in that house of 
mortality and cursed us in a shrill voice and with a marrowy choice 
of language.  It was a pair of very colourless urchins that fled 
down the lane from this remarkable experience!  But I recall with a 
more doubtful sentiment, compounded out of fear and exultation, the 
coil of equinoctial tempests; trumpeting squalls, scouring flaws of 
rain; the boats with their reefed lugsails scudding for the harbour 
mouth, where danger lay, for it was hard to make when the wind had 
any east in it; the wives clustered with blowing shawls at the 
pier-head, where (if fate was against them) they might see boat and 
husband and sons - their whole wealth and their whole family - 
engulfed under their eyes; and (what I saw but once) a troop of 
neighbours forcing such an unfortunate homeward, and she squalling 
and battling in their midst, a figure scarcely human, a tragic 
Maenad.

These are things that I recall with interest; but what my memory 
dwells upon the most, I have been all this while withholding.  It 
was a sport peculiar to the place, and indeed to a week or so of 
our two months' holiday there.  Maybe it still flourishes in its 
native spot; for boys and their pastimes are swayed by periodic 
forces inscrutable to man; so that tops and marbles reappear in 
their due season, regular like the sun and moon; and the harmless 
art of knucklebones has seen the fall of the Roman empire and the 
rise of the United States.  It may still flourish in its native 
spot, but nowhere else, I am persuaded; for I tried myself to 
introduce it on Tweedside, and was defeated lamentably; its charm 
being quite local, like a country wine that cannot be exported.

The idle manner of it was this:-

Toward the end of September, when school-time was drawing near and 
the nights were already black, we would begin to sally from our-
respective villas, each equipped with a tin bull's-eye lantern.  
The thing was so well known that it had worn a rut in the commerce 
of Great Britain; and the grocers, about the due time, began to 
garnish their windows with our particular brand of luminary.  We 
wore them buckled to the waist upon a cricket belt, and over them, 
such was the rigour of the game, a buttoned top-coat.  They smelled 
noisomely of blistered tin; they never burned aright, though they 
would always burn our fingers; their use was naught; the pleasure 
of them merely fanciful; and yet a boy with a bull's-eye under his 
top-coat asked for nothing more.  The fishermen used lanterns about 
their boats, and it was from them, I suppose, that we had got the 
hint; but theirs were not bull's-eyes, nor did we ever play at 
being fishermen.  The police carried them at their belts, and we 
had plainly copied them in that; yet we did not pretend to be 
policemen.  Burglars, indeed, we may have had some haunting 
thoughts of; and we had certainly an eye to past ages when lanterns 
were more common, and to certain story-books in which we had found 
them to figure very largely.  But take it for all in all, the 
pleasure of the thing was substantive; and to be a boy with a 
bull's-eye under his top-coat was good enough for us.

When two of these asses met, there would be an anxious "Have you 
got your lantern?" and a gratified "Yes!" That was the shibboleth, 
and very needful too; for, as it was the rule to keep our glory 
contained, none could recognise a lantern-bearer, unless (like the 
polecat) by the smell.  Four or five would sometimes climb into the 
belly of a ten-man lugger, with nothing but the thwarts above them 
- for the cabin was usually locked, or choose out some hollow of 
the links where the wind might whistle overhead.  There the coats 
would be unbuttoned and the bull's-eyes discovered; and in the 
chequering glimmer, under the huge windy hall of the night, and 
cheered by a rich steam of toasting tinware, these fortunate young 
gentlemen would crouch together in the cold sand of the links or on 
the scaly bilges of the fishing-boat, and delight themselves with 
inappropriate talk.  Woe is me that I may not give some specimens - 
some of their foresights of life, or deep inquiries into the 
rudiments of man and nature, these were so fiery and so innocent, 
they were so richly silly, so romantically young.  But the talk, at 
any rate, was but a condiment; and these gatherings themselves only 
accidents in the career of the lantern-bearer.  The essence of this 
bliss was to walk by yourself in the black night; the slide shut, 
the top-coat buttoned; not a ray escaping, whether to conduct your 
footsteps or to make your glory public:  a mere pillar of darkness 
in the dark; and all the while, deep down in the privacy of your 
fool's heart, to know you had a bull's-eye at your belt, and to 
exult and sing over the knowledge.


II


It is said that a poet has died young in the breast of the most 
stolid.  It may be contended, rather, that this (somewhat minor) 
bard in almost every case survives, and is the spice of life to his 
possessor.  Justice is not done to the versatility and the 
unplumbed childishness of man's imagination.  His life from without 
may seem but a rude mound of mud; there will be some golden chamber 
at the heart of it, in which he dwells delighted; and for as dark 
as his pathway seems to the observer, he will have some kind of a 
bull's-eye at his belt.

It would be hard to pick out a career more cheerless than that of 
Dancer, the miser, as he figures in the "Old Bailey Reports," a 
prey to the most sordid persecutions, the butt of his 
neighbourhood, betrayed by his hired man, his house beleaguered by 
the impish schoolboy, and he himself grinding and fuming and 
impotently fleeing to the law against these pin-pricks.  You marvel 
at first that any one should willingly prolong a life so destitute 
of charm and dignity; and then you call to memory that had he 
chosen, had he ceased to be a miser, he could have been freed at 
once from these trials, and might have built himself a castle and 
gone escorted by a squadron.  For the love of more recondite joys, 
which we cannot estimate, which, it may be, we should envy, the man 
had willingly forgone both comfort and consideration.  "His mind to 
him a kingdom was"; and sure enough, digging into that mind, which 
seems at first a dust-heap, we unearth some priceless jewels.  For 
Dancer must have had the love of power and the disdain of using it, 
a noble character in itself; disdain of many pleasures, a chief 
part of what is commonly called wisdom; disdain of the inevitable 
end, that finest trait of mankind; scorn of men's opinions, another 
element of virtue; and at the back of all, a conscience just like 
yours and mine, whining like a cur, swindling like a thimble-
rigger, but still pointing (there or there-about) to some 
conventional standard.  Here were a cabinet portrait to which 
Hawthorne perhaps had done justice; and yet not Hawthorne either, 
for he was mildly minded, and it lay not in him to create for us 
that throb of the miser's pulse, his fretful energy of gusto, his 
vast arms of ambition clutching in he knows not what:  insatiable, 
insane, a god with a muck-rake.  Thus, at least, looking in the 
bosom of the miser, consideration detects the poet in the full tide 
of life, with more, indeed, of the poetic fire than usually goes to 
epics; and tracing that mean man about his cold hearth, and to and 
fro in his discomfortable house, spies within him a blazing bonfire 
of delight.  And so with others, who do not live by bread alone, 
but by some cherished and perhaps fantastic pleasure; who are meat 
salesmen to the external eye, and possibly to themselves are 
Shakespeares, Napoleons, or Beethovens; who have not one virtue to 
rub against another in the field of active life, and yet perhaps, 
in the life of contemplation, sit with the saints.  We see them on 
the street, and we can count their buttons; but heaven knows in 
what they pride themselves! heaven knows where they have set their 
treasure!

There is one fable that touches very near the quick of life:  the 
fable of the monk who passed into the woods, heard a bird break 
into song, hearkened for a trill or two, and found himself on his 
return a stranger at his convent gates; for he had been absent 
fifty years, and of all his comrades there survived but one to 
recognise him.  It is not only in the woods that this enchanter 
carols, though perhaps he is native there.  He sings in the most 
doleful places.  The miser hears him and chuckles, and the days are 
moments.  With no more apparatus than an ill-smelling lantern I 
have evoked him on the naked links.  All life that is not merely 
mechanical is spun out of two strands:  seeking for that bird and 
hearing him.  And it is just this that makes life so hard to value, 
and the delight of each so incommunicable.  And just a knowledge of 
this, and a remembrance of those fortunate hours in which the bird 
has sung to us, that fills us with such wonder when we turn the 
pages of the realist.  There, to be sure, we find a picture of life 
in so far as it consists of mud and of old iron, cheap desires and 
cheap fears, that which we are ashamed to remember and that which 
we are careless whether we forget; but of the note of that time-
devouring nightingale we hear no news.

The case of these writers of romance is most obscure.  They have 
been boys and youths; they have lingered outside the window of the 
beloved, who was then most probably writing to some one else; they 
have sat before a sheet of paper, and felt themselves mere 
continents of congested poetry, not one line of which would flow; 
they have walked alone in the woods, they have walked in cities 
under the countless lamps; they have been to sea, they have hated, 
they have feared, they have longed to knife a man, and maybe done 
it; the wild taste of life has stung their palate.  Or, if you deny 
them all the rest, one pleasure at least they have tasted to the 
full - their books are there to prove it - the keen pleasure of 
successful literary composition.  And yet they fill the globe with 
volumes, whose cleverness inspires me with despairing admiration, 
and whose consistent falsity to all I care to call existence, with 
despairing wrath.  If I had no better hope than to continue to 
revolve among the dreary and petty businesses, and to be moved by 
the paltry hopes and fears with which they surround and animate 
their heroes, I declare I would die now.  But there has never an 
hour of mine gone quite so dully yet; if it were spent waiting at a 
railway junction, I would have some scattering thoughts, I could 
count some grains of memory, compared to which the whole of one of 
these romances seems but dross.

These writers would retort (if I take them properly) that this was 
very true; that it was the same with themselves and other persons 
of (what they call) the artistic temperament; that in this we were 
exceptional, and should apparently be ashamed of ourselves; but 
that our works must deal exclusively with (what they call) the 
average man, who was a prodigious dull fellow, and quite dead to 
all but the paltriest considerations.  I accept the issue.  We can 
only know others by ourselves.  The artistic temperament (a plague 
on the expression!) does not make us different from our fellowmen, 
or it would make us incapable of writing novels; and the average 
man (a murrain on the word!) is just like you and me, or he would 
not be average.  It was Whitman who stamped a kind of Birmingham 
sacredness upon the latter phrase; but Whitman knew very well, and 
showed very nobly, that the average man was full of joys and full 
of a poetry of his own.  And this harping on life's dulness and 
man's meanness is a loud profession of incompetence; it is one of 
two things:  the cry of the blind eye, I CANNOT SEE, or the 
complaint of the dumb tongue, I CANNOT UTTER.  To draw a life 
without delights is to prove I have not realised it.  To picture a 
man without some sort of poetry - well, it goes near to prove my 
case, for it shows an author may have little enough.  To see Dancer 
only as a dirty, old, small-minded, impotently fuming man, in a 
dirty house, besieged by Harrow boys, and probably beset by small 
attorneys, is to show myself as keen an observer as . . . the 
Harrow boys.  But these young gentlemen (with a more becoming 
modesty) were content to pluck Dancer by the coat-tails; they did 
not suppose they had surprised his secret or could put him living 
in a book:  and it is there my error would have lain.  Or say that 
in the same romance - I continue to call these books romances, in 
the hope of giving pain - say that in the same romance, which now 
begins really to take shape, I should leave to speak of Dancer, and 
follow instead the Harrow boys; and say that I came on some such 
business as that of my lantern-bearers on the links; and described 
the boys as very cold, spat upon by flurries of rain, and drearily 
surrounded, all of which they were; and their talk as silly and 
indecent, which it certainly was.  I might upon these lines, and 
had I Zola's genius, turn out, in a page or so, a gem of literary 
art, render the lantern-light with the touches of a master, and lay 
on the indecency with the ungrudging hand of love; and when all was 
done, what a triumph would my picture be of shallowness and 
dulness! how it would have missed the point! how it would have 
belied the boys!  To the ear of the stenographer, the talk is 
merely silly and indecent; but ask the boys themselves, and they 
are discussing (as it is highly proper they should) the 
possibilities of existence.  To the eye of the observer they are 
wet and cold and drearily surrounded; but ask themselves, and they 
are in the heaven of a recondite pleasure, the ground of which is 
an ill-smelling lantern.


III


For, to repeat, the ground of a man's joy is often hard to hit.  It 
may hinge at times upon a mere accessory, like the lantern; it may 
reside, like Dancer's, in the mysterious inwards of psychology.  It 
may consist with perpetual failure, and find exercise in the 
continued chase.  It has so little bond with externals (such as the 
observer scribbles in his note-book) that it may even touch them 
not; and the man's true life, for which he consents to live, lie 
altogether in the field of fancy.  The clergyman, in his spare 
hours, may be winning battles, the farmer sailing ships, the banker 
reaping triumph in the arts:  all leading another life, plying 
another trade from that they chose; like the poet's housebuilder, 
who, after all, is cased in stone,

"By his fireside, as impotent fancy prompts.
Rebuilds it to his liking."

In such a case the poetry runs underground.  The observer (poor 
soul, with his documents!) is all abroad.  For to look at the man 
is but to court deception.  We shall see the trunk from which he 
draws his nourishment; but he himself is above and abroad in the 
green dome of foliage, hummed through by winds and nested in by 
nightingales.  And the true realism were that of the poets, to 
climb up after him like a squirrel, and catch some glimpse of the 
heaven for which he lives.

And, the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the poets:  
to find out where joy resides, and give it a voice far beyond 
singing.

For to miss the joy is to miss all.  In the joy of the actors lies 
the sense of any action.  That is the explanation, that the excuse.  
To one who has not the secret of the lanterns, the scene upon the 
links is meaningless.  And hence the haunting and truly spectral 
unreality of realistic books.  Hence, when we read the English 
realists, the incredulous wonder with which we observe the hero's 
constancy under the submerging tide of dulness, and how he bears up 
with his jibbing sweetheart, and endures the chatter of idiot 
girls, and stands by his whole unfeatured wilderness of an 
existence, instead of seeking relief in drink or foreign travel.  
Hence in the French, in that meat-market of middle-aged sensuality, 
the disgusted surprise with which we see the hero drift sidelong, 
and practically quite untempted, into every description of 
misconduct and dishonour.  In each, we miss the personal poetry, 
the enchanted atmosphere, that rainbow work of fancy that clothes 
what is naked and seems to ennoble what is base; in each, life 
falls dead like dough, instead of soaring away like a balloon into 
the colours of the sunset; each is true, each inconceivable; for no 
man lives in the external truth, among salts and acids, but in the 
warm, phantasmagoric chamber of his brain, with the painted windows 
and the storied walls.

Of this falsity we have had a recent example from a man who knows 
far better - Tolstoi's POWERS OF DARKNESS.  Here is a piece full of 
force and truth, yet quite untrue.  For before Mikita was led into 
so dire a situation he was tempted, and temptations are beautiful 
at least in part; and a work which dwells on the ugliness of crime 
and gives no hint of any loveliness in the temptation, sins against 
the modesty of life, and even when a Tolstoi writes it, sinks to 
melodrama.  The peasants are not understood; they saw their life in 
fairer colours; even the deaf girl was clothed in poetry for 
Mikita, or he had never fallen.  And so, once again, even an Old 
Bailey melodrama, without some brightness of poetry and lustre of 
existence, falls into the inconceivable and ranks with fairy tales.


IV


In nobler books we are moved with something like the emotions of 
life; and this emotion is very variously provoked.  We are so moved 
when Levine labours in the field, when Andre sinks beyond emotion, 
when Richard Feverel and Lucy Desborough meet beside the river, 
when Antony, "not cowardly, puts off his helmet," when Kent has 
infinite pity on the dying Lear, when, in Dostoieffky's DESPISED 
AND REJECTED, the uncomplaining hero drains his cup of suffering 
and virtue.  These are notes that please the great heart of man.  
Not only love, and the fields, and the bright face of danger, but 
sacrifice and death and unmerited suffering humbly supported, touch 
in us the vein of the poetic.  We love to think of them, we long to 
try them, we are humbly hopeful that we may prove heroes also.

We have heard, perhaps, too much of lesser matters.  Here is the 
door, here is the open air.  ITUR IN ANTIQUAM SILVAM.



CHAPTER VIII - A CHAPTER ON DREAMS



THE past is all of one texture - whether feigned or suffered - 
whether acted out in three dimensions, or only witnessed in that 
small theatre of the brain which we keep brightly lighted all night 
long, after the jets are down, and darkness and sleep reign 
undisturbed in the remainder of the body.  There is no distinction 
on the face of our experiences; one is vivid indeed, and one dull, 
and one pleasant, and another agonising to remember; but which of 
them is what we call true, and which a dream, there is not one hair 
to prove.  The past stands on a precarious footing; another straw 
split in the field of metaphysic, and behold us robbed of it.  
There is scarce a family that can count four generations but lays a 
claim to some dormant title or some castle and estate:  a claim not 
prosecutable in any court of law, but flattering to the fancy and a 
great alleviation of idle hours.  A man's claim to his own past is 
yet less valid.  A paper might turn up (in proper story-book 
fashion) in the secret drawer of an old ebony secretary, and 
restore your family to its ancient honours, and reinstate mine in a 
certain West Indian islet (not far from St. Kitt's, as beloved 
tradition hummed in my young ears) which was once ours, and is now 
unjustly some one else's, and for that matter (in the state of the 
sugar trade) is not worth anything to anybody.  I do not say that 
these revolutions are likely; only no man can deny that they are 
possible; and the past, on the other baud, is, lost for ever:  our 
old days and deeds, our old selves, too, and the very world in 
which these scenes were acted, all brought down to the same faint 
residuum as a last night's dream, to some incontinuous images, and 
an echo in the chambers of the brain.  Not an hour, not a mood, not 
a glance of the eye, can we revoke; it is all gone, past conjuring.  
And yet conceive us robbed of it, conceive that little thread of 
memory that we trail behind us broken at the pocket's edge; and in 
what naked nullity should we be left! for we only guide ourselves, 
and only know ourselves, by these air-painted pictures of the past.

Upon these grounds, there are some among us who claim to have lived 
longer and more richly than their neighbours; when they lay asleep 
they claim they were still active; and among the treasures of 
memory that all men review for their amusement, these count in no 
second place the harvests of their dreams.  There is one of this 
kind whom I have in my eye, and whose case is perhaps unusual 
enough to be described.  He was from a child an ardent and 
uncomfortable dreamer.  When he had a touch of fever at night, and 
the room swelled and shrank, and his clothes, hanging on a nail, 
now loomed up instant to the bigness of a church, and now drew away 
into a horror of infinite distance and infinite littleness, the 
poor soul was very well aware of what must follow, and struggled 
hard against the approaches of that slumber which was the beginning 
of sorrows.

But his struggles were in vain; sooner or later the night-hag would 
have him by the throat, and pluck him strangling and screaming, 
from his sleep.  His dreams were at times commonplace enough, at 
times very strange, at times they were almost formless:  he would 
be haunted, for instance, by nothing more definite than a certain 
hue of brown, which he did not mind in the least while he was 
awake, but feared and loathed while he was dreaming; at times, 
again, they took on every detail of circumstance, as when once he 
supposed he must swallow the populous world, and awoke screaming 
with the horror of the thought.  The two chief troubles of his very 
narrow existence - the practical and everyday trouble of school 
tasks and the ultimate and airy one of hell and judgment - were 
often confounded together into one appalling nightmare.  He seemed 
to himself to stand before the Great White Throne; he was called 
on, poor little devil, to recite some form of words, on which his 
destiny depended; his tongue stuck, his memory was blank, hell 
gaped for him; and he would awake, clinging to the curtain-rod with 
his knees to his chin.

These were extremely poor experiences, on the whole; and at that 
time of life my dreamer would have very willingly parted with his 
power of dreams.  But presently, in the course of his growth, the 
cries and physical contortions passed away, seemingly for ever; his 
visions were still for the most part miserable, but they were more 
constantly supported; and he would awake with no more extreme 
symptom than a flying heart, a freezing scalp, cold sweats, and the 
speechless midnight fear.  His dreams, too, as befitted a mind 
better stocked with particulars, became more circumstantial, and 
had more the air and continuity of life.  The look of the world 
beginning to take hold on his attention, scenery came to play a 
part in his sleeping as well as in his waking thoughts, so that he 
would take long, uneventful journeys and see strange towns and 
beautiful places as he lay in bed.  And, what is more significant, 
an odd taste that he had for the Georgian costume and for stories 
laid in that period of English history, began to rule the features 
of his dreams; so that he masqueraded there in a three-cornered hat 
and was much engaged with Jacobite conspiracy between the hour for 
bed and that for breakfast.  About the same time, he began to read 
in his dreams - tales, for the most part, and for the most part 
after the manner of G. P. R. James, but so incredibly more vivid 
and moving than any printed book, that he has ever since been 
malcontent with literature.

And then, while he was yet a student, there came to him a dream-
adventure which he has no anxiety to repeat; he began, that is to 
say, to dream in sequence and thus to lead a double life - one of 
the day, one of the night - one that he had every reason to believe 
was the true one, another that he had no means of proving to be 
false.  I should have said he studied, or was by way of studying, 
at Edinburgh College, which (it may be supposed) was how I came to 
know him.  Well, in his dream-life, he passed a long day in the 
surgical theatre, his heart in his mouth, his teeth on edge, seeing 
monstrous malformations and the abhorred dexterity of surgeons.  In 
a heavy, rainy, foggy evening he came forth into the South Bridge, 
turned up the High Street, and entered the door of a tall LAND, at 
the top of which he supposed himself to lodge.  All night long, in 
his wet clothes, he climbed the stairs, stair after stair in 
endless series, and at every second flight a flaring lamp with a 
reflector.  All night long, he brushed by single persons passing 
downward - beggarly women of the street, great, weary, muddy 
labourers, poor scarecrows of men, pale parodies of women - but all 
drowsy and weary like himself, and all single, and all brushing 
against him as they passed.  In the end, out of a northern window, 
he would see day beginning to whiten over the Firth, give up the 
ascent, turn to descend, and in a breath be back again upon the 
streets, in his wet clothes, in the wet, haggard dawn, trudging to 
another day of monstrosities and operations.  Time went quicker in 
the life of dreams, some seven hours (as near as he can guess) to 
one; and it went, besides, more intensely, so that the gloom of 
these fancied experiences clouded the day, and he had not shaken 
off their shadow ere it was time to lie down and to renew them.  I 
cannot tell how long it was that he endured this discipline; but it 
was long enough to leave a great black blot upon his memory, long 
enough to send him, trembling for his reason, to the doors of a 
certain doctor; whereupon with a simple draught he was restored to 
the common lot of man.

The poor gentleman has since been troubled by nothing of the sort; 
indeed, his nights were for some while like other men's, now blank, 
now chequered with dreams, and these sometimes charming, sometimes 
appalling, but except for an occasional vividness, of no 
extraordinary kind.  I will just note one of these occasions, ere I 
pass on to what makes my dreamer truly interesting.  It seemed to 
him that he was in the first floor of a rough hill-farm.  The room 
showed some poor efforts at gentility, a carpet on the floor, a 
piano, I think, against the wall; but, for all these refinements, 
there was no mistaking he was in a moorland place, among hillside 
people, and set in miles of heather.  He looked down from the 
window upon a bare farmyard, that seemed to have been long disused.  
A great, uneasy stillness lay upon the world.  There was no sign of 
the farm-folk or of any live stock, save for an old, brown, curly 
dog of the retriever breed, who sat close in against the wall of 
the house and seemed to be dozing.  Something about this dog 
disquieted the dreamer; it was quite a nameless feeling, for the 
beast looked right enough - indeed, he was so old and dull and 
dusty and broken-down, that he should rather have awakened pity; 
and yet the conviction came and grew upon the dreamer that this was 
no proper dog at all, but something hellish.  A great many dozing 
summer flies hummed about the yard; and presently the dog thrust 
forth his paw, caught a fly in his open palm, carried it to his 
mouth like an ape, and looking suddenly up at the dreamer in the 
window, winked to him with one eye.  The dream went on, it matters 
not how it went; it was a good dream as dreams go; but there was 
nothing in the sequel worthy of that devilish brown dog.  And the 
point of interest for me lies partly in that very fact:  that 
having found so singular an incident, my imperfect dreamer should 
prove unable to carry the tale to a fit end and fall back on 
indescribable noises and indiscriminate horrors.  It would be 
different now; he knows his business better!

For, to approach at last the point:  This honest fellow had long 
been in the custom of setting himself to sleep with tales, and so 
had his father before him; but these were irresponsible inventions, 
told for the teller's pleasure, with no eye to the crass public or 
the thwart reviewer:  tales where a thread might be dropped, or one 
adventure quitted for another, on fancy's least suggestion.  So 
that the little people who manage man's internal theatre had not as 
yet received a very rigorous training; and played upon their stage 
like children who should have slipped into the house and found it 
empty, rather than like drilled actors performing a set piece to a 
huge hall of faces.  But presently my dreamer began to turn his 
former amusement of story-telling to (what is called) account; by 
which I mean that he began to write and sell his tales.  Here was 
he, and here were the little people who did that part of his 
business, in quite new conditions.  The stories must now be trimmed 
and pared and set upon all fours, they must run from a beginning to 
an end and fit (after a manner) with the laws of life; the 
pleasure, in one word, had become a business; and that not only for 
the dreamer, but for the little people of his theatre.  These 
understood the change as well as he.  When he lay down to prepare 
himself for sleep, he no longer sought amusement, but printable and 
profitable tales; and after he had dozed off in his box-seat, his 
little people continued their evolutions with the same mercantile 
designs.  All other forms of dream deserted him but two:  he still 
occasionally reads the most delightful books, he still visits at 
times the most delightful places; and it is perhaps worthy of note 
that to these same places, and to one in particular, he returns at 
intervals of months and years, finding new field-paths, visiting 
new neighbours, beholding that happy valley under new effects of 
noon and dawn and sunset.  But all the rest of the family of 
visions is quite lost to him:  the common, mangled version of 
yesterday's affairs, the raw-head-and-bloody-bones nightmare, 
rumoured to be the child of toasted cheese - these and their like 
are gone; and, for the most part, whether awake or asleep, he is 
simply occupied - he or his little people - in consciously making 
stories for the market.  This dreamer (like many other persons) has 
encountered some trifling vicissitudes of fortune.  When the bank 
begins to send letters and the butcher to linger at the back gate, 
he sets to belabouring his brains after a story, for that is his 
readiest money-winner; and, behold! at once the little people begin 
to bestir themselves in the same quest, and labour all night long, 
and all night long set before him truncheons of tales upon their 
lighted theatre.  No fear of his being frightened now; the flying 
heart and the frozen scalp are things by-gone; applause, growing 
applause, growing interest, growing exultation in his own 
cleverness (for he takes all the credit), and at last a jubilant 
leap to wakefulness, with the cry, "I have it, that'll do!" upon 
his lips:  with such and similar emotions he sits at these 
nocturnal dramas, with such outbreaks, like Claudius in the play, 
he scatters the performance in the midst.  Often enough the waking 
is a disappointment:  he has been too deep asleep, as I explain the 
thing; drowsiness has gained his little people, they have gone 
stumbling and maundering through their parts; and the play, to the 
awakened mind, is seen to be a tissue of absurdities.  And yet how 
often have these sleepless Brownies done him honest service, and 
given him, as he sat idly taking his pleasure in the boxes, better 
tales than he could fashion for himself.

Here is one, exactly as it came to him.  It seemed he was the son 
of a very rich and wicked man, the owner of broad acres and a most 
damnable temper.  The dreamer (and that was the son) had lived much 
abroad, on purpose to avoid his parent; and when at length he 
returned to England, it was to find him married again to a young 
wife, who was supposed to suffer cruelly and to loathe her yoke.  
Because of this marriage (as the dreamer indistinctly understood) 
it was desirable for father and son to have a meeting; and yet both 
being proud and both angry, neither would condescend upon a visit.  
Meet they did accordingly, in a desolate, sandy country by the sea; 
and there they quarrelled, and the son, stung by some intolerable 
insult, struck down the father dead.  No suspicion was aroused; the 
dead man was found and buried, and the dreamer succeeded to the 
broad estates, and found himself installed under the same roof with 
his father's widow, for whom no provision had been made.  These two 
lived very much alone, as people may after a bereavement, sat down 
to table together, shared the long evenings, and grew daily better 
friends; until it seemed to him of a sudden that she was prying 
about dangerous matters, that she had conceived a notion of his 
guilt, that she watched him and tried him with questions.  He drew 
back from her company as men draw back from a precipice suddenly 
discovered; and yet so strong was the attraction that he would 
drift again and again into the old intimacy, and again and again be 
startled back by some suggestive question or some inexplicable 
meaning in her eye.  So they lived at cross purposes, a life full 
of broken dialogue, challenging glances, and suppressed passion; 
until, one day, he saw the woman slipping from the house in a veil, 
followed her to the station, followed her in the train to the 
seaside country, and out over the sandhills to the very place where 
the murder was done.  There she began to grope among the bents, he 
watching her, flat upon his face; and presently she had something 
in her hand - I cannot remember what it was, but it was deadly 
evidence against the dreamer - and as she held it up to look at it, 
perhaps from the shock of the discovery, her foot slipped, and she 
hung at some peril on the brink of the tall sand-wreaths.  He had 
no thought but to spring up and rescue her; and there they stood 
face to face, she with that deadly matter openly in her hand - his 
very presence on the spot another link of proof.  It was plain she 
was about to speak, but this was more than he could bear - he could 
bear to be lost, but not to talk of it with his destroyer; and he 
cut her short with trivial conversation.  Arm in arm, they returned 
together to the train, talking he knew not what, made the journey 
back in the same carriage, sat down to dinner, and passed the 
evening in the drawing-room as in the past.  But suspense and fear 
drummed in the dreamer's bosom.  "She has not denounced me yet" - 
so his thoughts ran - "when will she denounce me?  Will it be to-
morrow?"  And it was not to-morrow, nor the next day, nor the next; 
and their life settled back on the old terms, only that she seemed 
kinder than before, and that, as for him, the burthen of his 
suspense and wonder grew daily more unbearable, so that he wasted 
away like a man with a disease.  Once, indeed, he broke all bounds 
of decency, seized an occasion when she was abroad, ransacked her 
room, and at last, hidden away among her jewels, found the damning 
evidence.  There he stood, holding this thing, which was his life, 
in the hollow of his hand, and marvelling at her inconsequent 
behaviour, that she should seek, and keep, and yet not use it; and 
then the door opened, and behold herself.  So, once more, they 
stood, eye to eye, with the evidence between them; and once more 
she raised to him a face brimming with some communication; and once 
more he shied away from speech and cut her off.  But before he left 
the room, which he had turned upside down, he laid back his death-
warrant where he had found it; and at that, her face lighted up.  
The next thing he heard, she was explaining to her maid, with some 
ingenious falsehood, the disorder of her things.  Flesh and blood 
could bear the strain no longer; and I think it was the next 
morning (though chronology is always hazy in the theatre of the 
mind) that he burst from his reserve.  They had been breakfasting 
together in one corner of a great, parqueted, sparely-furnished 
room of many windows; all the time of the meal she had tortured him 
with sly allusions; and no sooner were the servants gone, and these 
two protagonists alone together, than he leaped to his feet.  She 
too sprang up, with a pale face; with a pale face, she heard him as 
he raved out his complaint:  Why did she torture him so? she knew 
all, she knew he was no enemy to her; why did she not denounce him 
at once? what signified her whole behaviour? why did she torture 
him? and yet again, why did she torture him?  And when he had done, 
she fell upon her knees, and with outstretched hands:   "Do you not 
understand?" she cried.  "I love you!"

Hereupon, with a pang of wonder and mercantile delight, the dreamer 
awoke.  His mercantile delight was not of long endurance; for it 
soon became plain that in this spirited tale there were 
unmarketable elements; which is just the reason why you have it 
here so briefly told.  But his wonder has still kept growing; and I 
think the reader's will also, if he consider it ripely.  For now he 
sees why I speak of the little people as of substantive inventors 
and performers.  To the end they had kept their secret.  I will go 
bail for the dreamer (having excellent grounds for valuing his 
candour) that he had no guess whatever at the motive of the woman - 
the hinge of the whole well-invented plot - until the instant of 
that highly dramatic declaration.  It was not his tale; it was the 
little people's!  And observe:  not only was the secret kept, the 
story was told with really guileful craftsmanship.  The conduct of 
both actors is (in the cant phrase) psychologically correct, and 
the emotion aptly graduated up to the surprising climax.  I am 
awake now, and I know this trade; and yet I cannot better it.  I am 
awake, and I live by this business; and yet I could not outdo - 
could not perhaps equal - that crafty artifice (as of some old, 
experienced carpenter of plays, some Dennery or Sardou) by which 
the same situation is twice presented and the two actors twice 
brought face to face over the evidence, only once it is in her 
hand, once in his - and these in their due order, the least 
dramatic first.  The more I think of it, the more I am moved to 
press upon the world my question:  Who are the Little People?  They 
are near connections of the dreamer's, beyond doubt; they share in 
his financial worries and have an eye to the bank-book; they share 
plainly in his training; they have plainly learned like him to 
build the scheme of a considerate story and to arrange emotion in 
progressive order; only I think they have more talent; and one 
thing is beyond doubt, they can tell him a story piece by piece, 
like a serial, and keep him all the while in ignorance of where 
they aim.  Who are they, then? and who is the dreamer?

Well, as regards the dreamer, I can answer that, for he is no less 
a person than myself; - as I might have told you from the 
beginning, only that the critics murmur over my consistent egotism; 
- and as I am positively forced to tell you now, or I could advance 
but little farther with my story.  And for the Little People, what 
shall I say they are but just my Brownies, God bless them! who do 
one-half my work for me while I am fast asleep, and in all human 
likelihood, do the rest for me as well, when I am wide awake and 
fondly suppose I do it for myself.  That part which is done while I 
am sleeping is the Brownies' part beyond contention; but that which 
is done when I am up and about is by no means necessarily mine, 
since all goes to show the Brownies have a hand in it even then.  
Here is a doubt that much concerns my conscience.  For myself - 
what I call I, my conscious ego, the denizen of the pineal gland 
unless he has changed his residence since Descartes, the man with 
the conscience and the variable bank-account, the man with the hat 
and the boots, and the privilege of voting and not carrying his 
candidate at the general elections - I am sometimes tempted to 
suppose he is no story-teller at all, but a creature as matter of 
fact as any cheesemonger or any cheese, and a realist bemired up to 
the ears in actuality; so that, by that account, the whole of my 
published fiction should be the single-handed product of some 
Brownie, some Familiar, some unseen collaborator, whom I keep 
locked in a back garret, while I get all the praise and he but a 
share (which I cannot prevent him getting) of the pudding.  I am an 
excellent adviser, something like Moliere's servant; I pull back 
and I cut down; and I dress the whole in the best words and 
sentences that I can find and make; I hold the pen, too; and I do 
the sitting at the table, which is about the worst of it; and when 
all is done, I make up the manuscript and pay for the registration; 
so that, on the whole, I have some claim to share, though not so 
largely as I do, in the profits of our common enterprise.

I can but give an instance or so of what part is done sleeping and 
what part awake, and leave the reader to share what laurels there 
are, at his own nod, between myself and my collaborators; and to do 
this I will first take a book that a number of persons have been 
polite enough to read, the STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE.  
I had long been trying to write a story on this subject, to find a 
body, a vehicle, for that strong sense of man's double being which 
must at times come in upon and overwhelm the mind of every thinking 
creature.  I had even written one, THE TRAVELLING COMPANION, which 
was returned by an editor on the plea that it was a work of genius 
and indecent, and which I burned the other day on the ground that 
it was not a work of genius, and that JEKYLL had supplanted it.  
Then came one of those financial fluctuations to which (with an 
elegant modesty) I have hitherto referred in the third person.  For 
two days I went about racking my brains for a plot of any sort; and 
on the second night I dreamed the scene at the window, and a scene 
afterward split in two, in which Hyde, pursued for some crime, took 
the powder and underwent the change in the presence of his 
pursuers.  All the rest was made awake, and consciously, although I 
think I can trace in much of it the manner of my Brownies.  The 
meaning of the tale is therefore mine, and had long pre-existed in 
my garden of Adonis, and tried one body after another in vain; 
indeed, I do most of the morality, worse luck! and my Brownies have 
not a rudiment of what we call a conscience.  Mine, too, is the 
setting, mine the characters.  All that was given me was the matter 
of three scenes, and the central idea of a voluntary change 
becoming involuntary.  Will it be thought ungenerous, after I have 
been so liberally ladling out praise to my unseen collaborators, if 
I here toss them over, bound hand and foot, into the arena of the 
critics?  For the business of the powders, which so many have 
censured, is, I am relieved to say, not mine at all but the 
Brownies'.  Of another tale, in case the reader should have glanced 
at it, I may say a word:  the not very defensible story of OLALLA.  
Here the court, the mother, the mother's niche, Olalla, Olalla's 
chamber, the meetings on the stair, the broken window, the ugly 
scene of the bite, were all given me in bulk and detail as I have 
tried to write them; to this I added only the external scenery (for 
in my dream I never was beyond the court), the portrait, the 
characters of Felipe and the priest, the moral, such as it is, and 
the last pages, such as, alas! they are.  And I may even say that 
in this case the moral itself was given me; for it arose 
immediately on a comparison of the mother and the daughter, and 
from the hideous trick of atavism in the first.  Sometimes a 
parabolic sense is still more undeniably present in a dream; 
sometimes I cannot but suppose my Brownies have been aping Bunyan, 
and yet in no case with what would possibly be called a moral in a 
tract; never with the ethical narrowness; conveying hints instead 
of life's larger limitations and that sort of sense which we seem 
to perceive in the arabesque of time and space.

For the most part, it will be seen, my Brownies are somewhat 
fantastic, like their stories hot and hot, full of passion and the 
picturesque, alive with animating incident; and they have no 
prejudice against the supernatural.  But the other day they gave me 
a surprise, entertaining me with a love-story, a little April 
comedy, which I ought certainly to hand over to the author of A 
CHANCE ACQUAINTANCE, for he could write it as it should be written, 
and I am sure (although I mean to try) that I cannot. - But who 
would have supposed that a Brownie of mine should invent a tale for 
Mr. Howells?



CHAPTER IX - BEGGARS



IN a pleasant, airy, up-hill country, it was my fortune when I was 
young to make the acquaintance of a certain beggar.  I call him 
beggar, though he usually allowed his coat and his shoes (which 
were open-mouthed, indeed) to beg for him.  He was the wreck of an 
athletic man, tall, gaunt, and bronzed; far gone in consumption, 
with that disquieting smile of the mortally stricken on his face; 
but still active afoot, still with the brisk military carriage, the 
ready military salute.  Three ways led through this piece of 
country; and as I was inconstant in my choice, I believe he must 
often have awaited me in vain.  But often enough, he caught me; 
often enough, from some place of ambush by the roadside, he would 
spring suddenly forth in the regulation attitude, and launching at 
once into his inconsequential talk, fall into step with me upon my 
farther course.  "A fine morning, sir, though perhaps a trifle 
inclining to rain.  I hope I see you well, sir.  Why, no, sir, I 
don't feel as hearty myself as I could wish, but I am keeping about 
my ordinary.  I am pleased to meet you on the road, sir.  I assure 
you I quite look forward to one of our little conversations."  He 
loved the sound of his own voice inordinately, and though (with 
something too off-hand to call servility) he would always hasten to 
agree with anything you said, yet he could never suffer you to say 
it to an end.  By what transition he slid to his favourite subject 
I have no memory; but we had never been long together on the way 
before he was dealing, in a very military manner, with the English 
poets.  "Shelley was a fine poet, sir, though a trifle atheistical 
in his opinions.  His Queen Mab, sir, is quite an atheistical work.  
Scott, sir, is not so poetical a writer.  With the works of 
Shakespeare I am not so well acquainted, but he was a fine poet.  
Keats - John Keats, sir - he was a very fine poet."  With such 
references, such trivial criticism, such loving parade of his own 
knowledge, he would beguile the road, striding forward uphill, his 
staff now clapped to the ribs of his deep, resonant chest, now 
swinging in the air with the remembered jauntiness of the private 
soldier; and all the while his toes looking out of his boots, and 
his shirt looking out of his elbows, and death looking out of his 
smile, and his big, crazy frame shaken by accesses of cough.

He would often go the whole way home with me:  often to borrow a 
book, and that book always a poet.  Off he would march, to continue 
his mendicant rounds, with the volume slipped into the pocket of 
his ragged coat; and although he would sometimes keep it quite a 
while, yet it came always back again at last, not much the worse 
for its travels into beggardom.  And in this way, doubtless, his 
knowledge grew and his glib, random criticism took a wider range.  
But my library was not the first he had drawn upon:  at our first 
encounter, he was already brimful of Shelley and the atheistical 
Queen Mab, and "Keats - John Keats, sir."  And I have often 
wondered how he came by these acquirements; just as I often 
wondered how he fell to be a beggar.  He had served through the 
Mutiny - of which (like so many people) he could tell practically 
nothing beyond the names of places, and that it was "difficult 
work, sir," and very hot, or that so-and-so was "a very fine 
commander, sir."  He was far too smart a man to have remained a 
private; in the nature of things, he must have won his stripes.  
And yet here he was without a pension.  When I touched on this 
problem, he would content himself with diffidently offering me 
advice.  "A man should be very careful when he is young, sir.  If 
you'll excuse me saying so, a spirited young gentleman like 
yourself, sir, should be very careful.  I was perhaps a trifle 
inclined to atheistical opinions myself."  For (perhaps with a 
deeper wisdom than we are inclined in these days to admit) he 
plainly bracketed agnosticism with beer and skittles.

Keats - John Keats, sir - and Shelley were his favourite bards.  I 
cannot remember if I tried him with Rossetti; but I know his taste 
to a hair, and if ever I did, he must have doted on that author.  
What took him was a richness in the speech; he loved the exotic, 
the unexpected word; the moving cadence of a phrase; a vague sense 
of emotion (about nothing) in the very letters of the alphabet:  
the romance of language.  His honest head was very nearly empty, 
his intellect like a child's; and when he read his favourite 
authors, he can almost never have understood what he was reading.  
Yet the taste was not only genuine, it was exclusive; I tried in 
vain to offer him novels; he would none of them, he cared for 
nothing but romantic language that he could not understand.  The 
case may be commoner than we suppose.  I am reminded of a lad who 
was laid in the next cot to a friend of mine in a public hospital 
and who was no sooner installed than he sent out (perhaps with his 
last pence) for a cheap Shakespeare.  My friend pricked up his 
ears; fell at once in talk with his new neighbour, and was ready, 
when the book arrived, to make a singular discovery.  For this 
lover of great literature understood not one sentence out of 
twelve, and his favourite part was that of which he understood the 
least - the inimitable, mouth-filling rodomontade of the ghost in 
HAMLET.  It was a bright day in hospital when my friend expounded 
the sense of this beloved jargon:  a task for which I am willing to 
believe my friend was very fit, though I can never regard it as an 
easy one.  I know indeed a point or two, on which I would gladly 
question Mr. Shakespeare, that lover of big words, could he revisit 
the glimpses of the moon, or could I myself climb backward to the 
spacious days of Elizabeth.  But in the second case, I should most 
likely pretermit these questionings, and take my place instead in 
the pit at the Blackfriars, to hear the actor in his favourite 
part, playing up to Mr. Burbage, and rolling out - as I seem to 
hear him - with a ponderous gusto-

"Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd."

What a pleasant chance, if we could go there in a party I and what 
a surprise for Mr. Burbage, when the ghost received the honours of 
the evening!

As for my old soldier, like Mr. Burbage and Mr. Shakespeare, he is 
long since dead; and now lies buried, I suppose, and nameless and 
quite forgotten, in some poor city graveyard. - But not for me, you 
brave heart, have you been buried!  For me, you are still afoot, 
tasting the sun and air, and striding southward.  By the groves of 
Comiston and beside the Hermitage of Braid, by the Hunters' Tryst, 
and where the curlews and plovers cry around Fairmilehead, I see 
and hear you, stalwartly carrying your deadly sickness, cheerfully 
discoursing of uncomprehended poets.


II


The thought of the old soldier recalls that of another tramp, his 
counterpart.  This was a little, lean, and fiery man, with the eyes 
of a dog and the face of a gipsy; whom I found one morning encamped 
with his wife and children and his grinder's wheel, beside the burn 
of Kinnaird.  To this beloved dell I went, at that time, daily; and 
daily the knife-grinder and I (for as long as his tent continued 
pleasantly to interrupt my little wilderness) sat on two stones, 
and smoked, and plucked grass, and talked to the tune of the brown 
water.  His children were mere whelps, they fought and bit among 
the fern like vermin.  His wife was a mere squaw; I saw her gather 
brush and tend the kettle, but she never ventured to address her 
lord while I was present.  The tent was a mere gipsy hovel, like a 
sty for pigs.  But the grinder himself had the fine self-
sufficiency and grave politeness of the hunter and the savage; he 
did me the honours of this dell, which had been mine but the day 
before, took me far into the secrets of his life, and used me (I am 
proud to remember) as a friend.

Like my old soldier, he was far gone in the national complaint.  
Unlike him, he had a vulgar taste in letters; scarce flying higher 
than the story papers; probably finding no difference, certainly 
seeking none, between Tannahill and Burns; his noblest thoughts, 
whether of poetry or music, adequately embodied in that somewhat 
obvious ditty,

"Will ye gang, lassie, gang
To the braes o' Balquidder."

- which is indeed apt to echo in the ears of Scottish children, and 
to him, in view of his experience, must have found a special 
directness of address.  But if he had no fine sense of poetry in 
letters, he felt with a deep joy the poetry of life.  You should 
have heard him speak of what he loved; of the tent pitched beside 
the talking water; of the stars overhead at night; of the blest 
return of morning, the peep of day over the moors, the awaking 
birds among the birches; how he abhorred the long winter shut in 
cities; and with what delight, at the return of the spring, he once 
more pitched his camp in the living out-of-doors.  But we were a 
pair of tramps; and to you, who are doubtless sedentary and a 
consistent first-class passenger in life, he would scarce have laid 
himself so open; - to you, he might have been content to tell his 
story of a ghost - that of a buccaneer with his pistols as he lived 
- whom he had once encountered in a seaside cave near Buckie; and 
that would have been enough, for that would have shown you the 
mettle of the man.  Here was a piece of experience solidly and 
livingly built up in words, here was a story created, TERES ATQUE 
ROTUNDUS.

And to think of the old soldier, that lover of the literary bards!  
He had visited stranger spots than any seaside cave; encountered 
men more terrible than any spirit; done and dared and suffered in 
that incredible, unsung epic of the Mutiny War; played his part 
with the field force of Delhi, beleaguering and beleaguered; shared 
in that enduring, savage anger and contempt of death and decency 
that, for long months together, bedevil'd and inspired the army; 
was hurled to and fro in the battle-smoke of the assault; was 
there, perhaps, where Nicholson fell; was there when the attacking 
column, with hell upon every side, found the soldier's enemy - 
strong drink, and the lives of tens of thousands trembled in the 
scale, and the fate of the flag of England staggered.  And of all 
this he had no more to say than "hot work, sir," or "the army 
suffered a great deal, sir," or "I believe General Wilson, sir, was 
not very highly thought of in the papers."  His life was naught to 
him, the vivid pages of experience quite blank:  in words his 
pleasure lay - melodious, agitated words - printed words, about 
that which he had never seen and was connatally incapable of 
comprehending.  We have here two temperaments face to face; both 
untrained, unsophisticated, surprised (we may say) in the egg; both 
boldly charactered:  - that of the artist, the lover and artificer 
of words; that of the maker, the seeer, the lover and forger of 
experience.  If the one had a daughter and the other had a son, and 
these married, might not some illustrious writer count descent from 
the beggar-soldier and the needy knife-grinder?


III


Every one lives by selling something, whatever be his right to it.  
The burglar sells at the same time his own skill and courage and my 
silver plate (the whole at the most moderate figure) to a Jew 
receiver.  The bandit sells the traveller an article of prime 
necessity:  that traveller's life.  And as for the old soldier, who 
stands for central mark to my capricious figures of eight, he dealt 
in a specially; for he was the only beggar in the world who ever 
gave me pleasure for my money.  He had learned a school of manners 
in the barracks and had the sense to cling to it, accosting 
strangers with a regimental freedom, thanking patrons with a merely 
regimental difference, sparing you at once the tragedy of his 
position and the embarrassment of yours.  There was not one hint 
about him of the beggar's emphasis, the outburst of revolting 
gratitude, the rant and cant, the "God bless you, Kind, Kind 
gentleman," which insults the smallness of your alms by 
disproportionate vehemence, which is so notably false, which would 
be so unbearable if it were true.  I am sometimes tempted to 
suppose this reading of the beggar's part, a survival of the old 
days when Shakespeare was intoned upon the stage and mourners 
keened beside the death-bed; to think that we cannot now accept 
these strong emotions unless they be uttered in the just note of 
life; nor (save in the pulpit) endure these gross conventions.  
They wound us, I am tempted to say, like mockery; the high voice of 
keening (as it yet lingers on) strikes in the face of sorrow like a 
buffet; and the rant and cant of the staled beggar stirs in us a 
shudder of disgust.  But the fact disproves these amateur opinions.  
The beggar lives by his knowledge of the average man.  He knows 
what he is about when he bandages his head, and hires and drugs a 
babe, and poisons life with POOR MARY ANN or LONG, LONG AGO; he 
knows what he is about when he loads the critical ear and sickens 
the nice conscience with intolerable thanks; they know what they 
are about, he and his crew, when they pervade the slums of cities, 
ghastly parodies of suffering, hateful parodies of gratitude.  This 
trade can scarce be called an imposition; it has been so blown upon 
with exposures; it flaunts its fraudulence so nakedly.  We pay them 
as we pay those who show us, in huge exaggeration, the monsters of 
our drinking-water; or those who daily predict the fall of Britain.  
We pay them for the pain they inflict, pay them, and wince, and 
hurry on.  And truly there is nothing that can shake the conscience 
like a beggar's thanks; and that polity in which such protestations 
can be purchased for a shilling, seems no scene for an honest man.

Are there, then, we may be asked, no genuine beggars?  And the 
answer is, Not one.  My old soldier was a humbug like the rest; his 
ragged boots were, in the stage phrase, properties; whole boots 
were given him again and again, and always gladly accepted; and the 
next day, there he was on the road as usual, with toes exposed.  
His boots were his method; they were the man's trade; without his 
boots he would have starved; he did not live by charity, but by 
appealing to a gross taste in the public, which loves the limelight 
on the actor's face, and the toes out of the beggar's boots.  There 
is a true poverty, which no one sees:  a false and merely mimetic 
poverty, which usurps its place and dress, and lives and above all 
drinks, on the fruits of the usurpation.  The true poverty does not 
go into the streets; the banker may rest assured, he has never put 
a penny in its hand.  The self-respecting poor beg from each other; 
never from the rich.  To live in the frock-coated ranks of life, to 
hear canting scenes of gratitude rehearsed for twopence, a man 
might suppose that giving was a thing gone out of fashion; yet it 
goes forward on a scale so great as to fill me with surprise.  In 
the houses of the working class, all day long there will be a foot 
upon the stair; all day long there will be a knocking at the doors; 
beggars come, beggars go, without stint, hardly with intermission, 
from morning till night; and meanwhile, in the same city and but a 
few streets off, the castles of the rich stand unsummoned.  Get the 
tale of any honest tramp, you will find it was always the poor who 
helped him; get the truth from any workman who has met misfortunes, 
it was always next door that he would go for help, or only with 
such exceptions as are said to prove a rule; look at the course of 
the mimetic beggar, it is through the poor quarters that he trails 
his passage, showing his bandages to every window, piercing even to 
the attics with his nasal song.  Here is a remarkable state of 
things in our Christian commonwealths, that the poor only should be 
asked to give.


IV


There is a pleasant tale of some worthless, phrasing Frenchman, who 
was taxed with ingratitude:  "IL FAUT SAVOIR GARDER L'INDEPENDANCE 
DU COEUR," cried he.  I own I feel with him.  Gratitude without 
familarity, gratitude otherwise than as a nameless element in a 
friendship, is a thing so near to hatred that I do not care to 
split the difference.  Until I find a man who is pleased to receive 
obligations, I shall continue to question the tact of those who are 
eager to confer them.  What an art it is, to give, even to our 
nearest friends! and what a test of manners, to receive!  How, upon 
either side, we smuggle away the obligation, blushing for each 
other; how bluff and dull we make the giver; how hasty, how falsely 
cheerful, the receiver!  And yet an act of such difficulty and 
distress between near friends, it is supposed we can perform to a 
total stranger and leave the man transfixed with grateful emotions.  
The last thing you can do to a man is to burthen him with an 
obligation, and it is what we propose to begin with!  But let us 
not be deceived:  unless he is totally degraded to his trade, anger 
jars in his inside, and he grates his teeth at our gratuity.

We should wipe two words from our vocabulary:  gratitude and 
charity.  In real life, help is given out of friendship, or it is 
not valued; it is received from the hand of friendship, or it is 
resented.  We are all too proud to take a naked gift:  we must seem 
to pay it, if in nothing else, then with the delights of our 
society.  Here, then, is the pitiful fix of the rich man; here is 
that needle's eye in which he stuck already in the days of Christ, 
and still sticks to-day, firmer, if possible, than ever:  that he 
has the money and lacks the love which should make his money 
acceptable.  Here and now, just as of old in Palestine, he has the 
rich to dinner, it is with the rich that he takes his pleasure:  
and when his turn comes to be charitable, he looks in vain for a 
recipient.  His friends are not poor, they do not want; the poor 
are not his friends, they will not take.  To whom is he to give?  
Where to find - note this phase - the Deserving Poor?  Charity is 
(what they call) centralised; offices are hired; societies founded, 
with secretaries paid or unpaid:  the hunt of the Deserving Poor 
goes merrily forward.  I think it will take more than a merely 
human secretary to disinter that character.  What! a class that is 
to be in want from no fault of its own, and yet greedily eager to 
receive from strangers; and to be quite respectable, and at the 
same time quite devoid of self-respect; and play the most delicate 
part of friendship, and yet never be seen; and wear the form of 
man, and yet fly in the face of all the laws of human nature:  - 
and all this, in the hope of getting a belly-god Burgess through a 
needle's eye!  O, let him stick, by all means:  and let his polity 
tumble in the dust; and let his epitaph and all his literature (of 
which my own works begin to form no inconsiderable part) be 
abolished even from the history of man!  For a fool of this 
monstrosity of dulness, there can be no salvation:  and the fool 
who looked for the elixir of life was an angel of reason to the 
fool who looks for the Deserving Poor!


V


And yet there is one course which the unfortunate gentleman may 
take.  He may subscribe to pay the taxes.  There were the true 
charity, impartial and impersonal, cumbering none with obligation, 
helping all.  There were a destination for loveless gifts; there 
were the way to reach the pocket of the deserving poor, and yet 
save the time of secretaries!  But, alas! there is no colour of 
romance in such a course; and people nowhere demand the picturesque 
so much as in their virtues.



CHAPTER X - LETTER TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO PROPOSES TO EMBRACE THE 
CAREER OF ART



WITH the agreeable frankness of youth, you address me on a point of 
some practical importance to yourself and (it is even conceivable) 
of some gravity to the world:  Should you or should you not become 
an artist?  It is one which you must decide entirely for yourself; 
all that I can do is to bring under your notice some of the 
materials of that decision; and I will begin, as I shall probably 
conclude also, by assuring you that all depends on the vocation.

To know what you like is the beginning of wisdom and of old age.  
Youth is wholly experimental.  The essence and charm of that 
unquiet and delightful epoch is ignorance of self as well as 
ignorance of life.  These two unknowns the young man brings 
together again and again, now in the airiest touch, now with a 
bitter hug; now with exquisite pleasure, now with cutting pain; but 
never with indifference, to which he is a total stranger, and never 
with that near kinsman of indifference, contentment.  If he be a 
youth of dainty senses or a brain easily heated, the interest of 
this series of experiments grows upon him out of all proportion to 
the pleasure he receives.  It is not beauty that he loves, nor 
pleasure that he seeks, though he may think so; his design and his 
sufficient reward is to verify his own existence and taste the 
variety of human fate.  To him, before the razor-edge of curiosity 
is dulled, all that is not actual living and the hot chase of 
experience wears a face of a disgusting dryness difficult to recall 
in later days; or if there be any exception - and here destiny 
steps in - it is in those moments when, wearied or surfeited of the 
primary activity of the senses, he calls up before memory the image 
of transacted pains and pleasures.  Thus it is that such an one 
shies from all cut-and-dry professions, and inclines insensibly 
toward that career of art which consists only in the tasting and 
recording of experience.

This, which is not so much a vocation for art as an impatience of 
all other honest trades, frequently exists alone; and so existing, 
it will pass gently away in the course of years.  Emphatically, it 
is not to be regarded; it is not a vocation, but a temptation; and 
when your father the other day so fiercely and (in my view) so 
properly discouraged your ambition, he was recalling not improbably 
some similar passage in his own experience.  For the temptation is 
perhaps nearly as common as the vocation is rare.  But again we 
have vocations which are imperfect; we have men whose minds are 
bound up, not so much in any art, as in the general ARS ARTIUM and 
common base of all creative work; who will now dip into painting, 
and now study counterpoint, and anon will be inditing a sonnet:  
all these with equal interest, all often with genuine knowledge.  
And of this temper, when it stands alone, I find it difficult to 
speak; but I should counsel such an one to take to letters, for in 
literature (which drags with so wide a net) all his information may 
be found some day useful, and if he should go on as he has begun, 
and turn at last into the critic, he will have learned to use the 
necessary tools.  Lastly we come to those vocations which are at 
once decisive and precise; to the men who are born with the love of 
pigments, the passion of drawing, the gift of music, or the impulse 
to create with words, just as other and perhaps the same men are 
born with the love of hunting, or the sea, or horses, or the 
turning-lathe.  These are predestined; if a man love the labour of 
any trade, apart from any question of success or fame, the gods 
have called him.  He may have the general vocation too:  he may 
have a taste for all the arts, and I think he often has; but the 
mark of his calling is this laborious partiality for one, this 
inextinguishable zest in its technical successes, and (perhaps 
above all) a certain candour of mind to take his very trifling 
enterprise with a gravity that would befit the cares of empire, and 
to think the smallest improvement worth accomplishing at any 
expense of time and industry.  The book, the statue, the sonata, 
must be gone upon with the unreasoning good faith and the 
unflagging spirit of children at their play.  IS IT WORTH DOING? - 
when it shall have occurred to any artist to ask himself that 
question, it is implicitly answered in the negative.  It does not 
occur to the child as he plays at being a pirate on the dining-room 
sofa, nor to the hunter as he pursues his quarry; and the candour 
of the one and the ardour of the other should be united in the 
bosom of the artist.

If you recognise in yourself some such decisive taste, there is no 
room for hesitation:  follow your bent.  And observe (lest I should 
too much discourage you) that the disposition does not usually burn 
so brightly at the first, or rather not so constantly.  Habit and 
practice sharpen gifts; the necessity of toil grows less 
disgusting, grows even welcome, in the course of years; a small 
taste (if it be only genuine) waxes with indulgence into an 
exclusive passion.  Enough, just now, if you can look back over a 
fair interval, and see that your chosen art has a little more than 
held its own among the thronging interests of youth.  Time will do 
the rest, if devotion help it; and soon your every thought will be 
engrossed in that beloved occupation.

But even with devotion, you may remind me, even with unfaltering 
and delighted industry, many thousand artists spend their lives, if 
the result be regarded, utterly in vain:  a thousand artists, and 
never one work of art.  But the vast mass of mankind are incapable 
of doing anything reasonably well, art among the rest.  The 
worthless artist would not improbably have been a quite incompetent 
baker.  And the artist, even if he does not amuse the public, 
amuses himself; so that there will always be one man the happier 
for his vigils.  This is the practical side of art:  its 
inexpugnable fortress for the true practitioner.  The direct 
returns - the wages of the trade are small, but the indirect - the 
wages of the life - are incalculably great.  No other business 
offers a man his daily bread upon such joyful terms.  The soldier 
and the explorer have moments of a worthier excitement, but they 
are purchased by cruel hardships and periods of tedium that beggar 
language.  In the life of the artist there need be no hour without 
its pleasure.  I take the author, with whose career I am best 
acquainted; and it is true he works in a rebellious material, and 
that the act of writing is cramped and trying both to the eyes and 
the temper; but remark him in his study, when matter crowds upon 
him and words are not wanting - in what a continual series of small 
successes time flows by; with what a sense of power as of one 
moving mountains, he marshals his petty characters; with what 
pleasures, both of the ear and eye, he sees his airy structure 
growing on the page; and how he labours in a craft to which the 
whole material of his life is tributary, and which opens a door to 
all his tastes, his loves, his hatreds, and his convictions, so 
that what he writes is only what he longed to utter.  He may have 
enjoyed many things in this big, tragic playground of the world; 
but what shall he have enjoyed more fully than a morning of 
successful work?  Suppose it ill paid:  the wonder is it should be 
paid at all.  Other men pay, and pay dearly, for pleasures less 
desirable.

Nor will the practice of art afford you pleasure only; it affords 
besides an admirable training.  For the artist works entirely upon 
honour.  The public knows little or nothing of those merits in the 
quest of which you are condemned to spend the bulk of your 
endeavours.  Merits of design, the merit of first-hand energy, the 
merit of a certain cheap accomplishment which a man of the artistic 
temper easily acquires - these they can recognise, and these they 
value.  But to those more exquisite refinements of proficiency and 
finish, which the artist so ardently desires and so keenly feels, 
for which (in the vigorous words of Balzac) he must toil "like a 
miner buried in a landslip," for which, day after day, he recasts 
and revises and rejects - the gross mass of the public must be ever 
blind.  To those lost pains, suppose you attain the highest pitch 
of merit, posterity may possibly do justice; suppose, as is so 
probable, you fall by even a hair's breadth of the highest, rest 
certain they shall never be observed.  Under the shadow of this 
cold thought, alone in his studio, the artist must preserve from 
day to day his constancy to the ideal.  It is this which makes his 
life noble; it is by this that the practice of his craft 
strengthens and matures his character; it is for this that even the 
serious countenance of the great emperor was turned approvingly (if 
only for a moment) on the followers of Apollo, and that sternly 
gentle voice bade the artist cherish his art.

And here there fall two warnings to be made.  First, if you are to 
continue to be a law to yourself, you must beware of the first 
signs of laziness.  This idealism in honesty can only be supported 
by perpetual effort; the standard is easily lowered, the artist who 
says "IT WILL DO," is on the downward path; three or four pot-
boilers are enough at times (above all at wrong times) to falsify a 
talent, and by the practice of journalism a man runs the risk of 
becoming wedded to cheap finish.  This is the danger on the one 
side; there is not less upon the other.  The consciousness of how 
much the artist is (and must be) a law to himself, debauches the 
small heads.  Perceiving recondite merits very hard to attain, 
making or swallowing artistic formulae, or perhaps falling in love 
with some particular proficiency of his own, many artists forget 
the end of all art:  to please.  It is doubtless tempting to 
exclaim against the ignorant bourgeois; yet it should not be 
forgotten, it is he who is to pay us, and that (surely on the face 
of it) for services that he shall desire to have performed.  Here 
also, if properly considered, there is a question of transcendental 
honesty.  To give the public what they do not want, and yet expect 
to be supported:  we have there a strange pretension, and yet not 
uncommon, above all with painters.  The first duty in this world is 
for a man to pay his way; when that is quite accomplished, he may 
plunge into what eccentricity he likes; but emphatically not till 
then.  Till then, he must pay assiduous court to the bourgeois who 
carries the purse.  And if in the course of these capitulations he 
shall falsify his talent, it can never have been a strong one, and 
he will have preserved a better thing than talent - character.  Or 
if he be of a mind so independent that he cannot stoop to this 
necessity, one course is yet open:  he can desist from art, and 
follow some more manly way of life.

I speak of a more manly way of life, it is a point on which I must 
be frank.  To live by a pleasure is not a high calling; it involves 
patronage, however veiled; it numbers the artist, however 
ambitious, along with dancing girls and billiard markers.  The 
French have a romantic evasion for one employment, and call its 
practitioners the Daughters of Joy.  The artist is of the same 
family, he is of the Sons of Joy, chose his trade to please 
himself, gains his livelihood by pleasing others, and has parted 
with something of the sterner dignity of man.  Journals but a 
little while ago declaimed against the Tennyson peerage; and this 
Son of Joy was blamed for condescension when he followed the 
example of Lord Lawrence and Lord Cairns and Lord Clyde.  The poet 
was more happily inspired; with a better modesty he accepted the 
honour; and anonymous journalists have not yet (if I am to believe 
them) recovered the vicarious disgrace to their profession.  When 
it comes to their turn, these gentlemen can do themselves more 
justice; and I shall be glad to think of it; for to my barbarian 
eyesight, even Lord Tennyson looks somewhat out of place in that 
assembly.  There should be no honours for the artist; he has 
already, in the practice of his art, more than his share of the 
rewards of life; the honours are pre-empted for other trades, less 
agreeable and perhaps more useful.

But the devil in these trades of pleasing is to fail to please.  In 
ordinary occupations, a man offers to do a certain thing or to 
produce a certain article with a merely conventional 
accomplishment, a design in which (we may almost say) it is 
difficult to fail.  But the artist steps forth out of the crowd and 
proposes to delight:  an impudent design, in which it is impossible 
to fail without odious circumstances.  The poor Daughter of Joy, 
carrying her smiles and finery quite unregarded through the crowd, 
makes a figure which it is impossible to recall without a wounding 
pity.  She is the type of the unsuccessful artist.  The actor, the 
dancer, and the singer must appear like her in person, and drain 
publicly the cup of failure.  But though the rest of us escape this 
crowning bitterness of the pillory, we all court in essence the 
same humiliation.  We all profess to be able to delight.  And how 
few of us are!  We all pledge ourselves to be able to continue to 
delight.  And the day will come to each, and even to the most 
admired, when the ardour shall have declined and the cunning shall 
be lost, and he shall sit by his deserted booth ashamed.  Then 
shall he see himself condemned to do work for which he blushes to 
take payment.  Then (as if his lot were not already cruel) he must 
lie exposed to the gibes of the wreckers of the press, who earn a 
little bitter bread by the condemnation of trash which they have 
not read, and the praise of excellence which they cannot 
understand.

And observe that this seems almost the necessary end at least of 
writers.  LES BLANCS ET LES BLEUS (for instance) is of an order of 
merit very different from LE VICOMTE DE BRAGLONNE; and if any 
gentleman can bear to spy upon the nakedness of CASTLE DANGEROUS, 
his name I think is Ham:  let it be enough for the rest of us to 
read of it (not without tears) in the pages of Lockhart.  Thus in 
old age, when occupation and comfort are most needful, the writer 
must lay aside at once his pastime and his breadwinner.  The 
painter indeed, if he succeed at all in engaging the attention of 
the public, gains great sums and can stand to his easel until a 
great age without dishonourable failure.  The writer has the double 
misfortune to be ill-paid while he can work, and to be incapable of 
working when he is old.  It is thus a way of life which conducts 
directly to a false position.

For the writer (in spite of notorious examples to the contrary) 
must look to be ill-paid.  Tennyson and Montepin make handsome 
livelihoods; but we cannot all hope to be Tennyson, and we do not 
all perhaps desire to be Montepin.  If you adopt an art to be your 
trade, weed your mind at the outset of all desire of money.  What 
you may decently expect, if you have some talent and much industry, 
is such an income as a clerk will earn with a tenth or perhaps a 
twentieth of your nervous output.  Nor have you the right to look 
for more; in the wages of the life, not in the wages of the trade, 
lies your reward; the work is here the wages.  It will be seen I 
have little sympathy with the common lamentations of the artist 
class.  Perhaps they do not remember the hire of the field 
labourer; or do they think no parallel will lie?  Perhaps they have 
never observed what is the retiring allowance of a field officer; 
or do they suppose their contributions to the arts of pleasing more 
important than the services of a colonel?  Perhaps they forget on 
how little Millet was content to live; or do they think, because 
they have less genius, they stand excused from the display of equal 
virtues?  But upon one point there should be no dubiety:  if a man 
be not frugal, he has no business in the arts.  If he be not 
frugal, he steers directly for that last tragic scene of LE VIEUX 
SALTIMBANQUE; if he be not frugal, he will find it hard to continue 
to be honest.  Some day, when the butcher is knocking at the door, 
he may be tempted, he may be obliged, to turn out and sell a 
slovenly piece of work.  If the obligation shall have arisen 
through no wantonness of his own, he is even to be commanded; for 
words cannot describe how far more necessary it is that a man 
should support his family, than that he should attain to - or 
preserve - distinction in the arts.  But if the pressure comes, 
through his own fault, he has stolen, and stolen under trust, and 
stolen (which is the worst of all) in such a way that no law can 
reach him.

And now you may perhaps ask me, if the debutant artist is to have 
no thought of money, and if (as is implied) he is to expect no 
honours from the State, he may not at least look forward to the 
delights of popularity?  Praise, you will tell me, is a savoury 
dish.  And in so far as you may mean the countenance of other 
artists you would put your finger on one of the most essential and 
enduring pleasures of the career of art.  But in so far as you 
should have an eye to the commendations of the public or the notice 
of the newspapers, be sure you would but be cherishing a dream.  It 
is true that in certain esoteric journals the author (for instance) 
is duly criticised, and that he is often praised a great deal more 
than he deserves, sometimes for qualities which he prided himself 
on eschewing, and sometimes by ladies and gentlemen who have denied 
themselves the privilege of reading his work.  But if a man be 
sensitive to this wild praise, we must suppose him equally alive to 
that which often accompanies and always follows it - wild ridicule.  
A man may have done well for years, and then he may fail; he will 
hear of his failure.  Or he may have done well for years, and still 
do well, but the critics may have tired of praising him, or there 
may have sprung up some new idol of the instant, some "dust a 
little gilt," to whom they now prefer to offer sacrifice.  Here is 
the obverse and the reverse of that empty and ugly thing called 
popularity.  Will any man suppose it worth the gaining?



CHAPTER XI - PULVIS ET UMBRA



We look for some reward of our endeavours and are disappointed; not 
success, not happiness, not even peace of conscience, crowns our 
ineffectual efforts to do well.  Our frailties are invincible, our 
virtues barren; the battle goes sore against us to the going down 
of the sun.  The canting moralist tells us of right and wrong; and 
we look abroad, even on the face of our small earth, and find them 
change with every climate, and no country where some action is not 
honoured for a virtue and none where it is not branded for a vice; 
and we look in our experience, and find no vital congruity in the 
wisest rules, but at the best a municipal fitness.  It is not 
strange if we are tempted to despair of good.  We ask too much.  
Our religions and moralities have been trimmed to flatter us, till 
they are all emasculate and sentimentalised, and only please and 
weaken.  Truth is of a rougher strain.  In the harsh face of life, 
faith can read a bracing gospel.  The human race is a thing more 
ancient than the ten commandments; and the bones and revolutions of 
the Kosmos, in whose joints we are but moss and fungus, more 
ancient still.


I


Of the Kosmos in the last resort, science reports many doubtful 
things and all of them appalling.  There seems no substance to this 
solid globe on which we stamp:  nothing but symbols and ratios.  
Symbols and ratios carry us and bring us forth and beat us down; 
gravity that swings the incommensurable suns and worlds through 
space, is but a figment varying inversely as the squares of 
distances; and the suns and worlds themselves, imponderable figures 
of abstraction, NH3, and H2O.  Consideration dares not dwell upon 
this view; that way madness lies; science carries us into zones of 
speculation, where there is no habitable city for the mind of man.

But take the Kosmos with a grosser faith, as our senses give it us.  
We behold space sown with rotatory islands, suns and worlds and the 
shards and wrecks of systems:  some, like the sun, still blazing; 
some rotting, like the earth; others, like the moon, stable in 
desolation.  All of these we take to be made of something we call 
matter:  a thing which no analysis can help us to conceive; to 
whose incredible properties no familiarity can reconcile our minds.  
This stuff, when not purified by the lustration of fire, rots 
uncleanly into something we call life; seized through all its atoms 
with a pediculous malady; swelling in tumours that become 
independent, sometimes even (by an abhorrent prodigy) locomotory; 
one splitting into millions, millions cohering into one, as the 
malady proceeds through varying stages.  This vital putrescence of 
the dust, used as we are to it, yet strikes us with occasional 
disgust, and the profusion of worms in a piece of ancient turf, or 
the air of a marsh darkened with insects, will sometimes check our 
breathing so that we aspire for cleaner places.  But none is clean:  
the moving sand is infected with lice; the pure spring, where it 
bursts out of the mountain, is a mere issue of worms; even in the 
hard rock the crystal is forming.

In two main shapes this eruption covers the countenance of the 
earth:  the animal and the vegetable:  one in some degree the 
inversion of the other:  the second rooted to the spot; the first 
coming detached out of its natal mud, and scurrying abroad with the 
myriad feet of insects or towering into the heavens on the wings of 
birds:  a thing so inconceivable that, if it be well considered, 
the heart stops.  To what passes with the anchored vermin, we have 
little clue, doubtless they have their joys and sorrows, their 
delights and killing agonies:  it appears not how.  But of the 
locomotory, to which we ourselves belong, we can tell more.  These 
share with us a thousand miracles:  the miracles of sight, of 
hearing, of the projection of sound, things that bridge space; the 
miracles of memory and reason, by which the present is conceived, 
and when it is gone, its image kept living in the brains of man and 
brute; the miracle of reproduction, with its imperious desires and 
staggering consequences.  And to put the last touch upon this 
mountain mass of the revolting and the inconceivable, all these 
prey upon each other, lives tearing other lives in pieces, cramming 
them inside themselves, and by that summary process, growing fat:  
the vegetarian, the whale, perhaps the tree, not less than the lion 
of the desert; for the vegetarian is only the eater of the dumb.

Meanwhile our rotatory island loaded with predatory life, and more 
drenched with blood, both animal and vegetable, than ever mutinied 
ship, scuds through space with unimaginable speed, and turns 
alternate cheeks to the reverberation of a blazing world, ninety 
million miles away.


II


What a monstrous spectre is this man, the disease of the 
agglutinated dust, lifting alternate feet or lying drugged with 
slumber; killing, feeding, growing, bringing forth small copies of 
himself; grown upon with hair like grass, fitted with eyes that 
move and glitter in his face; a thing to set children screaming; - 
and yet looked at nearlier, known as his fellows know him, how 
surprising are his attributes!  Poor soul, here for so little, cast 
among so many hardships, filled with desires so incommensurate and 
so inconsistent, savagely surrounded, savagely descended, 
irremediably condemned to prey upon his fellow lives:  who should 
have blamed him had he been of a piece with his destiny and a being 
merely barbarous?  And we look and behold him instead filled with 
imperfect virtues:  infinitely childish, often admirably valiant, 
often touchingly kind; sitting down, amidst his momentary life, to 
debate of right and wrong and the attributes of the deity; rising 
up to do battle for an egg or die for an idea; singling out his 
friends and his mate with cordial affection; bringing forth in 
pain, rearing with long-suffering solicitude, his young.  To touch 
the heart of his mystery, we find, in him one thought, strange to 
the point of lunacy:  the thought of duty; the thought of something 
owing to himself, to his neighbour, to his God:  an ideal of 
decency, to which he would rise if it were possible; a limit of 
shame, below which, if it be possible, he will not stoop.  The 
design in most men is one of conformity; here and there, in picked 
natures, it transcends itself and soars on the other side, arming 
martyrs with independence; but in all, in their degrees, it is a 
bosom thought:  - Not in man alone, for we trace it in dogs and 
cats whom we know fairly well, and doubtless some similar point of 
honour sways the elephant, the oyster, and the louse, of whom we 
know so little:  - But in man, at least, it sways with so complete 
an empire that merely selfish things come second, even with the 
selfish:  that appetites are starved, fears are conquered, pains 
supported; that almost the dullest shrinks from the reproof of a 
glance, although it were a child's; and all but the most cowardly 
stand amid the risks of war; and the more noble, having strongly 
conceived an act as due to their ideal, affront and embrace death.  
Strange enough if, with their singular origin and perverted 
practice, they think they are to be rewarded in some future life:  
stranger still, if they are persuaded of the contrary, and think 
this blow, which they solicit, will strike them senseless for 
eternity.  I shall be reminded what a tragedy of misconception and 
misconduct man at large presents:  of organised injustice, cowardly 
violence and treacherous crime; and of the damning imperfections of 
the best.  They cannot be too darkly drawn.  Man is indeed marked 
for failure in his efforts to do right.  But where the best 
consistently miscarry, how tenfold more remarkable that all should 
continue to strive; and surely we should find it both touching and 
inspiriting, that in a field from which success is banished, our 
race should not cease to labour.

If the first view of this creature, stalking in his rotatory isle, 
be a thing to shake the courage of the stoutest, on this nearer 
sight, he startles us with an admiring wonder.  It matters not 
where we look, under what climate we observe him, in what stage of 
society, in what depth of ignorance, burthened with what erroneous 
morality; by camp-fires in Assiniboia, the snow powdering his 
shoulders, the wind plucking his blanket, as he sits, passing the 
ceremonial calumet and uttering his grave opinions like a Roman 
senator; in ships at sea, a man inured to hardship and vile 
pleasures, his brightest hope a fiddle in a tavern and a bedizened 
trull who sells herself to rob him, and he for all that simple, 
innocent, cheerful, kindly like a child, constant to toil, brave to 
drown, for others; in the slums of cities, moving among indifferent 
millions to mechanical employments, without hope of change in the 
future, with scarce a pleasure in the present, and yet true to his 
virtues, honest up to his lights, kind to his neighbours, tempted 
perhaps in vain by the bright gin-palace, perhaps long-suffering 
with the drunken wife that ruins him; in India (a woman this time) 
kneeling with broken cries and streaming tears, as she drowns her 
child in the sacred river; in the brothel, the discard of society, 
living mainly on strong drink, fed with affronts, a fool, a thief, 
the comrade of thieves, and even here keeping the point of honour 
and the touch of pity, often repaying the world's scorn with 
service, often standing firm upon a scruple, and at a certain cost, 
rejecting riches:  - everywhere some virtue cherished or affected, 
everywhere some decency of thought and carriage, everywhere the 
ensign of man's ineffectual goodness:  - ah! if I could show you 
this! if I could show you these men and women, all the world over, 
in every stage of history, under every abuse of error, under every 
circumstance of failure, without hope, without help, without 
thanks, still obscurely fighting the lost fight of virtue, still 
clinging, in the brothel or on the scaffold, to some rag of honour, 
the poor jewel of their souls!  They may seek to escape, and yet 
they cannot; it is not alone their privilege and glory, but their 
doom; they are condemned to some nobility; all their lives long, 
the desire of good is at their heels, the implacable hunter.

Of all earth's meteors, here at least is the most strange and 
consoling:  that this ennobled lemur, this hair-crowned bubble of 
the dust, this inheritor of a few years and sorrows, should yet 
deny himself his rare delights, and add to his frequent pains, and 
live for an ideal, however misconceived.  Nor can we stop with man.  
A new doctrine, received with screams a little while ago by canting 
moralists, and still not properly worked into the body of our 
thoughts, lights us a step farther into the heart of this rough but 
noble universe.  For nowadays the pride of man denies in vain his 
kinship with the original dust.  He stands no longer like a thing 
apart.  Close at his heels we see the dog, prince of another genus:  
and in him too, we see dumbly testified the same cultus of an 
unattainable ideal, the same constancy in failure.  Does it stop 
with the dog?  We look at our feet where the ground is blackened 
with the swarming ant:  a creature so small, so far from us in the 
hierarchy of brutes, that we can scarce trace and scarce comprehend 
his doings; and here also, in his ordered politics and rigorous 
justice, we see confessed the law of duty and the fact of 
individual sin.  Does it stop, then, with the ant?  Rather this 
desire of well-doing and this doom of frailty run through all the 
grades of life:  rather is this earth, from the frosty top of 
Everest to the next margin of the internal fire, one stage of 
ineffectual virtues and one temple of pious tears and perseverance.  
The whole creation groaneth and travaileth together.  It is the 
common and the god-like law of life.  The browsers, the biters, the 
barkers, the hairy coats of field and forest, the squirrel in the 
oak, the thousand-footed creeper in the dust, as they share with us 
the gift of life, share with us the love of an ideal:  strive like 
us - like us are tempted to grow weary of the struggle - to do 
well; like us receive at times unmerited refreshment, visitings of 
support, returns of courage; and are condemned like us to be 
crucified between that double law of the members and the will.  Are 
they like us, I wonder, in the timid hope of some reward, some 
sugar with the drug? do they, too, stand aghast at unrewarded 
virtues, at the sufferings of those whom, in our partiality, we 
take to be just, and the prosperity of such as, in our blindness, 
we call wicked?  It may be, and yet God knows what they should look 
for.  Even while they look, even while they repent, the foot of man 
treads them by thousands in the dust, the yelping hounds burst upon 
their trail, the bullet speeds, the knives are heating in the den 
of the vivisectionist; or the dew falls, and the generation of a 
day is blotted out.  For these are creatures, compared with whom 
our weakness is strength, our ignorance wisdom, our brief span 
eternity.

And as we dwell, we living things, in our isle of terror and under 
the imminent hand of death, God forbid it should be man the 
erected, the reasoner, the wise in his own eyes - God forbid it 
should be man that wearies in well-doing, that despairs of 
unrewarded effort, or utters the language of complaint.  Let it be 
enough for faith, that the whole creation groans in mortal frailty, 
strives with unconquerable constancy:  Surely not all in vain.



CHAPTER XII - A CHRISTMAS SERMON



BY the time this paper appears, I shall have been talking for 
twelve months; and it is thought I should take my leave in a formal 
and seasonable manner.  Valedictory eloquence is rare, and death-
bed sayings have not often hit the mark of the occasion.  Charles 
Second, wit and sceptic, a man whose life had been one long lesson 
in human incredulity, an easy-going comrade, a manoeuvring king - 
remembered and embodied all his wit and scepticism along with more 
than his usual good humour in the famous "I am afraid, gentlemen, I 
am an unconscionable time a-dying."


I


An unconscionable time a-dying - there is the picture ("I am 
afraid, gentlemen,") of your life and of mine.  The sands run out, 
and the hours are "numbered and imputed," and the days go by; and 
when the last of these finds us, we have been a long time dying, 
and what else?  The very length is something, if we reach that hour 
of separation undishonoured; and to have lived at all is doubtless 
(in the soldierly expression) to have served.

There is a tale in Ticitus of how the veterans mutinied in the 
German wilderness; of how they mobbed Germanicus, clamouing go 
home; and of how, seizing their general's hand, these old, war-worn 
exiles passed his finger along their toothless gums.  SUNT LACRYMAE 
RERUM:  this was the most eloquent of the songs of Simeon.  And 
when a man has lived to a fair age, he bears his marks of service.  
He may have never been remarked upon the breach at the head of the 
army; at least he shall have lost his teeth on the camp bread.

The idealism of serious people in this age of ours is of a noble 
character.  It never seems to them that they have served enough; 
they have a fine impatience of their virtues.  It were perhaps more 
modest to be singly thankful that we are no worse.  It is not only 
our enemies, those desperate characters - it is we ourselves who 
know not what we do, - thence springs the glimmering hope that 
perhaps we do better than we think:  that to scramble through this 
random business with hands reasonably clean to have played the part 
of a man or woman with some reasonable fulness, to have often 
resisted the diabolic, and at the end to be still resisting it, is 
for the poor human soldier to have done right well.  To ask to see 
some fruit of our endeavour is but a transcendental way of serving 
for reward; and what we take to be contempt of self is only greed 
of hire.

And again if we require so much of ourselves, shall we not require 
much of others?  If we do not genially judge our own deficiencies, 
is it not to be feared we shall be even stern to the trespasses of 
others?  And he who (looking back upon his own life) can see no 
more than that he has been unconscionably long a-dying, will he not 
be tempted to think his neighbour unconscionably long of getting 
hanged?  It is probable that nearly all who think of conduct at 
all, think of it too much; it is certain we all think too much of 
sin.  We are not damned for doing wrong, but for not doing right; 
Christ would never hear of negative morality; THOU SHALT was ever 
his word, with which he superseded THOU SHALT NOT.  To make our 
idea of morality centre on forbidden acts is to defile the 
imagination and to introduce into our judgments of our fellow-men a 
secret element of gusto.  If a thing is wrong for us, we should not 
dwell upon the thought of it; or we shall soon dwell upon it with 
inverted pleasure.  If we cannot drive it from our minds - one 
thing of two:  either our creed is in the wrong and we must more 
indulgently remodel it; or else, if our morality be in the right, 
we are criminal lunatics and should place our persons in restraint.  
A mark of such unwholesomely divided minds is the passion for 
interference with others:  the Fox without the Tail was of this 
breed, but had (if his biographer is to be trusted) a certain 
antique civility now out of date.  A man may have a flaw, a 
weakness, that unfits him for the duties of life, that spoils his 
temper, that threatens his integrity, or that betrays him into 
cruelty.  It has to be conquered; but it must never he suffered to 
engross his thoughts.  The true duties lie all upon the farther 
side, and must be attended to with a whole mind so soon as this 
preliminary clearing of the decks has been effected.  In order that 
he may be kind and honest, it may be needful he should become a 
total abstainer; let him become so then, and the next day let him 
forget the circumstance.  Trying to be kind and honest will require 
all his thoughts; a mortified appetite is never a wise companion; 
in so far as he has had to mortify an appetite, he will still be 
the worse man; and of such an one a great deal of cheerfulness will 
be required in judging life, and a great deal of humility in 
judging others.

It may be argued again that dissatisfaction with our life's 
endeavour springs in some degree from dulness.  We require higher 
tasks, because we do not recognise the height of those we have.  
Trying to be kind and honest seems an affair too simple and too 
inconsequential for gentlemen of our heroic mould; we had rather 
set ourselves to something bold, arduous, and conclusive; we had 
rather found a schism or suppress a heresy, cut off a hand or 
mortify an appetite.  But the task before us, which is to co-endure 
with our existence, is rather one of microscopic fineness, and the 
heroism required is that of patience.  There is no cutting of the 
Gordian knots of life; each must be smilingly unravelled.

To be honest, to be kind - to earn a little and to spend a little 
less, to make upon the whole a family happier for his presence, to 
renounce when that shall be necessary and not be embittered, to 
keep a few friends, but these without capitulation - above all, on 
the same grim condition, to keep friends with himself - here is a 
task for all that a man has of fortitude and delicacy.  He has an 
ambitious soul who would ask more; he has a hopeful spirit who 
should look in such an enterprise to be successful.  There is 
indeed one element in human destiny that not blindness itself can 
controvert:  whatever else we are intended to do, we are not 
intended to succeed; failure is the fate allotted.  It is so in 
every art and study; it is so above all in the continent art of 
living well.  Here is a pleasant thought for the year's end or for 
the end of life.  Only self-deception will be satisfied, and there 
need be no despair for the despairer.


II


But Christmas is not only the mile-mark of another year, moving us 
to thoughts of self-examination:  it is a season, from all its 
associations, whether domestic or religious, suggesting thoughts of 
joy.  A man dissatisfied with his endeavours is a man tempted to 
sadness.  And in the midst of the winter, when his life runs lowest 
and he is reminded of the empty chairs of his beloved, it is well 
he should be condemned to this fashion of the smiling face.  Noble 
disappointment, noble self-denial, are not to be admired, not even 
to be pardoned, if they bring bitterness.  It is one thing to enter 
the kingdom of heaven maim; another to maim yourself and stay 
without.  And the kingdom of heaven is of the child-like, of those 
who are easy to please, who love and who give pleasure.  Mighty men 
of their hands, the smiters and the builders and the judges, have 
lived long and done sternly and yet preserved this lovely 
character; and among our carpet interests and twopenny concerns, 
the shame were indelible if WE should lose it.  Gentleness and 
cheerfulness, these come before all morality; they are the perfect 
duties.  And it is the trouble with moral men that they have 
neither one nor other.  It was the moral man, the Pharisee, whom 
Christ could not away with.  If your morals make you dreary, depend 
upon it they are wrong.  I do not say "give them up," for they may 
be all you have; but conceal them like a vice, lest they should 
spoil the lives of better and simpler people.

A strange temptation attends upon man:  to keep his eye on 
pleasures, even when he will not share in them; to aim all his 
morals against them.  This very year a lady (singular iconoclast!) 
proclaimed a crusade against dolls; and the racy sermon against 
lust is a feature of the age.  I venture to call such moralists 
insincere.  At any excess or perversion of a natural appetite, 
their lyre sounds of itself with relishing denunciations; but for 
all displays of the truly diabolic - envy, malice, the mean lie, 
the mean silence, the calumnious truth, the back-biter, the petty 
tyrant, the peevish poisoner of family life - their standard is 
quite different.  These are wrong, they will admit, yet somehow not 
so wrong; there is no zeal in their assault on them, no secret 
element of gusto warms up the sermon; it is for things not wrong in 
themselves that they reserve the choicest of their indignation.  A 
man may naturally disclaim all moral kinship with the Reverend Mr. 
Zola or the hobgoblin old lady of the dolls; for these are gross 
and naked instances.  And yet in each of us some similar element 
resides.  The sight of a pleasure in which we cannot or else will 
not share moves us to a particular impatience.  It may be because 
we are envious, or because we are sad, or because we dislike noise 
and romping - being so refined, or because - being so philosophic - 
we have an over-weighing sense of life's gravity:  at least, as we 
go on in years, we are all tempted to frown upon our neighbour's 
pleasures.  People are nowadays so fond of resisting temptations; 
here is one to be resisted.  They are fond of self-denial; here is 
a propensity that cannot be too peremptorily denied.  There is an 
idea abroad among moral people that they should make their 
neighbours good.  One person I have to make good:  myself.  But my 
duty to my neighbour is much more nearly expressed by saying that I 
have to make him happy - if I may.


III


Happiness and goodness, according to canting moralists, stand in 
the relation of effect and cause.  There was never anything less 
proved or less probable:  our happiness is never in our own hands; 
we inherit our constitution; we stand buffet among friends and 
enemies; we may be so built as to feel a sneer or an aspersion with 
unusual keenness, and so circumstanced as to be unusually exposed 
to them; we may have nerves very sensitive to pain, and be 
afflicted with a disease very painful.  Virtue will not help us, 
and it is not meant to help us.  It is not even its own reward, 
except for the self-centred and - I had almost said - the 
unamiable.  No man can pacify his conscience; if quiet be what he 
want, he shall do better to let that organ perish from disuse.  And 
to avoid the penalties of the law, and the minor CAPITIS DIMINUTIO 
of social ostracism, is an affair of wisdom - of cunning, if you 
will - and not of virtue.

In his own life, then, a man is not to expect happiness, only to 
profit by it gladly when it shall arise; he is on duty here; he 
knows not how or why, and does not need to know; he knows not for 
what hire, and must not ask.  Somehow or other, though he does not 
know what goodness is, he must try to be good; somehow or other, 
though he cannot tell what will do it, he must try to give 
happiness to others.  And no doubt there comes in here a frequent 
clash of duties.  How far is he to make his neighbour happy?  How 
far must he respect that smiling face, so easy to cloud, so hard to 
brighten again?  And how far, on the other side, is he bound to be 
his brother's keeper and the prophet of his own morality?  How far 
must he resent evil?

The difficulty is that we have little guidance; Christ's sayings on 
the point being hard to reconcile with each other, and (the most of 
them) hard to accept.  But the truth of his teaching would seem to 
be this:  in our own person and fortune, we should be ready to 
accept and to pardon all; it is OUR cheek we are to turn, OUR coat 
that we are to give away to the man who has taken OUR cloak.  But 
when another's face is buffeted, perhaps a little of the lion will 
become us best.  That we are to suffer others to be injured, and 
stand by, is not conceivable and surely not desirable.  Revenge, 
says Bacon, is a kind of wild justice; its judgments at least are 
delivered by an insane judge; and in our own quarrel we can see 
nothing truly and do nothing wisely.  But in the quarrel of our 
neighbour, let us be more bold.  One person's happiness is as 
sacred as another's; when we cannot defend both, let us defend one 
with a stout heart.  It is only in so far as we are doing this, 
that we have any right to interfere:  the defence of B is our only 
ground of action against A.  A has as good a right to go to the 
devil, as we to go to glory; and neither knows what he does.

The truth is that all these interventions and denunciations and 
militant mongerings of moral half-truths, though they be sometimes 
needful, though they are often enjoyable, do yet belong to an 
inferior grade of duties.  Ill-temper and envy and revenge find 
here an arsenal of pious disguises; this is the playground of 
inverted lusts.  With a little more patience and a little less 
temper, a gentler and wiser method might be found in almost every 
case; and the knot that we cut by some fine heady quarrel-scene in 
private life, or, in public affairs, by some denunciatory act 
against what we are pleased to call our neighbour's vices, might 
yet have been unwoven by the hand of sympathy.


IV


To look back upon the past year, and see how little we have striven 
and to what small purpose; and how often we have been cowardly and 
hung back, or temerarious and rushed unwisely in; and how every day 
and all day long we have transgressed the law of kindness; - it may 
seem a paradox, but in the bitterness of these discoveries, a 
certain consolation resides.  Life is not designed to minister to a 
man's vanity.  He goes upon his long business most of the time with 
a hanging head, and all the time like a blind child.  Full of 
rewards and pleasures as it is - so that to see the day break or 
the moon rise, or to meet a friend, or to hear the dinner-call when 
he is hungry, fills him with surprising joys - this world is yet 
for him no abiding city.  Friendships fall through, health fails, 
weariness assails him; year after year, he must thumb the hardly 
varying record of his own weakness and folly.  It is a friendly 
process of detachment.  When the time comes that he should go, 
there need be few illusions left about himself.  HERE LIES ONE WHO 
MEANT WELL, TRIED A LITTLE, FAILED MUCH:  - surely that may be his 
epitaph, of which he need not be ashamed.  Nor will he complain at 
the summons which calls a defeated soldier from the field:  
defeated, ay, if he were Paul or Marcus Aurelius! - but if there is 
still one inch of fight in his old spirit, undishonoured.  The 
faith which sustained him in his life-long blindness and life-long 
disappointment will scarce even be required in this last formality 
of laying down his arms.  Give him a march with his old bones; 
there, out of the glorious sun-coloured earth, out of the day and 
the dust and the ecstasy - there goes another Faithful Failure!

From a recent book of verse, where there is more than one such 
beautiful and manly poem, I take this memorial piece:  it says 
better than I can, what I love to think; let it be our parting 
word.


"A late lark twitters from the quiet skies;
And from the west,
Where the sun, his day's work ended,
Lingers as in content,
There falls on the old, gray city
An influence luminous and serene,
A shining peace.

"The smoke ascends
In a rosy-and-golden haze.  The spires
Shine, and are changed.  In the valley
Shadows rise.  The lark sings on.  The sun,
Closing his benediction,
Sinks, and the darkening air
Thrills with a sense of the triumphing night -
Night, with her train of stars
And her great gift of sleep.

"So be my passing!
My task accomplished and the long day done,
My wages taken, and in my heart
Some late lark singing,
Let me be gathered to the quiet west,
The sundown splendid and serene,
Death."

[1888.]






CHAPTER I--THE ELEMENTS OF DISCORD: NATIVE


The story I have to tell is still going on as I write; the characters are
alive and active; it is a piece of contemporary history in the most exact
sense.  And yet, for all its actuality and the part played in it by mails
and telegraphs and iron war-ships, the ideas and the manners of the
native actors date back before the Roman Empire.  They are Christians,
church-goers, singers of hymns at family worship, hardy cricketers; their
books are printed in London by Spottiswoode, Trubner, or the Tract
Society; but in most other points they are the contemporaries of our
tattooed ancestors who drove their chariots on the wrong side of the
Roman wall.  We have passed the feudal system; they are not yet clear of
the patriarchal.  We are in the thick of the age of finance; they are in
a period of communism.  And this makes them hard to understand.

To us, with our feudal ideas, Samoa has the first appearance of a land of
despotism.  An elaborate courtliness marks the race alone among
Polynesians; terms of ceremony fly thick as oaths on board a ship;
commoners my-lord each other when they meet--and urchins as they play
marbles.  And for the real noble a whole private dialect is set apart.
The common names for an axe, for blood, for bamboo, a bamboo knife, a
pig, food, entrails, and an oven are taboo in his presence, as the common
names for a bug and for many offices and members of the body are taboo in
the drawing-rooms of English ladies.  Special words are set apart for his
leg, his face, his hair, his belly, his eyelids, his son, his daughter,
his wife, his wife's pregnancy, his wife's adultery, adultery with his
wife, his dwelling, his spear, his comb, his sleep, his dreams, his
anger, the mutual anger of several chiefs, his food, his pleasure in
eating, the food and eating of his pigeons, his ulcers, his cough, his
sickness, his recovery, his death, his being carried on a bier, the
exhumation of his bones, and his skull after death.  To address these
demigods is quite a branch of knowledge, and he who goes to visit a high
chief does well to make sure of the competence of his interpreter.  To
complete the picture, the same word signifies the watching of a virgin
and the warding of a chief; and the same word means to cherish a chief
and to fondle a favourite child.

Men like us, full of memories of feudalism, hear of a man so addressed,
so flattered, and we leap at once to the conclusion that he is hereditary
and absolute.  Hereditary he is; born of a great family, he must always
be a man of mark; but yet his office is elective and (in a weak sense) is
held on good behaviour.  Compare the case of a Highland chief: born one
of the great ones of his clan, he was sometimes appointed its chief
officer and conventional father; was loved, and respected, and served,
and fed, and died for implicitly, if he gave loyalty a chance; and yet if
he sufficiently outraged clan sentiment, was liable to deposition.  As to
authority, the parallel is not so close.  Doubtless the Samoan chief, if
he be popular, wields a great influence; but it is limited.  Important
matters are debated in a fono, or native parliament, with its feasting
and parade, its endless speeches and polite genealogical allusions.
Debated, I say--not decided; for even a small minority will often strike
a clan or a province impotent.  In the midst of these ineffective
councils the chief sits usually silent: a kind of a gagged audience for
village orators.  And the deliverance of the fono seems (for the moment)
to be final.  The absolute chiefs of Tahiti and Hawaii were addressed as
plain John and Thomas; the chiefs of Samoa are surfeited with lip-honour,
but the seat and extent of their actual authority is hard to find.

It is so in the members of the state, and worse in the belly.  The idea
of a sovereign pervades the air; the name we have; the thing we are not
so sure of.  And the process of election to the chief power is a mystery.
Certain provinces have in their gift certain high titles, or _names_, as
they are called.  These can only be attributed to the descendants of
particular lines.  Once granted, each name conveys at once the
principality (whatever that be worth) of the province which bestows it,
and counts as one suffrage towards the general sovereignty of Samoa.  To
be indubitable king, they say, or some of them say,--I find few in
perfect harmony,--a man should resume five of these names in his own
person.  But the case is purely hypothetical; local jealousy forbids its
occurrence.  There are rival provinces, far more concerned in the
prosecution of their rivalry than in the choice of a right man for king.
If one of these shall have bestowed its name on competitor A, it will be
the signal and the sufficient reason for the other to bestow its name on
competitor B or C.  The majority of Savaii and that of Aana are thus in
perennial opposition.  Nor is this all.  In 1881, Laupepa, the present
king, held the three names of Malietoa, Natoaitele, and Tamasoalii;
Tamasese held that of Tuiaana; and Mataafa that of Tuiatua.  Laupepa had
thus a majority of suffrages; he held perhaps as high a proportion as can
be hoped in these distracted islands; and he counted among the number the
preponderant name of Malietoa.  Here, if ever, was an election.  Here, if
a king were at all possible, was the king.  And yet the natives were not
satisfied.  Laupepa was crowned, March 19th; and next month, the
provinces of Aana and Atua met in joint parliament, and elected their own
two princes, Tamasese and Mataafa, to an alternate monarchy, Tamasese
taking the first trick of two years.  War was imminent, when the consuls
interfered, and any war were preferable to the terms of the peace which
they procured.  By the Lackawanna treaty, Laupepa was confirmed king, and
Tamasese set by his side in the nondescript office of vice-king.  The
compromise was not, I am told, without precedent; but it lacked all
appearance of success.  To the constitution of Samoa, which was already
all wheels and no horses, the consuls had added a fifth wheel.  In
addition to the old conundrum, "Who is the king?" they had supplied a new
one, "What is the vice-king?"

Two royal lines; some cloudy idea of alternation between the two; an
electorate in which the vote of each province is immediately effectual,
as regards itself, so that every candidate who attains one name becomes a
perpetual and dangerous competitor for the other four: such are a few of
the more trenchant absurdities.  Many argue that the whole idea of
sovereignty is modern and imported; but it seems impossible that anything
so foolish should have been suddenly devised, and the constitution bears
on its front the marks of dotage.

But the king, once elected and nominated, what does he become?  It may be
said he remains precisely as he was.  Election to one of the five names
is significant; it brings not only dignity but power, and the holder is
secure, from that moment, of a certain following in war.  But I cannot
find that the further step of election to the kingship implies anything
worth mention.  The successful candidate is now the _Tupu o Samoa_--much
good may it do him!  He can so sign himself on proclamations, which it
does not follow that any one will heed.  He can summon parliaments; it
does not follow they will assemble.  If he be too flagrantly disobeyed,
he can go to war.  But so he could before, when he was only the chief of
certain provinces.  His own provinces will support him, the provinces of
his rivals will take the field upon the other part; just as before.  In
so far as he is the holder of any of the five _names_, in short, he is a
man to be reckoned with; in so far as he is king of Samoa, I cannot find
but what the president of a college debating society is a far more
formidable officer.  And unfortunately, although the credit side of the
account proves thus imaginary, the debit side is actual and heavy.  For
he is now set up to be the mark of consuls; he will be badgered to raise
taxes, to make roads, to punish crime, to quell rebellion: and how he is
to do it is not asked.

If I am in the least right in my presentation of this obscure matter, no
one need be surprised to hear that the land is full of war and rumours of
war.  Scarce a year goes by but what some province is in arms, or sits
sulky and menacing, holding parliaments, disregarding the king's
proclamations and planting food in the bush, the first step of military
preparation.  The religious sentiment of the people is indeed for peace
at any price; no pastor can bear arms; and even the layman who does so is
denied the sacraments.  In the last war the college of Malua, where the
picked youth are prepared for the ministry, lost but a single student;
the rest, in the bosom of a bleeding country, and deaf to the voices of
vanity and honour, peacefully pursued their studies.  But if the church
looks askance on war, the warrior in no extremity of need or passion
forgets his consideration for the church.  The houses and gardens of her
ministers stand safe in the midst of armies; a way is reserved for
themselves along the beach, where they may be seen in their white kilts
and jackets openly passing the lines, while not a hundred yards behind
the skirmishers will be exchanging the useless volleys of barbaric
warfare.  Women are also respected; they are not fired upon; and they are
suffered to pass between the hostile camps, exchanging gossip, spreading
rumour, and divulging to either army the secret councils of the other.
This is plainly no savage war; it has all the punctilio of the barbarian,
and all his parade; feasts precede battles, fine dresses and songs
decorate and enliven the field; and the young soldier comes to camp
burning (on the one hand) to distinguish himself by acts of valour, and
(on the other) to display his acquaintance with field etiquette.  Thus
after Mataafa became involved in hostilities against the Germans, and had
another code to observe beside his own, he was always asking his white
advisers if "things were done correctly."  Let us try to be as wise as
Mataafa, and to conceive that etiquette and morals differ in one country
and another.  We shall be the less surprised to find Samoan war defaced
with some unpalatable customs.  The childish destruction of fruit-trees
in an enemy's country cripples the resources of Samoa; and the habit of
head-hunting not only revolts foreigners, but has begun to exercise the
minds of the natives themselves.  Soon after the German heads were taken,
Mr. Carne, Wesleyan missionary, had occasion to visit Mataafa's camp, and
spoke of the practice with abhorrence.  "Misi Kane," said one chief, "we
have just been puzzling ourselves to guess where that custom came from.
But, Misi, is it not so that when David killed Goliath, he cut off his
head and carried it before the king?"

With the civil life of the inhabitants we have far less to do; and yet
even here a word of preparation is inevitable.  They are easy, merry, and
pleasure-loving; the gayest, though by far from either the most capable
or the most beautiful of Polynesians.  Fine dress is a passion, and makes
a Samoan festival a thing of beauty.  Song is almost ceaseless.  The
boatman sings at the oar, the family at evening worship, the girls at
night in the guest-house, sometimes the workman at his toil.  No occasion
is too small for the poets and musicians; a death, a visit, the day's
news, the day's pleasantry, will be set to rhyme and harmony.  Even half-
grown girls, the occasion arising, fashion words and train choruses of
children for its celebration.  Song, as with all Pacific islanders, goes
hand in hand with the dance, and both shade into the drama.  Some of the
performances are indecent and ugly, some only dull; others are pretty,
funny, and attractive.  Games are popular.  Cricket-matches, where a
hundred played upon a side, endured at times for weeks, and ate up the
country like the presence of an army.  Fishing, the daily bath,
flirtation; courtship, which is gone upon by proxy; conversation, which
is largely political; and the delights of public oratory, fill in the
long hours.

But the special delight of the Samoan is the _malanga_.  When people form
a party and go from village to village, junketing and gossiping, they are
said to go on a _malanga_.  Their songs have announced their approach ere
they arrive; the guest-house is prepared for their reception; the virgins
of the village attend to prepare the kava bowl and entertain them with
the dance; time flies in the enjoyment of every pleasure which an
islander conceives; and when the _malanga_ sets forth, the same welcome
and the same joys expect them beyond the next cape, where the nearest
village nestles in its grove of palms.  To the visitors it is all golden;
for the hosts, it has another side.  In one or two words of the language
the fact peeps slyly out.  The same word (_afemoeina_) expresses "a long
call" and "to come as a calamity"; the same word (_lesolosolou_)
signifies "to have no intermission of pain" and "to have no cessation, as
in the arrival of visitors"; and _soua_, used of epidemics, bears the
sense of being overcome as with "fire, flood, or visitors."  But the gem
of the dictionary is the verb _alovao_, which illustrates its pages like
a humorous woodcut.  It is used in the sense of "to avoid visitors," but
it means literally "hide in the wood."  So, by the sure hand of popular
speech, we have the picture of the house deserted, the _malanga_
disappointed, and the host that should have been quaking in the bush.

We are thus brought to the beginning of a series of traits of manners,
highly curious in themselves, and essential to an understanding of the
war.  In Samoa authority sits on the one hand entranced; on the other,
property stands bound in the midst of chartered marauders.  What property
exists is vested in the family, not in the individual; and of the loose
communism in which a family dwells, the dictionary may yet again help us
to some idea.  I find a string of verbs with the following senses: to
deal leniently with, as in helping oneself from a family plantation; to
give away without consulting other members of the family; to go to
strangers for help instead of to relatives; to take from relatives
without permission; to steal from relatives; to have plantations robbed
by relatives.  The ideal of conduct in the family, and some of its
depravations, appear here very plainly.  The man who (in a native word of
praise) is _mata-ainga_, a race-regarder, has his hand always open to his
kindred; the man who is not (in a native term of contempt) _noa_, knows
always where to turn in any pinch of want or extremity of laziness.
Beggary within the family--and by the less self-respecting, without
it--has thus grown into a custom and a scourge, and the dictionary teems
with evidence of its abuse.  Special words signify the begging of food,
of uncooked food, of fish, of pigs, of pigs for travellers, of pigs for
stock, of taro, of taro-tops, of taro-tops for planting, of tools, of
flyhooks, of implements for netting pigeons, and of mats.  It is true the
beggar was supposed in time to make a return, somewhat as by the Roman
contract of _mutuum_.  But the obligation was only moral; it could not
be, or was not, enforced; as a matter of fact, it was disregarded.  The
language had recently to borrow from the Tahitians a word for debt; while
by a significant excidence, it possessed a native expression for the
failure to pay--"to omit to make a return for property begged."  Conceive
now the position of the householder besieged by harpies, and all defence
denied him by the laws of honour.  The sacramental gesture of refusal,
his last and single resource, was supposed to signify "my house is
destitute."  Until that point was reached, in other words, the conduct
prescribed for a Samoan was to give and to continue giving.  But it does
not appear he was at all expected to give with a good grace.  The
dictionary is well stocked with expressions standing ready, like
missiles, to be discharged upon the locusts--"troop of shamefaced ones,"
"you draw in your head like a tern," "you make your voice small like a
whistle-pipe," "you beg like one delirious"; and the verb _pongitai_, "to
look cross," is equipped with the pregnant rider, "as at the sight of
beggars."

This insolence of beggars and the weakness of proprietors can only be
illustrated by examples.  We have a girl in our service to whom we had
given some finery, that she might wait at table, and (at her own request)
some warm clothing against the cold mornings of the bush.  She went on a
visit to her family, and returned in an old tablecloth, her whole
wardrobe having been divided out among relatives in the course of twenty-
four hours.  A pastor in the province of Atua, being a handy, busy man,
bought a boat for a hundred dollars, fifty of which he paid down.
Presently after, relatives came to him upon a visit and took a fancy to
his new possession.  "We have long been wanting a boat," said they.  "Give
us this one."  So, when the visit was done, they departed in the boat.
The pastor, meanwhile, travelled into Savaii the best way he could, sold
a parcel of land, and begged mats among his other relatives, to pay the
remainder of the price of the boat which was no longer his.  You might
think this was enough; but some months later, the harpies, having broken
a thwart, brought back the boat to be repaired and repainted by the
original owner.

Such customs, it might be argued, being double-edged, will ultimately
right themselves.  But it is otherwise in practice.  Such folk as the
pastor's harpy relatives will generally have a boat, and will never have
paid for it; such men as the pastor may have sometimes paid for a boat,
but they will never have one.  It is there as it is with us at home: the
measure of the abuse of either system is the blackness of the individual
heart.  The same man, who would drive his poor relatives from his own
door in England, would besiege in Samoa the doors of the rich; and the
essence of the dishonesty in either case is to pursue one's own advantage
and to be indifferent to the losses of one's neighbour.  But the
particular drawback of the Polynesian system is to depress and stagger
industry.  To work more is there only to be more pillaged; to save is
impossible.  The family has then made a good day of it when all are
filled and nothing remains over for the crew of free-booters; and the
injustice of the system begins to be recognised even in Samoa.  One
native is said to have amassed a certain fortune; two clever lads have
individually expressed to us their discontent with a system which taxes
industry to pamper idleness; and I hear that in one village of Savaii a
law has been passed forbidding gifts under the penalty of a sharp fine.

Under this economic regimen, the unpopularity of taxes, which strike all
at the same time, which expose the industrious to a perfect siege of
mendicancy, and the lazy to be actually condemned to a day's labour, may
be imagined without words.  It is more important to note the concurrent
relaxation of all sense of property.  From applying for help to kinsmen
who are scarce permitted to refuse, it is but a step to taking from them
(in the dictionary phrase) "without permission"; from that to theft at
large is but a hair's-breadth.




CHAPTER II--THE ELEMENTS OF DISCORD: FOREIGN


The huge majority of Samoans, like other God-fearing folk in other
countries, are perfectly content with their own manners.  And upon one
condition, it is plain they might enjoy themselves far beyond the average
of man.  Seated in islands very rich in food, the idleness of the many
idle would scarce matter; and the provinces might continue to bestow
their names among rival pretenders, and fall into war and enjoy that a
while, and drop into peace and enjoy that, in a manner highly to be
envied.  But the condition--that they should be let alone--is now no
longer possible.  More than a hundred years ago, and following closely on
the heels of Cook, an irregular invasion of adventurers began to swarm
about the isles of the Pacific.  The seven sleepers of Polynesia stand,
still but half aroused, in the midst of the century of competition.  And
the island races, comparable to a shopful of crockery launched upon the
stream of time, now fall to make their desperate voyage among pots of
brass and adamant.

Apia, the port and mart, is the seat of the political sickness of Samoa.
At the foot of a peaked, woody mountain, the coast makes a deep indent,
roughly semicircular.  In front the barrier reef is broken by the fresh
water of the streams; if the swell be from the north, it enters almost
without diminution; and the war-ships roll dizzily at their moorings, and
along the fringing coral which follows the configuration of the beach,
the surf breaks with a continuous uproar.  In wild weather, as the world
knows, the roads are untenable.  Along the whole shore, which is
everywhere green and level and overlooked by inland mountain-tops, the
town lies drawn out in strings and clusters.  The western horn is
Mulinuu, the eastern, Matautu; and from one to the other of these
extremes, I ask the reader to walk.  He will find more of the history of
Samoa spread before his eyes in that excursion, than has yet been
collected in the blue-books or the white-books of the world.  Mulinuu
(where the walk is to begin) is a flat, wind-swept promontory, planted
with palms, backed against a swamp of mangroves, and occupied by a rather
miserable village.  The reader is informed that this is the proper
residence of the Samoan kings; he will be the more surprised to observe a
board set up, and to read that this historic village is the property of
the German firm.  But these boards, which are among the commonest
features of the landscape, may be rather taken to imply that the claim
has been disputed.  A little farther east he skirts the stores, offices,
and barracks of the firm itself.  Thence he will pass through Matafele,
the one really town-like portion of this long string of villages, by
German bars and stores and the German consulate; and reach the Catholic
mission and cathedral standing by the mouth of a small river.  The bridge
which crosses here (bridge of Mulivai) is a frontier; behind is Matafele;
beyond, Apia proper; behind, Germans are supreme; beyond, with but few
exceptions, all is Anglo-Saxon.  Here the reader will go forward past the
stores of Mr. Moors (American) and Messrs. MacArthur (English); past the
English mission, the office of the English newspaper, the English church,
and the old American consulate, till he reaches the mouth of a larger
river, the Vaisingano.  Beyond, in Matautu, his way takes him in the
shade of many trees and by scattered dwellings, and presently brings him
beside a great range of offices, the place and the monument of a German
who fought the German firm during his life.  His house (now he is dead)
remains pointed like a discharged cannon at the citadel of his old
enemies.  Fitly enough, it is at present leased and occupied by
Englishmen.  A little farther, and the reader gains the eastern flanking
angle of the bay, where stands the pilot-house and signal-post, and
whence he can see, on the line of the main coast of the island, the
British and the new American consulates.

The course of his walk will have been enlivened by a considerable to and
fro of pleasure and business.  He will have encountered many varieties of
whites,--sailors, merchants, clerks, priests, Protestant missionaries in
their pith helmets, and the nondescript hangers-on of any island beach.
And the sailors are sometimes in considerable force; but not the
residents.  He will think at times there are more signboards than men to
own them.  It may chance it is a full day in the harbour; he will then
have seen all manner of ships, from men-of-war and deep-sea packets to
the labour vessels of the German firm and the cockboat island schooner;
and if he be of an arithmetical turn, he may calculate that there are
more whites afloat in Apia bay than whites ashore in the whole
Archipelago.  On the other hand, he will have encountered all ranks of
natives, chiefs and pastors in their scrupulous white clothes; perhaps
the king himself, attended by guards in uniform; smiling policemen with
their pewter stars; girls, women, crowds of cheerful children.  And he
will have asked himself with some surprise where these reside.  Here and
there, in the back yards of European establishments, he may have had a
glimpse of a native house elbowed in a corner; but since he left Mulinuu,
none on the beach where islanders prefer to live, scarce one on the line
of street.  The handful of whites have everything; the natives walk in a
foreign town.  A year ago, on a knoll behind a bar-room, he might have
observed a native house guarded by sentries and flown over by the
standard of Samoa.  He would then have been told it was the seat of
government, driven (as I have to relate) over the Mulivai and from beyond
the German town into the Anglo-Saxon.  To-day, he will learn it has been
carted back again to its old quarters.  And he will think it significant
that the king of the islands should be thus shuttled to and fro in his
chief city at the nod of aliens.  And then he will observe a feature more
significant still: a house with some concourse of affairs, policemen and
idlers hanging by, a man at a bank-counter overhauling manifests, perhaps
a trial proceeding in the front verandah, or perhaps the council breaking
up in knots after a stormy sitting.  And he will remember that he is in
the _Eleele Sa_, the "Forbidden Soil," or Neutral Territory of the
treaties; that the magistrate whom he has just seen trying native
criminals is no officer of the native king's; and that this, the only
port and place of business in the kingdom, collects and administers its
own revenue for its own behoof by the hands of white councillors and
under the supervision of white consuls.  Let him go further afield.  He
will find the roads almost everywhere to cease or to be made impassable
by native pig-fences, bridges to be quite unknown, and houses of the
whites to become at once a rare exception.  Set aside the German
plantations, and the frontier is sharp.  At the boundary of the _Eleele
Sa_, Europe ends, Samoa begins.  Here, then, is a singular state of
affairs: all the money, luxury, and business of the kingdom centred in
one place; that place excepted from the native government and
administered by whites for whites; and the whites themselves holding it
not in common but in hostile camps, so that it lies between them like a
bone between two dogs, each growling, each clutching his own end.

Should Apia ever choose a coat of arms, I have a motto ready: "Enter
Rumour painted full of tongues."  The majority of the natives do
extremely little; the majority of the whites are merchants with some four
mails in the month, shopkeepers with some ten or twenty customers a day,
and gossip is the common resource of all.  The town hums to the day's
news, and the bars are crowded with amateur politicians.  Some are office-
seekers, and earwig king and consul, and compass the fall of officials,
with an eye to salary.  Some are humorists, delighted with the pleasure
of faction for itself.   "I never saw so good a place as this Apia," said
one of these; "you can be in a new conspiracy every day!"  Many, on the
other hand, are sincerely concerned for the future of the country.  The
quarters are so close and the scale is so small, that perhaps not any one
can be trusted always to preserve his temper.  Every one tells everything
he knows; that is our country sickness.  Nearly every one has been
betrayed at times, and told a trifle more; the way our sickness takes the
predisposed.  And the news flies, and the tongues wag, and fists are
shaken.  Pot boil and caldron bubble!

Within the memory of man, the white people of Apia lay in the worst
squalor of degradation.  They are now unspeakably improved, both men and
women.  To-day they must be called a more than fairly respectable
population, and a much more than fairly intelligent.  The whole would
probably not fill the ranks of even an English half-battalion, yet there
are a surprising number above the average in sense, knowledge, and
manners.  The trouble (for Samoa) is that they are all here after a
livelihood.  Some are sharp practitioners, some are famous (justly or
not) for foul play in business.  Tales fly.  One merchant warns you
against his neighbour; the neighbour on the first occasion is found to
return the compliment: each with a good circumstantial story to the
proof.  There is so much copra in the islands, and no more; a man's share
of it is his share of bread; and commerce, like politics, is here
narrowed to a focus, shows its ugly side, and becomes as personal as
fisticuffs.  Close at their elbows, in all this contention, stands the
native looking on.  Like a child, his true analogue, he observes,
apprehends, misapprehends, and is usually silent.  As in a child, a
considerable intemperance of speech is accompanied by some power of
secrecy.  News he publishes; his thoughts have often to be dug for.  He
looks on at the rude career of the dollar-hunt, and wonders.  He sees
these men rolling in a luxury beyond the ambition of native kings; he
hears them accused by each other of the meanest trickery; he knows some
of them to be guilty; and what is he to think?  He is strongly conscious
of his own position as the common milk-cow; and what is he to do?  "Surely
these white men on the beach are not great chiefs?" is a common question,
perhaps asked with some design of flattering the person questioned.  And
one, stung by the last incident into an unusual flow of English, remarked
to me: "I begin to be weary of white men on the beach."

But the true centre of trouble, the head of the boil of which Samoa
languishes, is the German firm.  From the conditions of business, a great
island house must ever be an inheritance of care; and it chances that the
greatest still afoot has its chief seat in Apia bay, and has sunk the
main part of its capital in the island of Upolu.  When its founder, John
Caesar Godeffroy, went bankrupt over Russian paper and Westphalian iron,
his most considerable asset was found to be the South Sea business.  This
passed (I understand) through the hands of Baring Brothers in London, and
is now run by a company rejoicing in the Gargantuan name of the _Deutsche
Handels und Plantagen Gesellschaft fur Sud-See Inseln zu Hamburg_.  This
piece of literature is (in practice) shortened to the D. H. and P. G.,
the Old Firm, the German Firm, the Firm, and (among humorists) the Long
Handle Firm.  Even from the deck of an approaching ship, the island is
seen to bear its signature--zones of cultivation showing in a more vivid
tint of green on the dark vest of forest.  The total area in use is near
ten thousand acres.  Hedges of fragrant lime enclose, broad avenues
intersect them.  You shall walk for hours in parks of palm-tree alleys,
regular, like soldiers on parade; in the recesses of the hills you may
stumble on a mill-house, toiling and trembling there, fathoms deep in
superincumbent forest.  On the carpet of clean sward, troops of horses
and herds of handsome cattle may be seen to browse; and to one accustomed
to the rough luxuriance of the tropics, the appearance is of fairyland.
The managers, many of them German sea-captains, are enthusiastic in their
new employment.  Experiment is continually afoot: coffee and cacao, both
of excellent quality, are among the more recent outputs; and from one
plantation quantities of pineapples are sent at a particular season to
the Sydney markets.  A hundred and fifty thousand pounds of English
money, perhaps two hundred thousand, lie sunk in these magnificent
estates.  In estimating the expense of maintenance quite a fleet of ships
must be remembered, and a strong staff of captains, supercargoes,
overseers, and clerks.  These last mess together at a liberal board; the
wages are high, and the staff is inspired with a strong and pleasing
sentiment of loyalty to their employers.

Seven or eight hundred imported men and women toil for the company on
contracts of three or of five years, and at a hypothetical wage of a few
dollars in the month.  I am now on a burning question: the labour
traffic; and I shall ask permission in this place only to touch it with
the tongs.  Suffice it to say that in Queensland, Fiji, New Caledonia,
and Hawaii it has been either suppressed or placed under close public
supervision.  In Samoa, where it still flourishes, there is no regulation
of which the public receives any evidence; and the dirty linen of the
firm, if there be any dirty, and if it be ever washed at all, is washed
in private.  This is unfortunate, if Germans would believe it.  But they
have no idea of publicity, keep their business to themselves, rather
affect to "move in a mysterious way," and are naturally incensed by
criticisms, which they consider hypocritical, from men who would import
"labour" for themselves, if they could afford it, and would probably
maltreat them if they dared.  It is said the whip is very busy on some of
the plantations; it is said that punitive extra-labour, by which the
thrall's term of service is extended, has grown to be an abuse; and it is
complained that, even where that term is out, much irregularity occurs in
the repatriation of the discharged.  To all this I can say nothing, good
or bad.  A certain number of the thralls, many of them wild negritos from
the west, have taken to the bush, harbour there in a state partly
bestial, or creep into the back quarters of the town to do a day's
stealthy labour under the nose of their proprietors.  Twelve were
arrested one morning in my own boys' kitchen.  Farther in the bush, huts,
small patches of cultivation, and smoking ovens, have been found by
hunters.  There are still three runaways in the woods of Tutuila, whither
they escaped upon a raft.  And the Samoans regard these dark-skinned
rangers with extreme alarm; the fourth refugee in Tutuila was shot down
(as I was told in that island) while carrying off the virgin of a
village; and tales of cannibalism run round the country, and the natives
shudder about the evening fire.  For the Samoans are not cannibals, do
not seem to remember when they were, and regard the practice with a
disfavour equal to our own.

The firm is Gulliver among the Lilliputs; and it must not be forgotten,
that while the small, independent traders are fighting for their own
hand, and inflamed with the usual jealousy against corporations, the
Germans are inspired with a sense of the greatness of their affairs and
interests.  The thought of the money sunk, the sight of these costly and
beautiful plantations, menaced yearly by the returning forest, and the
responsibility of administering with one hand so many conjunct fortunes,
might well nerve the manager of such a company for desperate and
questionable deeds.  Upon this scale, commercial sharpness has an air of
patriotism; and I can imagine the man, so far from haggling over the
scourge for a few Solomon islanders, prepared to oppress rival firms,
overthrow inconvenient monarchs, and let loose the dogs of war.  Whatever
he may decide, he will not want for backing.  Every clerk will be eager
to be up and strike a blow; and most Germans in the group, whatever they
may babble of the firm over the walnuts and the wine, will rally round
the national concern at the approach of difficulty.  They are so few--I
am ashamed to give their number, it were to challenge contradiction--they
are so few, and the amount of national capital buried at their feet is so
vast, that we must not wonder if they seem oppressed with greatness and
the sense of empire.  Other whites take part in our brabbles, while
temper holds out, with a certain schoolboy entertainment.  In the Germans
alone, no trace of humour is to be observed, and their solemnity is
accompanied by a touchiness often beyond belief.  Patriotism flies in
arms about a hen; and if you comment upon the colour of a Dutch umbrella,
you have cast a stone against the German Emperor.  I give one instance,
typical although extreme.  One who had returned from Tutuila on the mail
cutter complained of the vermin with which she is infested.  He was
suddenly and sharply brought to a stand.  The ship of which he spoke, he
was reminded, was a German ship.

John Caesar Godeffroy himself had never visited the islands; his sons and
nephews came, indeed, but scarcely to reap laurels; and the mainspring
and headpiece of this great concern, until death took him, was a certain
remarkable man of the name of Theodor Weber.  He was of an artful and
commanding character; in the smallest thing or the greatest, without fear
or scruple; equally able to affect, equally ready to adopt, the most
engaging politeness or the most imperious airs of domination.  It was he
who did most damage to rival traders; it was he who most harried the
Samoans; and yet I never met any one, white or native, who did not
respect his memory.  All felt it was a gallant battle, and the man a
great fighter; and now when he is dead, and the war seems to have gone
against him, many can scarce remember, without a kind of regret, how much
devotion and audacity have been spent in vain.  His name still lives in
the songs of Samoa.  One, that I have heard, tells of _Misi Ueba_ and a
biscuit-box--the suggesting incident being long since forgotten.  Another
sings plaintively how all things, land and food and property, pass
progressively, as by a law of nature, into the hands of _Misi Ueba_, and
soon nothing will be left for Samoans.  This is an epitaph the man would
have enjoyed.

At one period of his career, Weber combined the offices of director of
the firm and consul for the City of Hamburg.  No question but he then
drove very hard.  Germans admit that the combination was unfortunate; and
it was a German who procured its overthrow.  Captain Zembsch superseded
him with an imperial appointment, one still remembered in Samoa as "the
gentleman who acted justly."  There was no house to be found, and the new
consul must take up his quarters at first under the same roof with Weber.
On several questions, in which the firm was vitally interested, Zembsch
embraced the contrary opinion.  Riding one day with an Englishman in
Vailele plantation, he was startled by a burst of screaming, leaped from
the saddle, ran round a house, and found an overseer beating one of the
thralls.  He punished the overseer, and, being a kindly and perhaps not a
very diplomatic man, talked high of what he felt and what he might
consider it his duty to forbid or to enforce.  The firm began to look
askance at such a consul; and worse was behind.  A number of deeds being
brought to the consulate for registration, Zembsch detected certain
transfers of land in which the date, the boundaries, the measure, and the
consideration were all blank.  He refused them with an indignation which
he does not seem to have been able to keep to himself; and, whether or
not by his fault, some of these unfortunate documents became public.  It
was plain that the relations between the two flanks of the German
invasion, the diplomatic and the commercial, were strained to bursting.
But Weber was a man ill to conquer.  Zembsch was recalled; and from that
time forth, whether through influence at home, or by the solicitations of
Weber on the spot, the German consulate has shown itself very apt to play
the game of the German firm.  That game, we may say, was twofold,--the
first part even praiseworthy, the second at least natural.  On the one
part, they desired an efficient native administration, to open up the
country and punish crime; they wished, on the other, to extend their own
provinces and to curtail the dealings of their rivals.  In the first,
they had the jealous and diffident sympathy of all whites; in the second,
they had all whites banded together against them for their lives and
livelihoods.  It was thus a game of _Beggar my Neighbour_ between a large
merchant and some small ones.  Had it so remained, it would still have
been a cut-throat quarrel.  But when the consulate appeared to be
concerned, when the war-ships of the German Empire were thought to fetch
and carry for the firm, the rage of the independent traders broke beyond
restraint.  And, largely from the national touchiness and the intemperate
speech of German clerks, this scramble among dollar-hunters assumed the
appearance of an inter-racial war.

The firm, with the indomitable Weber at its head and the consulate at its
back--there has been the chief enemy at Samoa.  No English reader can
fail to be reminded of John Company; and if the Germans appear to have
been not so successful, we can only wonder that our own blunders and
brutalities were less severely punished.  Even on the field of Samoa,
though German faults and aggressors make up the burthen of my story, they
have been nowise alone.  Three nations were engaged in this infinitesimal
affray, and not one appears with credit.  They figure but as the three
ruffians of the elder play-wrights.  The United States have the cleanest
hands, and even theirs are not immaculate.  It was an ambiguous business
when a private American adventurer was landed with his pieces of
artillery from an American war-ship, and became prime minister to the
king.  It is true (even if he were ever really supported) that he was
soon dropped and had soon sold himself for money to the German firm.  I
will leave it to the reader whether this trait dignifies or not the
wretched story.  And the end of it spattered the credit alike of England
and the States, when this man (the premier of a friendly sovereign) was
kidnapped and deported, on the requisition of an American consul, by the
captain of an English war-ship.  I shall have to tell, as I proceed, of
villages shelled on very trifling grounds by Germans; the like has been
done of late years, though in a better quarrel, by ourselves of England.
I shall have to tell how the Germans landed and shed blood at Fangalii;
it was only in 1876 that we British had our own misconceived little
massacre at Mulinuu.  I shall have to tell how the Germans bludgeoned
Malietoa with a sudden call for money; it was something of the suddenest
that Sir Arthur Gordon himself, smarting under a sensible public affront,
made and enforced a somewhat similar demand.




CHAPTER III--THE SORROWS OF LAUPEPA, 1883 TO 1887


You ride in a German plantation and see no bush, no soul stirring; only
acres of empty sward, miles of cocoa-nut alley: a desert of food.  In the
eyes of the Samoan the place has the attraction of a park for the holiday
schoolboy, of a granary for mice.  We must add the yet more lively
allurement of a haunted house, for over these empty and silent miles
there broods the fear of the negrito cannibal.  For the Samoan besides,
there is something barbaric, unhandsome, and absurd in the idea of thus
growing food only to send it from the land and sell it.  A man at home
who should turn all Yorkshire into one wheatfield, and annually burn his
harvest on the altar of Mumbo-Jumbo, might impress ourselves not much
otherwise.  And the firm which does these things is quite extraneous, a
wen that might be excised to-morrow without loss but to itself; few
natives drawing from it so much as day's wages; and the rest beholding in
it only the occupier of their acres.  The nearest villages have suffered
most; they see over the hedge the lands of their ancestors waving with
useless cocoa-palms; and the sales were often questionable, and must
still more often appear so to regretful natives, spinning and improving
yarns about the evening lamp.  At the worst, then, to help oneself from
the plantation will seem to a Samoan very like orchard-breaking to the
British schoolboy; at the best, it will be thought a gallant
Robin-Hoodish readjustment of a public wrong.

And there is more behind.  Not only is theft from the plantations
regarded rather as a lark and peccadillo, the idea of theft in itself is
not very clearly present to these communists; and as to the punishment of
crime in general, a great gulf of opinion divides the natives from
ourselves.  Indigenous punishments were short and sharp.  Death,
deportation by the primitive method of setting the criminal to sea in a
canoe, fines, and in Samoa itself the penalty of publicly biting a hot,
ill-smelling root, comparable to a rough forfeit in a children's
game--these are approved.  The offender is killed, or punished and
forgiven.  We, on the other hand, harbour malice for a period of years:
continuous shame attaches to the criminal; even when he is doing his
best--even when he is submitting to the worst form of torture, regular
work--he is to stand aside from life and from his family in dreadful
isolation.  These ideas most Polynesians have accepted in appearance, as
they accept other ideas of the whites; in practice, they reduce it to a
farce.  I have heard the French resident in the Marquesas in talk with
the French gaoler of Tai-o-hae: "_Eh bien, ou sont vos prisonnieres_?--_Je
crois, mon commandant, qu'elles sont allees quelque part faire une
visite_."  And the ladies would be welcome.  This is to take the most
savage of Polynesians; take some of the most civilised.  In Honolulu,
convicts labour on the highways in piebald clothing, gruesome and
ridiculous; and it is a common sight to see the family of such an one
troop out, about the dinner hour, wreathed with flowers and in their
holiday best, to picnic with their kinsman on the public wayside.  The
application of these outlandish penalties, in fact, transfers the
sympathy to the offender.  Remember, besides, that the clan system, and
that imperfect idea of justice which is its worst feature, are still
lively in Samoa; that it is held the duty of a judge to favour kinsmen,
of a king to protect his vassals; and the difficulty of getting a
plantation thief first caught, then convicted, and last of all punished,
will appear.

During the early 'eighties, the Germans looked upon this system with
growing irritation.  They might see their convict thrust in gaol by the
front door; they could never tell how soon he was enfranchised by the
back; and they need not be the least surprised if they met him, a few
days after, enjoying the delights of a _malanga_.  It was a banded
conspiracy, from the king and the vice-king downward, to evade the law
and deprive the Germans of their profits.  In 1883, accordingly, the
consul, Dr. Stuebel, extorted a convention on the subject, in terms of
which Samoans convicted of offences against German subjects were to be
confined in a private gaol belonging to the German firm.  To Dr. Stuebel
it seemed simple enough: the offenders were to be effectually punished,
the sufferers partially indemnified.  To the Samoans, the thing appeared
no less simple, but quite different: "Malietoa was selling Samoans to
Misi Ueba."  What else could be expected?  Here was a private corporation
engaged in making money; to it was delegated, upon a question of profit
and loss, one of the functions of the Samoan crown; and those who make
anomalies must look for comments.  Public feeling ran unanimous and high.
Prisoners who escaped from the private gaol were not recaptured or not
returned and Malietoa hastened to build a new prison of his own, whither
he conveyed, or pretended to convey, the fugitives.  In October 1885 a
trenchant state paper issued from the German consulate.  Twenty
prisoners, the consul wrote, had now been at large for eight months from
Weber's prison.  It was pretended they had since then completed their
term of punishment elsewhere.  Dr. Stuebel did not seek to conceal his
incredulity; but he took ground beyond; he declared the point irrelevant.
The law was to be enforced.  The men were condemned to a certain period
in Weber's prison; they had run away; they must now be brought back and
(whatever had become of them in the interval) work out the sentence.
Doubtless Dr. Stuebel's demands were substantially just; but doubtless
also they bore from the outside a great appearance of harshness; and when
the king submitted, the murmurs of the people increased.

But Weber was not yet content.  The law had to be enforced; property, or
at least the property of the firm, must be respected.  And during an
absence of the consul's, he seems to have drawn up with his own hand, and
certainly first showed to the king, in his own house, a new convention.
Weber here and Weber there.  As an able man, he was perhaps in the right
to prepare and propose conventions.  As the head of a trading company, he
seems far out of his part to be communicating state papers to a
sovereign.  The administration of justice was the colour, and I am
willing to believe the purpose, of the new paper; but its effect was to
depose the existing government.  A council of two Germans and two Samoans
were to be invested with the right to make laws and impose taxes as might
be "desirable for the common interest of the Samoan government and the
German residents."  The provisions of this council the king and vice-king
were to sign blindfold.  And by a last hardship, the Germans, who
received all the benefit, reserved a right to recede from the agreement
on six months' notice; the Samoans, who suffered all the loss, were bound
by it in perpetuity.  I can never believe that my friend Dr. Stuebel had
a hand in drafting these proposals; I am only surprised he should have
been a party to enforcing them, perhaps the chief error in these islands
of a man who has made few.  And they were enforced with a rigour that
seems injudicious.  The Samoans (according to their own account) were
denied a copy of the document; they were certainly rated and threatened;
their deliberation was treated as contumacy; two German war-ships lay in
port, and it was hinted that these would shortly intervene.

Succeed in frightening a child, and he takes refuge in duplicity.
"Malietoa," one of the chiefs had written, "we know well we are in
bondage to the great governments."  It was now thought one tyrant might
be better than three, and any one preferable to Germany.  On the 5th
November 1885, accordingly, Laupepa, Tamasese, and forty-eight high
chiefs met in secret, and the supremacy of Samoa was secretly offered to
Great Britain for the second time in history.  Laupepa and Tamasese still
figured as king and vice-king in the eyes of Dr. Stuebel; in their own,
they had secretly abdicated, were become private persons, and might do
what they pleased without binding or dishonouring their country.  On the
morrow, accordingly, they did public humiliation in the dust before the
consulate, and five days later signed the convention.  The last was done,
it is claimed, upon an impulse.  The humiliation, which it appeared to
the Samoans so great a thing to offer, to the practical mind of Dr.
Stuebel seemed a trifle to receive; and the pressure was continued and
increased.  Laupepa and Tamasese were both heavy, well-meaning,
inconclusive men.  Laupepa, educated for the ministry, still bears some
marks of it in character and appearance; Tamasese was in private of an
amorous and sentimental turn, but no one would have guessed it from his
solemn and dull countenance.  Impossible to conceive two less dashing
champions for a threatened race; and there is no doubt they were reduced
to the extremity of muddlement and childish fear.  It was drawing towards
night on the 10th, when this luckless pair and a chief of the name of
Tuiatafu, set out for the German consulate, still minded to temporise.  As
they went, they discussed their case with agitation.  They could see the
lights of the German war-ships as they walked--an eloquent reminder.  And
it was then that Tamasese proposed to sign the convention.  "It will give
us peace for the day," said Laupepa, "and afterwards Great Britain must
decide."--"Better fight Germany than that!" cried Tuiatafu, speaking
words of wisdom, and departed in anger.  But the two others proceeded on
their fatal errand; signed the convention, writing themselves king and
vice-king, as they now believed themselves to be no longer; and with
childish perfidy took part in a scene of "reconciliation" at the German
consulate.

Malietoa supposed himself betrayed by Tamasese.  Consul Churchward states
with precision that the document was sold by a scribe for thirty-six
dollars.  Twelve days later at least, November 22nd, the text of the
address to Great Britain came into the hands of Dr. Stuebel.  The Germans
may have been wrong before; they were now in the right to be angry.  They
had been publicly, solemnly, and elaborately fooled; the treaty and the
reconciliation were both fraudulent, with the broad, farcical fraudulency
of children and barbarians.  This history is much from the outside; it is
the digested report of eye-witnesses; it can be rarely corrected from
state papers; and as to what consuls felt and thought, or what
instructions they acted under, I must still be silent or proceed by
guess.  It is my guess that Stuebel now decided Malietoa Laupepa to be a
man impossible to trust and unworthy to be dealt with.  And it is certain
that the business of his deposition was put in hand at once.  The
position of Weber, with his knowledge of things native, his prestige, and
his enterprising intellect, must have always made him influential with
the consul: at this juncture he was indispensable.  Here was the deed to
be done; here the man of action.  "Mr. Weber rested not," says Laupepa.
It was "like the old days of his own consulate," writes Churchward.  His
messengers filled the isle; his house was thronged with chiefs and
orators; he sat close over his loom, delightedly weaving the future.
There was one thing requisite to the intrigue,--a native pretender; and
the very man, you would have said, stood waiting: Mataafa, titular of
Atua, descended from both the royal lines, late joint king with Tamasese,
fobbed off with nothing in the time of the Lackawanna treaty, probably
mortified by the circumstance, a chief with a strong following, and in
character and capacity high above the native average.  Yet when Weber's
spiriting was done, and the curtain rose on the set scene of the
coronation, Mataafa was absent, and Tamasese stood in his place.  Malietoa
was to be deposed for a piece of solemn and offensive trickery, and the
man selected to replace him was his sole partner and accomplice in the
act.  For so strange a choice, good ground must have existed; but it
remains conjectural: some supposing Mataafa scratched as too independent;
others that Tamasese had indeed betrayed Laupepa, and his new advancement
was the price of his treachery.

So these two chiefs began to change places like the scales of a balance,
one down, the other up.  Tamasese raised his flag (Jan. 28th, 1886) in
Leulumoenga, chief place of his own province of Aana, usurped the style
of king, and began to collect and arm a force.  Weber, by the admission
of Stuebel, was in the market supplying him with weapons; so were the
Americans; so, but for our salutary British law, would have been the
British; for wherever there is a sound of battle, there will the traders
be gathered together selling arms.  A little longer, and we find Tamasese
visited and addressed as king and majesty by a German commodore.
Meanwhile, for the unhappy Malietoa, the road led downward.  He was
refused a bodyguard.  He was turned out of Mulinuu, the seat of his
royalty, on a land claim of Weber's, fled across the Mulivai, and "had
the coolness" (German expression) to hoist his flag in Apia.  He was
asked "in the most polite manner," says the same account--"in the most
delicate manner in the world," a reader of Marryat might be tempted to
amend the phrase,--to strike his flag in his own capital; and on his
"refusal to accede to this request," Dr. Stuebel appeared himself with
ten men and an officer from the cruiser _Albatross_; a sailor climbed
into the tree and brought down the flag of Samoa, which was carefully
folded, and sent, "in the most polite manner," to its owner.  The consuls
of England and the States were there (the excellent gentlemen!) to
protest.  Last, and yet more explicit, the German commodore who visited
the be-titled Tamasese, addressed the king--we may surely say the late
king--as "the High Chief Malietoa."

Had he no party, then?  At that time, it is probable, he might have
called some five-sevenths of Samoa to his standard.  And yet he sat
there, helpless monarch, like a fowl trussed for roasting.  The blame
lies with himself, because he was a helpless creature; it lies also with
England and the States.  Their agents on the spot preached peace (where
there was no peace, and no pretence of it) with eloquence and iteration.
Secretary Bayard seems to have felt a call to join personally in the
solemn farce, and was at the expense of a telegram in which he assured
the sinking monarch it was "for the higher interests of Samoa" he should
do nothing.  There was no man better at doing that; the advice came
straight home, and was devoutly followed.  And to be just to the great
Powers, something was done in Europe; a conference was called, it was
agreed to send commissioners to Samoa, and the decks had to be hastily
cleared against their visit.  Dr. Stuebel had attached the municipality
of Apia and hoisted the German war-flag over Mulinuu; the American consul
(in a sudden access of good service) had flown the stars and stripes over
Samoan colours; on either side these steps were solemnly retracted.  The
Germans expressly disowned Tamasese; and the islands fell into a period
of suspense, of some twelve months' duration, during which the seat of
the history was transferred to other countries and escapes my purview.
Here on the spot, I select three incidents: the arrival on the scene of a
new actor, the visit of the Hawaiian embassy, and the riot on the
Emperor's birthday.  The rest shall be silence; only it must be borne in
view that Tamasese all the while continued to strengthen himself in
Leulumoenga, and Laupepa sat inactive listening to the song of consuls.

_Captain Brandeis_.  The new actor was Brandeis, a Bavarian captain of
artillery, of a romantic and adventurous character.  He had served with
credit in war; but soon wearied of garrison life, resigned his battery,
came to the States, found employment as a civil engineer, visited Cuba,
took a sub-contract on the Panama canal, caught the fever, and came (for
the sake of the sea voyage) to Australia.  He had that natural love for
the tropics which lies so often latent in persons of a northern birth;
difficulty and danger attracted him; and when he was picked out for
secret duty, to be the hand of Germany in Samoa, there is no doubt but he
accepted the post with exhilaration.  It is doubtful if a better choice
could have been made.  He had courage, integrity, ideas of his own, and
loved the employment, the people, and the place.  Yet there was a fly in
the ointment.  The double error of unnecessary stealth and of the
immixture of a trading company in political affairs, has vitiated, and in
the end defeated, much German policy.  And Brandeis was introduced to the
islands as a clerk, and sent down to Leulumoenga (where he was soon
drilling the troops and fortifying the position of the rebel king) as an
agent of the German firm.  What this mystification cost in the end I
shall tell in another place; and even in the beginning, it deceived no
one.  Brandeis is a man of notable personal appearance; he looks the part
allotted him; and the military clerk was soon the centre of observation
and rumour.  Malietoa wrote and complained of his presence to Becker, who
had succeeded Dr. Stuebel in the consulate.  Becker replied, "I have
nothing to do with the gentleman Brandeis.  Be it well known that the
gentleman Brandeis has no appointment in a military character, but
resides peaceably assisting the government of Leulumoenga in their work,
for Brandeis is a quiet, sensible gentleman."  And then he promised to
send the vice-consul to "get information of the captain's doings": surely
supererogation of deceit.

_The Hawaiian Embassy_.  The prime minister of the Hawaiian kingdom was,
at this period, an adventurer of the name of Gibson.  He claimed, on the
strength of a romantic story, to be the heir of a great English house.  He
had played a part in a revolt in Java, had languished in Dutch fetters,
and had risen to be a trusted agent of Brigham Young, the Utah president.
It was in this character of a Mormon emissary that he first came to the
islands of Hawaii, where he collected a large sum of money for the Church
of the Latter Day Saints.  At a given moment, he dropped his saintship
and appeared as a Christian and the owner of a part of the island of
Lanai.  The steps of the transformation are obscure; they seem, at least,
to have been ill-received at Salt Lake; and there is evidence to the
effect that he was followed to the islands by Mormon assassins.  His
first attempt on politics was made under the auspices of what is called
the missionary party, and the canvass conducted largely (it is said with
tears) on the platform at prayer-meetings.  It resulted in defeat.
Without any decency of delay he changed his colours, abjured the errors
of reform, and, with the support of the Catholics, rose to the chief
power.  In a very brief interval he had thus run through the gamut of
religions in the South Seas.  It does not appear that he was any more
particular in politics, but he was careful to consult the character and
prejudices of the late king, Kalakaua.  That amiable, far from
unaccomplished, but too convivial sovereign, had a continued use for
money: Gibson was observant to keep him well supplied.  Kalakaua (one of
the most theoretical of men) was filled with visionary schemes for the
protection and development of the Polynesian race: Gibson fell in step
with him; it is even thought he may have shared in his illusions.  The
king and minister at least conceived between them a scheme of island
confederation--the most obvious fault of which was that it came too
late--and armed and fitted out the cruiser _Kaimiloa_, nest-egg of the
future navy of Hawaii.  Samoa, the most important group still
independent, and one immediately threatened with aggression, was chosen
for the scene of action.  The Hon. John E. Bush, a half-caste Hawaiian,
sailed (December 1887) for Apia as minister-plenipotentiary, accompanied
by a secretary of legation, Henry F. Poor; and as soon as she was ready
for sea, the war-ship followed in support.  The expedition was futile in
its course, almost tragic in result.  The _Kaimiloa_ was from the first a
scene of disaster and dilapidation: the stores were sold; the crew
revolted; for a great part of a night she was in the hands of mutineers,
and the secretary lay bound upon the deck.  The mission, installing
itself at first with extravagance in Matautu, was helped at last out of
the island by the advances of a private citizen.  And they returned from
dreams of Polynesian independence to find their own city in the hands of
a clique of white shopkeepers, and the great Gibson once again in gaol.
Yet the farce had not been quite without effect.  It had encouraged the
natives for the moment, and it seems to have ruffled permanently the
temper of the Germans.  So might a fly irritate Caesar.

The arrival of a mission from Hawaii would scarce affect the composure of
the courts of Europe.  But in the eyes of Polynesians the little kingdom
occupies a place apart.  It is there alone that men of their race enjoy
most of the advantages and all the pomp of independence; news of Hawaii
and descriptions of Honolulu are grateful topics in all parts of the
South Seas; and there is no better introduction than a photograph in
which the bearer shall be represented in company with Kalakaua.  Laupepa
was, besides, sunk to the point at which an unfortunate begins to clutch
at straws, and he received the mission with delight.  Letters were
exchanged between him and Kalakaua; a deed of confederation was signed,
17th February 1887, and the signature celebrated in the new house of the
Hawaiian embassy with some original ceremonies.  Malietoa Laupepa came,
attended by his ministry, several hundred chiefs, two guards, and six
policemen.  Always decent, he withdrew at an early hour; by those that
remained, all decency appears to have been forgotten; high chiefs were
seen to dance; and day found the house carpeted with slumbering grandees,
who must be roused, doctored with coffee, and sent home.  As a first
chapter in the history of Polynesian Confederation, it was hardly
cheering, and Laupepa remarked to one of the embassy, with equal dignity
and sense: "If you have come here to teach my people to drink, I wish you
had stayed away."

The Germans looked on from the first with natural irritation that a power
of the powerlessness of Hawaii should thus profit by its undeniable
footing in the family of nations, and send embassies, and make believe to
have a navy, and bark and snap at the heels of the great German Empire.
But Becker could not prevent the hunted Laupepa from taking refuge in any
hole that offered, and he could afford to smile at the fantastic orgie in
the embassy.  It was another matter when the Hawaiians approached the
intractable Mataafa, sitting still in his Atua government like Achilles
in his tent, helping neither side, and (as the Germans suspected) keeping
the eggs warm for himself.  When the _Kaimiloa_ steamed out of Apia on
this visit, the German war-ship _Adler_ followed at her heels; and
Mataafa was no sooner set down with the embassy than he was summoned and
ordered on board by two German officers.  The step is one of those
triumphs of temper which can only be admired.  Mataafa is entertaining
the plenipotentiary of a sovereign power in treaty with his own king, and
the captain of a German corvette orders him to quit his guests.

But there was worse to come.  I gather that Tamasese was at the time in
the sulks.  He had doubtless been promised prompt aid and a prompt
success; he had seen himself surreptitiously helped, privately ordered
about, and publicly disowned; and he was still the king of nothing more
than his own province, and already the second in command of Captain
Brandeis.  With the adhesion of some part of his native cabinet, and
behind the back of his white minister, he found means to communicate with
the Hawaiians.  A passage on the _Kaimiloa_, a pension, and a home in
Honolulu were the bribes proposed; and he seems to have been tempted.  A
day was set for a secret interview.  Poor, the Hawaiian secretary, and J.
D. Strong, an American painter attached to the embassy in the surprising
quality of "Government Artist," landed with a Samoan boat's-crew in Aana;
and while the secretary hid himself, according to agreement, in the
outlying home of an English settler, the artist (ostensibly bent on
photography) entered the headquarters of the rebel king.  It was a great
day in Leulumoenga; three hundred recruits had come in, a feast was
cooking; and the photographer, in view of the native love of being
photographed, was made entirely welcome.  But beneath the friendly
surface all were on the alert.  The secret had leaked out: Weber beheld
his plans threatened in the root; Brandeis trembled for the possession of
his slave and sovereign; and the German vice-consul, Mr. Sonnenschein,
had been sent or summoned to the scene of danger.

It was after dark, prayers had been said and the hymns sung through all
the village, and Strong and the German sat together on the mats in the
house of Tamasese, when the events began.  Strong speaks German freely, a
fact which he had not disclosed, and he was scarce more amused than
embarrassed to be able to follow all the evening the dissension and the
changing counsels of his neighbours.  First the king himself was missing,
and there was a false alarm that he had escaped and was already closeted
with Poor.  Next came certain intelligence that some of the ministry had
run the blockade, and were on their way to the house of the English
settler.  Thereupon, in spite of some protests from Tamasese, who tried
to defend the independence of his cabinet, Brandeis gathered a posse of
warriors, marched out of the village, brought back the fugitives, and
clapped them in the corrugated iron shanty which served as gaol.  Along
with these he seems to have seized Billy Coe, interpreter to the
Hawaiians; and Poor, seeing his conspiracy public, burst with his boat's-
crew into the town, made his way to the house of the native prime
minister, and demanded Coe's release.  Brandeis hastened to the spot,
with Strong at his heels; and the two principals being both incensed, and
Strong seriously alarmed for his friend's safety, there began among them
a scene of great intemperance.  At one point, when Strong suddenly
disclosed his acquaintance with German, it attained a high style of
comedy; at another, when a pistol was most foolishly drawn, it bordered
on drama; and it may be said to have ended in a mixed genus, when Poor
was finally packed into the corrugated iron gaol along with the forfeited
ministers.  Meanwhile the captain of his boat, Siteoni, of whom I shall
have to tell again, had cleverly withdrawn the boat's-crew at an early
stage of the quarrel.  Among the population beyond Tamasese's marches, he
collected a body of armed men, returned before dawn to Leulumoenga,
demolished the corrugated iron gaol, and liberated the Hawaiian secretary
and the rump of the rebel cabinet.  No opposition was shown; and
doubtless the rescue was connived at by Brandeis, who had gained his
point.  Poor had the face to complain the next day to Becker; but to
compete with Becker in effrontery was labour lost.  "You have been
repeatedly warned, Mr. Poor, not to expose yourself among these savages,"
said he.

Not long after, the presence of the _Kaimiloa_ was made _a casus belli_
by the Germans; and the rough-and-tumble embassy withdrew, on borrowed
money, to find their own government in hot water to the neck.

* * * * *

_The Emperor's Birthday_.  It is possible, and it is alleged, that the
Germans entered into the conference with hope.  But it is certain they
were resolved to remain prepared for either fate.  And I take the liberty
of believing that Laupepa was not forgiven his duplicity; that, during
this interval, he stood marked like a tree for felling; and that his
conduct was daily scrutinised for further pretexts of offence.  On the
evening of the Emperor's birthday, March 22nd, 1887, certain Germans were
congregated in a public bar.  The season and the place considered, it is
scarce cynical to assume they had been drinking; nor, so much being
granted, can it be thought exorbitant to suppose them possibly in fault
for the squabble that took place.  A squabble, I say; but I am willing to
call it a riot.  And this was the new fault of Laupepa; this it is that
was described by a German commodore as "the trampling upon by Malietoa of
the German Emperor."  I pass the rhetoric by to examine the point of
liability.  Four natives were brought to trial for this horrid fact: not
before a native judge, but before the German magistrate of the tripartite
municipality of Apia.  One was acquitted, one condemned for theft, and
two for assault.  On appeal, not to Malietoa, but to the three consuls,
the case was by a majority of two to one returned to the magistrate and
(as far as I can learn) was then allowed to drop.  Consul Becker himself
laid the chief blame on one of the policemen of the municipality, a half-
white of the name of Scanlon.  Him he sought to have discharged, but was
again baffled by his brother consuls.  Where, in all this, are we to find
a corner of responsibility for the king of Samoa?  Scanlon, the alleged
author of the outrage, was a half-white; as Becker was to learn to his
cost, he claimed to be an American subject; and he was not even in the
king's employment.  Apia, the scene of the outrage, was outside the
king's jurisdiction by treaty; by the choice of Germany, he was not so
much as allowed to fly his flag there.  And the denial of justice (if
justice were denied) rested with the consuls of Britain and the States.

But when a dog is to be beaten, any stick will serve.  In the meanwhile,
on the proposition of Mr. Bayard, the Washington conference on Samoan
affairs was adjourned till autumn, so that "the ministers of Germany and
Great Britain might submit the protocols to their respective
Governments."  "You propose that the conference is to adjourn and not to
be broken up?" asked Sir Lionel West.  "To adjourn for the reasons
stated," replied Bayard.  This was on July 26th; and, twenty-nine days
later, by Wednesday the 24th of August, Germany had practically seized
Samoa.  For this flagrant breach of faith one excuse is openly alleged;
another whispered.  It is openly alleged that Bayard had shown himself
impracticable; it is whispered that the Hawaiian embassy was an
expression of American intrigue, and that the Germans only did as they
were done by.  The sufficiency of these excuses may be left to the
discretion of the reader.  But, however excused, the breach of faith was
public and express; it must have been deliberately predetermined and it
was resented in the States as a deliberate insult.

By the middle of August 1887 there were five sail of German war-ships in
Apia bay: the _Bismarck_, of 3000 tons displacement; the _Carola_, the
_Sophie_, and the _Olga_, all considerable ships; and the beautiful
_Adler_, which lies there to this day, kanted on her beam, dismantled,
scarlet with rust, the day showing through her ribs.  They waited
inactive, as a burglar waits till the patrol goes by.  And on the 23rd,
when the mail had left for Sydney, when the eyes of the world were
withdrawn, and Samoa plunged again for a period of weeks into her
original island-obscurity, Becker opened his guns.  The policy was too
cunning to seem dignified; it gave to conduct which would otherwise have
seemed bold and even brutally straightforward, the appearance of a timid
ambuscade; and helped to shake men's reliance on the word of Germany.  On
the day named, an ultimatum reached Malietoa at Afenga, whither he had
retired months before to avoid friction.  A fine of one thousand dollars
and an _ifo_, or public humiliation, were demanded for the affair of the
Emperor's birthday.  Twelve thousand dollars were to be "paid quickly"
for thefts from German plantations in the course of the last four years.
"It is my opinion that there is nothing just or correct in Samoa while
you are at the head of the government," concluded Becker.  "I shall be at
Afenga in the morning of to-morrow, Wednesday, at 11 A.M."  The blow fell
on Laupepa (in his own expression) "out of the bush"; the dilatory fellow
had seen things hang over so long, he had perhaps begun to suppose they
might hang over for ever; and here was ruin at the door.  He rode at once
to Apia, and summoned his chiefs.  The council lasted all night long.
Many voices were for defiance.  But Laupepa had grown inured to a policy
of procrastination; and the answer ultimately drawn only begged for delay
till Saturday, the 27th.  So soon as it was signed, the king took horse
and fled in the early morning to Afenga; the council hastily dispersed;
and only three chiefs, Selu, Seumanu, and Le Mamea, remained by the
government building, tremulously expectant of the result.

By seven the letter was received.  By 7.30 Becker arrived in person,
inquired for Laupepa, was evasively answered, and declared war on the
spot.  Before eight, the Germans (seven hundred men and six guns) came
ashore and seized and hoisted German colours on the government building.
The three chiefs had made good haste to escape; but a considerable booty
was made of government papers, fire-arms, and some seventeen thousand
cartridges.  Then followed a scene which long rankled in the minds of the
white inhabitants, when the German marines raided the town in search of
Malietoa, burst into private houses, and were accused (I am willing to
believe on slender grounds) of violence to private persons.

On the morrow, the 25th, one of the German war-ships, which had been
despatched to Leulumoenga over night re-entered the bay, flying the
Tamasese colours at the fore.  The new king was given a royal salute of
twenty-one guns, marched through the town by the commodore and a German
guard of honour, and established on Mulinuu with two or three hundred
warriors.  Becker announced his recognition to the other consuls.  These
replied by proclaiming Malietoa, and in the usual mealy-mouthed manner
advised Samoans to do nothing.  On the 27th martial law was declared; and
on the 1st September the German squadron dispersed about the group,
bearing along with them the proclamations of the new king.  Tamasese was
now a great man, to have five iron war-ships for his post-runners.  But
the moment was critical.  The revolution had to be explained, the chiefs
persuaded to assemble at a fono summoned for the 15th; and the ships
carried not only a store of printed documents, but a squad of Tamasese
orators upon their round.

Such was the German _coup d'etat_.  They had declared war with a squadron
of five ships upon a single man; that man, late king of the group, was in
hiding on the mountains; and their own nominee, backed by German guns and
bayonets, sat in his stead in Mulinuu.

One of the first acts of Malietoa, on fleeing to the bush, was to send
for Mataafa twice: "I am alone in the bush; if you do not come quickly
you will find me bound."  It is to be understood the men were near
kinsmen, and had (if they had nothing else) a common jealousy.  At the
urgent cry, Mataafa set forth from Falefa, and came to Mulinuu to
Tamasese.  "What is this that you and the German commodore have decided
on doing?" he inquired.  "I am going to obey the German consul," replied
Tamasese, "whose wish it is that I should be the king and that all Samoa
should assemble here."  "Do not pursue in wrath against Malietoa," said
Mataafa "but try to bring about a compromise, and form a united
government."  "Very well," said Tamasese, "leave it to me, and I will
try."  From Mulinuu, Mataafa went on board the _Bismarck_, and was
graciously received.  "Probably," said the commodore, "we shall bring
about a reconciliation of all Samoa through you"; and then asked his
visitor if he bore any affection to Malietoa.  "Yes," said Mataafa.  "And
to Tamasese?"  "To him also; and if you desire the weal of Samoa, you
will allow either him or me to bring about a reconciliation."  "If it
were my will," said the commodore, "I would do as you say.  But I have no
will in the matter.  I have instructions from the Kaiser, and I cannot go
back again from what I have been sent to do."  "I thought you would be
commanded," said Mataafa, "if you brought about the weal of Samoa."  "I
will tell you," said the commodore.  "All shall go quietly.  But there is
one thing that must be done: Malietoa must be deposed.  I will do nothing
to him beyond; he will only be kept on board for a couple of months and
be well treated, just as we Germans did to the French chief [Napoleon
III.] some time ago, whom we kept a while and cared for well."  Becker
was no less explicit: war, he told Sewall, should not cease till the
Germans had custody of Malietoa and Tamasese should be recognised.

Meantime, in the Malietoa provinces, a profound impression was received.
People trooped to their fugitive sovereign in the bush.  Many natives in
Apia brought their treasures, and stored them in the houses of white
friends.  The Tamasese orators were sometimes ill received.  Over in
Savaii, they found the village of Satupaitea deserted, save for a few
lads at cricket.  These they harangued, and were rewarded with ironical
applause; and the proclamation, as soon as they had departed, was torn
down.  For this offence the village was ultimately burned by German
sailors, in a very decent and orderly style, on the 3rd September.  This
was the dinner-bell of the fono on the 15th.  The threat conveyed in the
terms of the summons--"If any government district does not quickly obey
this direction, I will make war on that government district"--was thus
commented on and reinforced.  And the meeting was in consequence well
attended by chiefs of all parties.  They found themselves unarmed among
the armed warriors of Tamasese and the marines of the German squadron,
and under the guns of five strong ships.  Brandeis rose; it was his first
open appearance, the German firm signing its revolutionary work.  His
words were few and uncompromising: "Great are my thanks that the chiefs
and heads of families of the whole of Samoa are assembled here this day.
It is strictly forbidden that any discussion should take place as to
whether it is good or not that Tamasese is king of Samoa, whether at this
fono or at any future fono.  I place for your signature the following:
'_We inform all the people of Samoa of what follows: (1) The government
of Samoa has been assumed by King Tuiaana Tamasese.  (2) By order of the
king, it was directed that a fono should take place to-day, composed of
the chiefs and heads of families, and we have obeyed the summons.  We
have signed our names under this, 15th September_ 1887."  Needs must
under all these guns; and the paper was signed, but not without open
sullenness.  The bearing of Mataafa in particular was long remembered
against him by the Germans.  "Do you not see the king?" said the
commodore reprovingly.  "His father was no king," was the bold answer.  A
bolder still has been printed, but this is Mataafa's own recollection of
the passage.  On the next day, the chiefs were all ordered back to shake
hands with Tamasese.  Again they obeyed; but again their attitude was
menacing, and some, it is said, audibly murmured as they gave their
hands.

It is time to follow the poor Sheet of Paper (literal meaning of
_Laupepa_), who was now to be blown so broadly over the face of earth.  As
soon as news reached him of the declaration of war, he fled from Afenga
to Tanungamanono, a hamlet in the bush, about a mile and a half behind
Apia, where he lurked some days.  On the 24th, Selu, his secretary,
despatched to the American consul an anxious appeal, his majesty's "cry
and prayer" in behalf of "this weak people."  By August 30th, the Germans
had word of his lurking-place, surrounded the hamlet under cloud of
night, and in the early morning burst with a force of sailors on the
houses.  The people fled on all sides, and were fired upon.  One boy was
shot in the hand, the first blood of the war.  But the king was nowhere
to be found; he had wandered farther, over the woody mountains, the
backbone of the land, towards Siumu and Safata.  Here, in a safe place,
he built himself a town in the forest, where he received a continual
stream of visitors and messengers.  Day after day the German blue-jackets
were employed in the hopeless enterprise of beating the forests for the
fugitive; day after day they were suffered to pass unhurt under the guns
of ambushed Samoans; day after day they returned, exhausted and
disappointed, to Apia.  Seumanu Tafa, high chief of Apia, was known to be
in the forest with the king; his wife, Fatuila, was seized, imprisoned in
the German hospital, and when it was thought her spirit was sufficiently
reduced, brought up for cross-examination.  The wise lady confined
herself in answer to a single word.  "Is your husband near Apia?"  "Yes."
"Is he far from Apia?"  "Yes." "Is he with the king?"  "Yes."  "Are he
and the king in different places?"  "Yes."  Whereupon the witness was
discharged.  About the 10th of September, Laupepa was secretly in Apia at
the American consulate with two companions.  The German pickets were
close set and visited by a strong patrol; and on his return, his party
was observed and hailed and fired on by a sentry.  They ran away on all
fours in the dark, and so doing plumped upon another sentry, whom Laupepa
grappled and flung in a ditch; for the Sheet of Paper, although infirm of
character, is, like most Samoans, of an able body.  The second sentry
(like the first) fired after his assailants at random in the dark; and
the two shots awoke the curiosity of Apia.  On the afternoon of the 16th,
the day of the hand-shakings, Suatele, a high chief, despatched two boys
across the island with a letter.  They were most of the night upon the
road; it was near three in the morning before the sentries in the camp of
Malietoa beheld their lantern drawing near out of the wood; but the king
was at once awakened.  The news was decisive and the letter peremptory;
if Malietoa did not give himself up before ten on the morrow, he was told
that great sorrows must befall his country.  I have not been able to draw
Laupepa as a hero; but he is a man of certain virtues, which the Germans
had now given him an occasion to display.  Without hesitation he
sacrificed himself, penned his touching farewell to Samoa, and making
more expedition than the messengers, passed early behind Apia to the
banks of the Vaisingano.  As he passed, he detached a messenger to
Mataafa at the Catholic mission.  Mataafa followed by the same road, and
the pair met at the river-side and went and sat together in a house.  All
present were in tears.  "Do not let us weep," said the talking man,
Lauati.  "We have no cause for shame.  We do not yield to Tamasese, but
to the invincible strangers."  The departing king bequeathed the care of
his country to Mataafa; and when the latter sought to console him with
the commodore's promises, he shook his head, and declared his assurance
that he was going to a life of exile, and perhaps to death.  About two
o'clock the meeting broke up; Mataafa returned to the Catholic mission by
the back of the town; and Malietoa proceeded by the beach road to the
German naval hospital, where he was received (as he owns, with perfect
civility) by Brandeis.  About three, Becker brought him forth again.  As
they went to the wharf, the people wept and clung to their departing
monarch.  A boat carried him on board the _Bismarck_, and he vanished
from his countrymen.  Yet it was long rumoured that he still lay in the
harbour; and so late as October 7th, a boy, who had been paddling round
the _Carola_, professed to have seen and spoken with him.  Here again the
needless mystery affected by the Germans bitterly disserved them.  The
uncertainty which thus hung over Laupepa's fate, kept his name
continually in men's mouths.  The words of his farewell rang in their
ears: "To all Samoa: On account of my great love to my country and my
great affection to all Samoa, this is the reason that I deliver up my
body to the German government.  That government may do as they wish to
me.  The reason of this is, because I do not desire that the blood of
Samoa shall be spilt for me again.  But I do not know what is my offence
which has caused their anger to me and to my country."  And then,
apostrophising the different provinces: "Tuamasanga, farewell!  Manono
and family, farewell!  So, also, Salafai, Tutuila, Aana, and Atua,
farewell!  If we do not again see one another in this world, pray that we
may be again together above."  So the sheep departed with the halo of a
saint, and men thought of him as of some King Arthur snatched into
Avilion.

On board the _Bismarck_, the commodore shook hands with him, told him he
was to be "taken away from all the chiefs with whom he had been
accustomed," and had him taken to the wardroom under guard.  The next day
he was sent to sea in the _Adler_.  There went with him his brother Moli,
one Meisake, and one Alualu, half-caste German, to interpret.  He was
respectfully used; he dined in the stern with the officers, but the boys
dined "near where the fire was."  They come to a "newly-formed place" in
Australia, where the _Albatross_ was lying, and a British ship, which he
knew to be a man-of-war "because the officers were nicely dressed and
wore epaulettes."  Here he was transhipped, "in a boat with a screen,"
which he supposed was to conceal him from the British ship; and on board
the _Albatross_ was sent below and told he must stay there till they had
sailed.  Later, however, he was allowed to come on deck, where he found
they had rigged a screen (perhaps an awning) under which he walked,
looking at "the newly-formed settlement," and admiring a big house "where
he was sure the governor lived."  From Australia, they sailed some time,
and reached an anchorage where a consul-general came on board, and where
Laupepa was only allowed on deck at night.  He could then see the lights
of a town with wharves; he supposes Cape Town.  Off the Cameroons they
anchored or lay-to, far at sea, and sent a boat ashore to see (he
supposes) that there was no British man-of-war.  It was the next morning
before the boat returned, when the _Albatross_ stood in and came to
anchor near another German ship.  Here Alualu came to him on deck and
told him this was the place.  "That is an astonishing thing," said he.  "I
thought I was to go to Germany, I do not know what this means; I do not
know what will be the end of it; my heart is troubled."  Whereupon Alualu
burst into tears.  A little after, Laupepa was called below to the
captain and the governor.  The last addressed him: "This is my own place,
a good place, a warm place.  My house is not yet finished, but when it
is, you shall live in one of my rooms until I can make a house for you."
Then he was taken ashore and brought to a tall, iron house.  "This house
is regulated," said the governor; "there is no fire allowed to burn in
it."  In one part of this house, weapons of the government were hung up;
there was a passage, and on the other side of the passage, fifty
criminals were chained together, two and two, by the ankles.  The windows
were out of reach; and there was only one door, which was opened at six
in the morning and shut again at six at night.  All day he had his
liberty, went to the Baptist Mission, and walked about viewing the
negroes, who were "like the sand on the seashore" for number.  At six
they were called into the house and shut in for the night without beds or
lights.  "Although they gave me no light," said he, with a smile, "I
could see I was in a prison."  Good food was given him: biscuits, "tea
made with warm water," beef, etc.; all excellent.  Once, in their walks,
they spied a breadfruit tree bearing in the garden of an English
merchant, ran back to the prison to get a shilling, and came and offered
to purchase.  "I am not going to sell breadfruit to you people," said the
merchant; "come and take what you like."  Here Malietoa interrupted
himself to say it was the only tree bearing in the Cameroons.  "The
governor had none, or he would have given it to me."  On the passage from
the Cameroons to Germany, he had great delight to see the cliffs of
England.  He saw "the rocks shining in the sun, and three hours later was
surprised to find them sunk in the heavens."  He saw also wharves and
immense buildings; perhaps Dover and its castle.  In Hamburg, after
breakfast, Mr. Weber, who had now finally "ceased from troubling" Samoa,
came on board, and carried him ashore "suitably" in a steam launch to "a
large house of the government," where he stayed till noon.  At noon Weber
told him he was going to "the place where ships are anchored that go to
Samoa," and led him to "a very magnificent house, with carriages inside
and a wonderful roof of glass"; to wit, the railway station.  They were
benighted on the train, and then went in "something with a house, drawn
by horses, which had windows and many decks"; plainly an omnibus.  Here
(at Bremen or Bremerhaven, I believe) they stayed some while in "a house
of five hundred rooms"; then were got on board the _Nurnberg_ (as they
understood) for Samoa, anchored in England on a Sunday, were joined _en
route_ by the famous Dr. Knappe, passed through "a narrow passage where
they went very slow and which was just like a river," and beheld with
exhilarated curiosity that Red Sea of which they had learned so much in
their Bibles.  At last, "at the hour when the fires burn red," they came
to a place where was a German man-of-war.  Laupepa was called, with one
of the boys, on deck, when he found a German officer awaiting him, and a
steam launch alongside, and was told he must now leave his brother and go
elsewhere.  "I cannot go like this," he cried.  "You must let me see my
brother and the other old men"--a term of courtesy.  Knappe, who seems
always to have been good-natured, revised his orders, and consented not
only to an interview, but to allow Moli to continue to accompany the
king.  So these two were carried to the man-of-war, and sailed many a
day, still supposing themselves bound for Samoa; and lo! she came to a
country the like of which they had never dreamed of, and cast anchor in
the great lagoon of Jaluit; and upon that narrow land the exiles were set
on shore.  This was the part of his captivity on which he looked back
with the most bitterness.  It was the last, for one thing, and he was
worn down with the long suspense, and terror, and deception.  He could
not bear the brackish water; and though "the Germans were still good to
him, and gave him beef and biscuit and tea," he suffered from the lack of
vegetable food.

Such is the narrative of this simple exile.  I have not sought to correct
it by extraneous testimony.  It is not so much the facts that are
historical, as the man's attitude.  No one could hear this tale as he
originally told it in my hearing--I think none can read it as here
condensed and unadorned--without admiring the fairness and simplicity of
the Samoan; and wondering at the want of heart--or want of humour--in so
many successive civilised Germans, that they should have continued to
surround this infant with the secrecy of state.




CHAPTER IV--BRANDEIS


_September '87 to August '88_

So Tamasese was on the throne, and Brandeis behind it; and I have now to
deal with their brief and luckless reign.  That it was the reign of
Brandeis needs not to be argued: the policy is throughout that of an
able, over-hasty white, with eyes and ideas.  But it should be borne in
mind that he had a double task, and must first lead his sovereign, before
he could begin to drive their common subjects.  Meanwhile, he himself was
exposed (if all tales be true) to much dictation and interference, and to
some "cumbrous aid," from the consulate and the firm.  And to one of
these aids, the suppression of the municipality, I am inclined to
attribute his ultimate failure.

The white enemies of the new regimen were of two classes.  In the first
stood Moors and the employes of MacArthur, the two chief rivals of the
firm, who saw with jealousy a clerk (or a so-called clerk) of their
competitors advanced to the chief power.  The second class, that of the
officials, numbered at first exactly one.  Wilson, the English acting
consul, is understood to have held strict orders to help Germany.
Commander Leary, of the _Adams_, the American captain, when he arrived,
on the 16th October, and for some time after, seemed devoted to the
German interest, and spent his days with a German officer, Captain Von
Widersheim, who was deservedly beloved by all who knew him.  There
remains the American consul-general, Harold Marsh Sewall, a young man of
high spirit and a generous disposition.  He had obeyed the orders of his
government with a grudge; and looked back on his past action with regret
almost to be called repentance.  From the moment of the declaration of
war against Laupepa, we find him standing forth in bold, consistent, and
sometimes rather captious opposition, stirring up his government at home
with clear and forcible despatches, and on the spot grasping at every
opportunity to thrust a stick into the German wheels.  For some while, he
and Moors fought their difficult battle in conjunction; in the course of
which, first one, and then the other, paid a visit home to reason with
the authorities at Washington; and during the consul's absence, there was
found an American clerk in Apia, William Blacklock, to perform the duties
of the office with remarkable ability and courage.  The three names just
brought together, Sewall, Moors, and Blacklock, make the head and front
of the opposition; if Tamasese fell, if Brandeis was driven forth, if the
treaty of Berlin was signed, theirs is the blame or the credit.

To understand the feelings of self-reproach and bitterness with which
Sewall took the field, the reader must see Laupepa's letter of farewell
to the consuls of England and America.  It is singular that this far from
brilliant or dignified monarch, writing in the forest, in heaviness of
spirit and under pressure for time, should have left behind him not only
one, but two remarkable and most effective documents.  The farewell to
his people was touching; the farewell to the consuls, for a man of the
character of Sewall, must have cut like a whip.  "When the chief Tamasese
and others first moved the present troubles," he wrote, "it was my wish
to punish them and put an end to the rebellion; but I yielded to the
advice of the British and American consuls.  Assistance and protection
was repeatedly promised to me and my government, if I abstained from
bringing war upon my country.  Relying upon these promises, I did not put
down the rebellion.  Now I find that war has been made upon me by the
Emperor of Germany, and Tamasese has been proclaimed king of Samoa.  I
desire to remind you of the promises so frequently made by your
government, and trust that you will so far redeem them as to cause the
lives and liberties of my chiefs and people to be respected."

Sewall's immediate adversary was, of course, Becker.  I have formed an
opinion of this gentleman, largely from his printed despatches, which I
am at a loss to put in words.  Astute, ingenious, capable, at moments
almost witty with a kind of glacial wit in action, he displayed in the
course of this affair every description of capacity but that which is
alone useful and which springs from a knowledge of men's natures.  It
chanced that one of Sewall's early moves played into his hands, and he
was swift to seize and to improve the advantage.  The neutral territory
and the tripartite municipality of Apia were eyesores to the German
consulate and Brandeis.  By landing Tamasese's two or three hundred
warriors at Mulinuu, as Becker himself owns, they had infringed the
treaties, and Sewall entered protest twice.  There were two ways of
escaping this dilemma: one was to withdraw the warriors; the other, by
some hocus-pocus, to abrogate the neutrality.  And the second had
subsidiary advantages: it would restore the taxes of the richest district
in the islands to the Samoan king; and it would enable them to substitute
over the royal seat the flag of Germany for the new flag of Tamasese.  It
is true (and it was the subject of much remark) that these two could
hardly be distinguished by the naked eye; but their effects were
different.  To seat the puppet king on German land and under German
colours, so that any rebellion was constructive war on Germany, was a
trick apparently invented by Becker, and which we shall find was repeated
and persevered in till the end.

Otto Martin was at this time magistrate in the municipality.  The post
was held in turn by the three nationalities; Martin had served far beyond
his term, and should have been succeeded months before by an American.  To
make the change it was necessary to hold a meeting of the municipal
board, consisting of the three consuls, each backed by an assessor.  And
for some time these meetings had been evaded or refused by the German
consul.  As long as it was agreed to continue Martin, Becker had attended
regularly; as soon as Sewall indicated a wish for his removal, Becker
tacitly suspended the municipality by refusing to appear.  This policy
was now the more necessary; for if the whole existence of the
municipality were a check on the freedom of the new government, it was
plainly less so when the power to enforce and punish lay in German hands.
For some while back the Malietoa flag had been flown on the municipal
building: Becker denies this; I am sorry; my information obliges me to
suppose he is in error.  Sewall, with post-mortem loyalty to the past,
insisted that this flag should be continued.  And Becker immediately made
his point.  He declared, justly enough, that the proposal was hostile,
and argued that it was impossible he should attend a meeting under a flag
with which his sovereign was at war.  Upon one occasion of urgency, he
was invited to meet the two other consuls at the British consulate; even
this he refused; and for four months the municipality slumbered, Martin
still in office.  In the month of October, in consequence, the British
and American ratepayers announced they would refuse to pay.  Becker
doubtless rubbed his hands.  On Saturday, the 10th, the chief Tamaseu, a
Malietoa man of substance and good character, was arrested on a charge of
theft believed to be vexatious, and cast by Martin into the municipal
prison.  He sent to Moors, who was his tenant and owed him money at the
time, for bail.  Moors applied to Sewall, ranking consul.  After some
search, Martin was found and refused to consider bail before the Monday
morning.  Whereupon Sewall demanded the keys from the gaoler, accepted
Moors's verbal recognisances, and set Tamaseu free.

Things were now at a deadlock; and Becker astonished every one by
agreeing to a meeting on the 14th.  It seems he knew what to expect.
Writing on the 13th at least, he prophesies that the meeting will be held
in vain, that the municipality must lapse, and the government of Tamasese
step in.  On the 14th, Sewall left his consulate in time, and walked some
part of the way to the place of meeting in company with Wilson, the
English pro-consul.  But he had forgotten a paper, and in an evil hour
returned for it alone.  Wilson arrived without him, and Becker broke up
the meeting for want of a quorum.  There was some unedifying disputation
as to whether he had waited ten or twenty minutes, whether he had been
officially or unofficially informed by Wilson that Sewall was on the way,
whether the statement had been made to himself or to Weber {1} in answer
to a question, and whether he had heard Wilson's answer or only Weber's
question: all otiose; if he heard the question, he was bound to have
waited for the answer; if he heard it not, he should have put it himself;
and it was the manifest truth that he rejoiced in his occasion.  "Sir,"
he wrote to Sewall, "I have the honour to inform you that, to my regret,
I am obliged to consider the municipal government to be provisionally in
abeyance since you have withdrawn your consent to the continuation of Mr.
Martin in his position as magistrate, and since you have refused to take
part in the meeting of the municipal board agreed to for the purpose of
electing a magistrate.  The government of the town and district of the
municipality rests, as long as the municipality is in abeyance, with the
Samoan government.  The Samoan government has taken over the
administration, and has applied to the commander of the imperial German
squadron for assistance in the preservation of good order."  This letter
was not delivered until 4 P.M.  By three, sailors had been landed.
Already German colours flew over Tamasese's headquarters at Mulinuu, and
German guards had occupied the hospital, the German consulate, and the
municipal gaol and court-house, where they stood to arms under the flag
of Tamasese.  The same day Sewall wrote to protest.  Receiving no reply,
he issued on the morrow a proclamation bidding all Americans look to
himself alone.  On the 26th, he wrote again to Becker, and on the 27th
received this genial reply: "Sir, your high favour of the 26th of this
month, I give myself the honour of acknowledging.  At the same time I
acknowledge the receipt of your high favour of the 14th October in reply
to my communication of the same date, which contained the information of
the suspension of the arrangements for the municipal government."  There
the correspondence ceased.  And on the 18th January came the last step of
this irritating intrigue when Tamasese appointed a judge--and the judge
proved to be Martin.

Thus was the adventure of the Castle Municipal achieved by Sir Becker the
chivalrous.  The taxes of Apia, the gaol, the police, all passed into the
hands of Tamasese-Brandeis; a German was secured upon the bench; and the
German flag might wave over her puppet unquestioned.  But there is a law
of human nature which diplomatists should be taught at school, and it
seems they are not; that men can tolerate bare injustice, but not the
combination of injustice and subterfuge.  Hence the chequered career of
the thimble-rigger.  Had the municipality been seized by open force,
there might have been complaint, it would not have aroused the same
lasting grudge.

This grudge was an ill gift to bring to Brandeis, who had trouble enough
in front of him without.  He was an alien, he was supported by the guns
of alien war-ships, and he had come to do an alien's work, highly needful
for Samoa, but essentially unpopular with all Samoans.  The law to be
enforced, causes of dispute between white and brown to be eliminated,
taxes to be raised, a central power created, the country opened up, the
native race taught industry: all these were detestable to the natives,
and to all of these he must set his hand.  The more I learn of his brief
term of rule, the more I learn to admire him, and to wish we had his
like.

In the face of bitter native opposition, he got some roads accomplished.
He set up beacons.  The taxes he enforced with necessary vigour.  By the
6th of January, Aua and Fangatonga, districts in Tutuila, having made a
difficulty, Brandeis is down at the island in a schooner, with the
_Adler_ at his heels, seizes the chief Maunga, fines the recalcitrant
districts in three hundred dollars for expenses, and orders all to be in
by April 20th, which if it is not, "not one thing will be done," he
proclaimed, "but war declared against you, and the principal chiefs taken
to a distant island."  He forbade mortgages of copra, a frequent source
of trickery and quarrel; and to clear off those already contracted,
passed a severe but salutary law.  Each individual or family was first to
pay off its own obligation; that settled, the free man was to pay for the
indebted village, the free village for the indebted province, and one
island for another.  Samoa, he declared, should be free of debt within a
year.  Had he given it three years, and gone more gently, I believe it
might have been accomplished.  To make it the more possible, he sought to
interdict the natives from buying cotton stuffs and to oblige them to
dress (at least for the time) in their own tapa.  He laid the beginnings
of a royal territorial army.  The first draft was in his hands drilling.
But it was not so much on drill that he depended; it was his hope to
kindle in these men an _esprit de corps_, which should weaken the old
local jealousies and bonds, and found a central or national party in the
islands.  Looking far before, and with a wisdom beyond that of many
merchants, he had condemned the single dependence placed on copra for the
national livelihood.  His recruits, even as they drilled, were taught to
plant cacao.  Each, his term of active service finished, should return to
his own land and plant and cultivate a stipulated area.  Thus, as the
young men continued to pass through the army, habits of discipline and
industry, a central sentiment, the principles of the new culture, and
actual gardens of cacao, should be concurrently spread over the face of
the islands.

Tamasese received, including his household expenses, 1960 dollars a year;
Brandeis, 2400.  All such disproportions are regrettable, but this is not
extreme: we have seen horses of a different colour since then.  And the
Tamaseseites, with true Samoan ostentation, offered to increase the
salary of their white premier: an offer he had the wisdom and good
feeling to refuse.  A European chief of police received twelve hundred.
There were eight head judges, one to each province, and appeal lay from
the district judge to the provincial, thence to Mulinuu.  From all
salaries (I gather) a small monthly guarantee was withheld.  The army was
to cost from three to four thousand, Apia (many whites refusing to pay
taxes since the suppression of the municipality) might cost three
thousand more: Sir Becker's high feat of arms coming expensive (it will
be noticed) even in money.  The whole outlay was estimated at
twenty-seven thousand; and the revenue forty thousand: a sum Samoa is
well able to pay.

Such were the arrangements and some of the ideas of this strong, ardent,
and sanguine man.  Of criticisms upon his conduct, beyond the general
consent that he was rather harsh and in too great a hurry, few are
articulate.  The native paper of complaints was particularly childish.
Out of twenty-three counts, the first two refer to the private character
of Brandeis and Tamasese.  Three complain that Samoan officials were kept
in the dark as to the finances; one, of the tapa law; one, of the direct
appointment of chiefs by Tamasese-Brandeis, the sort of mistake into
which Europeans in the South Seas fall so readily; one, of the enforced
labour of chiefs; one, of the taxes; and one, of the roads.  This I may
give in full from the very lame translation in the American white book.
"The roads that were made were called the Government Roads; they were six
fathoms wide.  Their making caused much damage to Samoa's lands and what
was planted on it.  The Samoans cried on account of their lands, which
were taken high-handedly and abused.  They again cried on account of the
loss of what they had planted, which was now thrown away in a high-handed
way, without any regard being shown or question asked of the owner of the
land, or any compensation offered for the damage done.  This was
different with foreigners' land; in their case permission was first asked
to make the roads; the foreigners were paid for any destruction made."
The sting of this count was, I fancy, in the last clause.  No less than
six articles complain of the administration of the law; and I believe
that was never satisfactory.  Brandeis told me himself he was never yet
satisfied with any native judge.  And men say (and it seems to fit in
well with his hasty and eager character) that he would legislate by word
of mouth; sometimes forget what he had said; and, on the same question
arising in another province, decide it perhaps otherwise.  I gather, on
the whole, our artillery captain was not great in law.  Two articles
refer to a matter I must deal with more at length, and rather from the
point of view of the white residents.

The common charge against Brandeis was that of favouring the German firm.
Coming as he did, this was inevitable.  Weber had bought Steinberger with
hard cash; that was matter of history.  The present government he did not
even require to buy, having founded it by his intrigues, and introduced
the premier to Samoa through the doors of his own office.  And the effect
of the initial blunder was kept alive by the chatter of the clerks in bar-
rooms, boasting themselves of the new government and prophesying
annihilation to all rivals.  The time of raising a tax is the harvest of
the merchants; it is the time when copra will be made, and must be sold;
and the intention of the German firm, first in the time of Steinberger,
and again in April and May, 1888, with Brandeis, was to seize and handle
the whole operation.  Their chief rivals were the Messrs. MacArthur; and
it seems beyond question that provincial governors more than once issued
orders forbidding Samoans to take money from "the New Zealand firm."
These, when they were brought to his notice, Brandeis disowned, and he is
entitled to be heard.  No man can live long in Samoa and not have his
honesty impugned.  But the accusations against Brandeis's veracity are
both few and obscure.  I believe he was as straight as his sword.  The
governors doubtless issued these orders, but there were plenty besides
Brandeis to suggest them.  Every wandering clerk from the firm's office,
every plantation manager, would be dinning the same story in the native
ear.  And here again the initial blunder hung about the neck of Brandeis,
a ton's weight.  The natives, as well as the whites, had seen their
premier masquerading on a stool in the office; in the eyes of the
natives, as well as in those of the whites, he must always have retained
the mark of servitude from that ill-judged passage; and they would be
inclined to look behind and above him, to the great house of _Misi Ueba_.
The government was like a vista of puppets.  People did not trouble with
Tamasese, if they got speech with Brandeis; in the same way, they might
not always trouble to ask Brandeis, if they had a hint direct from _Misi
Ueba_.  In only one case, though it seems to have had many developments,
do I find the premier personally committed.  The MacArthurs claimed the
copra of Fasitotai on a district mortgage of three hundred dollars.  The
German firm accepted a mortgage of the whole province of Aana, claimed
the copra of Fasitotai as that of a part of Aana, and were supported by
the government.  Here Brandeis was false to his own principle, that
personal and village debts should come before provincial.  But the case
occurred before the promulgation of the law, and was, as a matter of
fact, the cause of it; so the most we can say is that he changed his
mind, and changed it for the better.  If the history of his government be
considered--how it originated in an intrigue between the firm and the
consulate, and was (for the firm's sake alone) supported by the consulate
with foreign bayonets--the existence of the least doubt on the man's
action must seem marvellous.  We should have looked to find him playing
openly and wholly into their hands; that he did not, implies great
independence and much secret friction; and I believe (if the truth were
known) the firm would be found to have been disgusted with the
stubbornness of its intended tool, and Brandeis often impatient of the
demands of his creators.

But I may seem to exaggerate the degree of white opposition.  And it is
true that before fate overtook the Brandeis government, it appeared to
enjoy the fruits of victory in Apia; and one dissident, the unconquerable
Moors, stood out alone to refuse his taxes.  But the victory was in
appearance only; the opposition was latent; it found vent in talk, and
thus reacted on the natives; upon the least excuse, it was ready to flame
forth again.  And this is the more singular because some were far from
out of sympathy with the native policy pursued.  When I met Captain
Brandeis, he was amazed at my attitude.  "Whom did you find in Apia to
tell you so much good of me?" he asked.  I named one of my informants.
"He?" he cried.  "If he thought all that, why did he not help me?"  I
told him as well as I was able.  The man was a merchant.  He beheld in
the government of Brandeis a government created by and for the firm who
were his rivals.  If Brandeis were minded to deal fairly, where was the
probability that he would be allowed?  If Brandeis insisted and were
strong enough to prevail, what guarantee that, as soon as the government
were fairly accepted, Brandeis might not be removed?  Here was the
attitude of the hour; and I am glad to find it clearly set forth in a
despatch of Sewall's, June 18th, 1888, when he commends the law against
mortgages, and goes on: "Whether the author of this law will carry out
the good intentions which he professes--whether he will be allowed to do
so, if he desires, against the opposition of those who placed him in
power and protect him in the possession of it--may well be doubted."
Brandeis had come to Apia in the firm's livery.  Even while he promised
neutrality in commerce, the clerks were prating a different story in the
bar-rooms; and the late high feat of the knight-errant, Becker, had
killed all confidence in Germans at the root.  By these three impolicies,
the German adventure in Samoa was defeated.

I imply that the handful of whites were the true obstacle, not the
thousands of malcontent Samoans; for had the whites frankly accepted
Brandeis, the path of Germany was clear, and the end of their policy,
however troublesome might be its course, was obvious.  But this is not to
say that the natives were content.  In a sense, indeed, their opposition
was continuous.  There will always be opposition in Samoa when taxes are
imposed; and the deportation of Malietoa stuck in men's throats.  Tuiatua
Mataafa refused to act under the new government from the beginning, and
Tamasese usurped his place and title.  As early as February, I find him
signing himself "Tuiaana _Tuiatua_ Tamasese," the first step on a
dangerous path.  Asi, like Mataafa, disclaimed his chiefship and declared
himself a private person; but he was more rudely dealt with.  German
sailors surrounded his house in the night, burst in, and dragged the
women out of the mosquito nets--an offence against Samoan manners.  No
Asi was to be found; but at last they were shown his fishing-lights on
the reef, rowed out, took him as he was, and carried him on board a man-
of-war, where he was detained some while between-decks.  At last, January
16th, after a farewell interview over the ship's side with his wife, he
was discharged into a ketch, and along with two other chiefs, Maunga and
Tuiletu-funga, deported to the Marshalls.  The blow struck fear upon all
sides.  Le Mamea (a very able chief) was secretly among the malcontents.
His family and followers murmured at his weakness; but he continued,
throughout the duration of the government, to serve Brandeis with
trembling.  A circus coming to Apia, he seized at the pretext for escape,
and asked leave to accept an engagement in the company.  "I will not
allow you to make a monkey of yourself," said Brandeis; and the phrase
had a success throughout the islands, pungent expressions being so much
admired by the natives that they cannot refrain from repeating them, even
when they have been levelled at themselves.  The assumption of the Atua
_name_ spread discontent in that province; many chiefs from thence were
convicted of disaffection, and condemned to labour with their hands upon
the roads--a great shock to the Samoan sense of the becoming, which was
rendered the more sensible by the death of one of the number at his task.
Mataafa was involved in the same trouble.  His disaffected speech at a
meeting of Atua chiefs was betrayed by the girls that made the kava, and
the man of the future was called to Apia on safe-conduct, but, after an
interview, suffered to return to his lair.  The peculiarly tender
treatment of Mataafa must be explained by his relationship to Tamasese.
Laupepa was of Malietoa blood.  The hereditary retainers of the Tupua
would see him exiled even with some complacency.  But Mataafa was Tupua
himself; and Tupua men would probably have murmured, and would perhaps
have mutinied, had he been harshly dealt with.

The native opposition, I say, was in a sense continuous.  And it kept
continuously growing.  The sphere of Brandeis was limited to Mulinuu and
the north central quarters of Upolu--practically what is shown upon the
map opposite.  There the taxes were expanded; in the out-districts, men
paid their money and saw no return.  Here the eye and hand of the
dictator were ready to correct the scales of justice; in the
out-districts, all things lay at the mercy of the native magistrates, and
their oppressions increased with the course of time and the experience of
impunity.  In the spring of the year, a very intelligent observer had
occasion to visit many places in the island of Savaii.  "Our lives are
not worth living," was the burthen of the popular complaint.  "We are
groaning under the oppression of these men.  We would rather die than
continue to endure it."  On his return to Apia, he made haste to
communicate his impressions to Brandeis.  Brandeis replied in an epigram:
"Where there has been anarchy in a country, there must be oppression for
a time."  But unfortunately the terms of the epigram may be reversed; and
personal supervision would have been more in season than wit.  The same
observer who conveyed to him this warning thinks that, if Brandeis had
himself visited the districts and inquired into complaints, the blow
might yet have been averted and the government saved.  At last, upon a
certain unconstitutional act of Tamasese, the discontent took life and
fire.  The act was of his own conception; the dull dog was ambitious.
Brandeis declares he would not be dissuaded; perhaps his adviser did not
seriously try, perhaps did not dream that in that welter of
contradictions, the Samoan constitution, any one point would be
considered sacred.  I have told how Tamasese assumed the title of
Tuiatua.  In August 1888 a year after his installation, he took a more
formidable step and assumed that of Malietoa.  This name, as I have said,
is of peculiar honour; it had been given to, it had never been taken
from, the exiled Laupepa; those in whose grant it lay, stood punctilious
upon their rights; and Tamasese, as the representative of their natural
opponents, the Tupua line, was the last who should have had it.  And
there was yet more, though I almost despair to make it thinkable by
Europeans.  Certain old mats are handed down, and set huge store by; they
may be compared to coats of arms or heirlooms among ourselves; and to the
horror of more than one-half of Samoa, Tamasese, the head of the Tupua,
began collecting Malietoa mats.  It was felt that the cup was full, and
men began to prepare secretly for rebellion.  The history of the month of
August is unknown to whites; it passed altogether in the covert of the
woods or in the stealthy councils of Samoans.  One ominous sign was to be
noted; arms and ammunition began to be purchased or inquired about; and
the more wary traders ordered fresh consignments of material of war.  But
the rest was silence; the government slept in security; and Brandeis was
summoned at last from a public dinner, to find rebellion organised, the
woods behind Apia full of insurgents, and a plan prepared, and in the
very article of execution, to surprise and seize Mulinuu.  The timely
discovery averted all; and the leaders hastily withdrew towards the south
side of the island, leaving in the bush a rear-guard under a young man of
the name of Saifaleupolu.  According to some accounts, it scarce numbered
forty; the leader was no great chief, but a handsome, industrious lad who
seems to have been much beloved.  And upon this obstacle Brandeis fell.
It is the man's fault to be too impatient of results; his public
intention to free Samoa of all debt within the year, depicts him; and
instead of continuing to temporise and let his enemies weary and
disperse, he judged it politic to strike a blow.  He struck it, with what
seemed to be success, and the sound of it roused Samoa to rebellion.

About two in the morning of August 31st, Apia was wakened by men
marching.  Day came, and Brandeis and his war-party were already long
disappeared in the woods.  All morning belated Tamaseseites were still to
be seen running with their guns.  All morning shots were listened for in
vain; but over the top of the forest, far up the mountain, smoke was for
some time observed to hang.  About ten a dead man was carried in, lashed
under a pole like a dead pig, his rosary (for he was a Catholic) hanging
nearly to the ground.  Next came a young fellow wounded, sitting in a
rope swung from a pole; two fellows bearing him, two running behind for a
relief.  At last about eleven, three or four heavy volleys and a great
shouting were heard from the bush town Tanungamanono; the affair was
over, the victorious force, on the march back, was there celebrating its
victory by the way.  Presently after, it marched through Apia, five or
six hundred strong, in tolerable order and strutting with the ludicrous
assumption of the triumphant islander.  Women who had been buying bread
ran and gave them loaves.  At the tail end came Brandeis himself, smoking
a cigar, deadly pale, and with perhaps an increase of his usual nervous
manner.  One spoke to him by the way.  He expressed his sorrow the action
had been forced on him.  "Poor people, it's all the worse for them!" he
said.  "It'll have to be done another way now."  And it was supposed by
his hearer that he referred to intervention from the German war-ships.  He
meant, he said, to put a stop to head-hunting; his men had taken two that
day, he added, but he had not suffered them to bring them in, and they
had been left in Tanungamanono.  Thither my informant rode, was attracted
by the sound of wailing, and saw in a house the two heads washed and
combed, and the sister of one of the dead lamenting in the island fashion
and kissing the cold face.  Soon after, a small grave was dug, the heads
were buried in a beef box, and the pastor read the service.  The body of
Saifaleupolu himself was recovered unmutilated, brought down from the
forest, and buried behind Apia.

The same afternoon, the men of Vaimaunga were ordered to report in
Mulinuu, where Tamasese's flag was half-masted for the death of a chief
in the skirmish.  Vaimaunga is that district of Taumasanga which includes
the bay and the foothills behind Apia; and both province and district are
strong Malietoa.  Not one man, it is said, obeyed the summons.  Night
came, and the town lay in unusual silence; no one abroad; the blinds down
around the native houses, the men within sleeping on their arms; the old
women keeping watch in pairs.  And in the course of the two following
days all Vaimaunga was gone into the bush, the very gaoler setting free
his prisoners and joining them in their escape.  Hear the words of the
chiefs in the 23rd article of their complaint: "Some of the chiefs fled
to the bush from fear of being reported, fear of German men-of-war,
constantly being accused, etc., and Brandeis commanded that they were to
be shot on sight.  This act was carried out by Brandeis on the 31st day
of August, 1888.  After this we evaded these laws; we could not stand
them; our patience was worn out with the constant wickedness of Tamasese
and Brandeis.  We were tired out and could stand no longer the acts of
these two men."

So through an ill-timed skirmish, two severed heads, and a dead body, the
rule of Brandeis came to a sudden end.  We shall see him a while longer
fighting for existence in a losing battle; but his government--take it
for all in all, the most promising that has ever been in these unlucky
islands--was from that hour a piece of history.




CHAPTER V--THE BATTLE OF MATAUTU


_September 1888_

The revolution had all the character of a popular movement.  Many of the
high chiefs were detained in Mulinuu; the commons trooped to the bush
under inferior leaders.  A camp was chosen near Faleula, threatening
Mulinuu, well placed for the arrival of recruits and close to a German
plantation from which the force could be subsisted.  Manono came, all
Tuamasanga, much of Savaii, and part of Aana, Tamasese's own government
and titular seat.  Both sides were arming.  It was a brave day for the
trader, though not so brave as some that followed, when a single
cartridge is said to have been sold for twelve cents currency--between
nine and ten cents gold.  Yet even among the traders a strong party
feeling reigned, and it was the common practice to ask a purchaser upon
which side he meant to fight.

On September 5th, Brandeis published a letter: "To the chiefs of
Tuamasanga, Manono, and Faasaleleanga in the Bush: Chiefs, by authority
of his majesty Tamasese, the king of Samoa, I make known to you all that
the German man-of-war is about to go together with a Samoan fleet for the
purpose of burning Manono.  After this island is all burnt, 'tis good if
the people return to Manono and live quiet.  To the people of
Faasaleleanga I say, return to your houses and stop there.  The same to
those belonging to Tuamasanga.  If you obey this instruction, then you
will all be forgiven; if you do not obey, then all your villages will be
burnt like Manono.  These instructions are made in truth in the sight of
God in the Heaven."  The same morning, accordingly, the _Adler_ steamed
out of the bay with a force of Tamasese warriors and some native boats in
tow, the Samoan fleet in question.  Manono was shelled; the Tamasese
warriors, under the conduct of a Manono traitor, who paid before many
days the forfeit of his blood, landed and did some damage, but were
driven away by the sight of a force returning from the mainland; no one
was hurt, for the women and children, who alone remained on the island,
found a refuge in the bush; and the _Adler_ and her acolytes returned the
same evening.  The letter had been energetic; the performance fell below
the programme.  The demonstration annoyed and yet re-assured the
insurgents, and it fully disclosed to the Germans a new enemy.

Captain Yon Widersheim had been relieved.  His successor, Captain Fritze,
was an officer of a different stamp.  I have nothing to say of him but
good; he seems to have obeyed the consul's requisitions with secret
distaste; his despatches were of admirable candour; but his habits were
retired, he spoke little English, and was far indeed from inheriting von
Widersheim's close relations with Commander Leary.  It is believed by
Germans that the American officer resented what he took to be neglect.  I
mention this, not because I believe it to depict Commander Leary, but
because it is typical of a prevailing infirmity among Germans in Samoa.
Touchy themselves, they read all history in the light of personal
affronts and tiffs; and I find this weakness indicated by the big thumb
of Bismarck, when he places "sensitiveness to small
disrespects--_Empfindlichkeit ueber Mangel an Respect_," among the causes
of the wild career of Knappe.  Whatever the cause, at least, the natives
had no sooner taken arms than Leary appeared with violence upon that
side.  As early as the 3rd, he had sent an obscure but menacing despatch
to Brandeis.  On the 6th, he fell on Fritze in the matter of the Manono
bombardment.  "The revolutionists," he wrote, "had an armed force in the
field within a few miles of this harbour, when the vessels under your
command transported the Tamasese troops to a neighbouring island with the
avowed intention of making war on the isolated homes of the women and
children of the enemy.  Being the only other representative of a naval
power now present in this harbour, for the sake of humanity I hereby
respectfully and solemnly protest in the name of the United States of
America and of the civilised world in general against the use of a
national war-vessel for such services as were yesterday rendered by the
German corvette _Adler_."  Fritze's reply, to the effect that he is under
the orders of the consul and has no right of choice, reads even humble;
perhaps he was not himself vain of the exploit, perhaps not prepared to
see it thus described in words.  From that moment Leary was in the front
of the row.  His name is diagnostic, but it was not required; on every
step of his subsequent action in Samoa Irishman is writ large; over all
his doings a malign spirit of humour presided.  No malice was too small
for him, if it were only funny.  When night signals were made from
Mulinuu, he would sit on his own poop and confound them with gratuitous
rockets.  He was at the pains to write a letter and address it to "the
High Chief Tamasese"--a device as old at least as the wars of Robert
Bruce--in order to bother the officials of the German post-office, in
whose hands he persisted in leaving it, although the address was death to
them and the distribution of letters in Samoa formed no part of their
profession.  His great masterwork of pleasantry, the Scanlon affair, must
be narrated in its place.  And he was no less bold than comical.  The
_Adams_ was not supposed to be a match for the _Adler_; there was no
glory to be gained in beating her; and yet I have heard naval officers
maintain she might have proved a dangerous antagonist in narrow waters
and at short range.  Doubtless Leary thought so.  He was continually
daring Fritze to come on; and already, in a despatch of the 9th, I find
Becker complaining of his language in the hearing of German officials,
and how he had declared that, on the _Adler_ again interfering, he would
interfere himself, "if he went to the bottom for it--_und wenn sein
Schiff dabei zu Grunde ginge_."  Here is the style of opposition which
has the merit of being frank, not that of being agreeable.  Becker was
annoying, Leary infuriating; there is no doubt that the tempers in the
German consulate were highly ulcerated; and if war between the two
countries did not follow, we must set down the praise to the forbearance
of the German navy.  This is not the last time that I shall have to
salute the merits of that service.

The defeat and death of Saifaleupolu and the burning of Manono had thus
passed off without the least advantage to Tamasese.  But he still held
the significant position of Mulinuu, and Brandeis was strenuous to make
it good.  The whole peninsula was surrounded with a breastwork; across
the isthmus it was six feet high and strengthened with a ditch; and the
beach was staked against landing.  Weber's land claim--the same that now
broods over the village in the form of a signboard--then appeared in a
more military guise; the German flag was hoisted, and German sailors
manned the breastwork at the isthmus--"to protect German property" and
its trifling parenthesis, the king of Samoa.  Much vigilance reigned and,
in the island fashion, much wild firing.  And in spite of all, desertion
was for a long time daily.  The detained high chiefs would go to the
beach on the pretext of a natural occasion, plunge in the sea, and
swimming across a broad, shallow bay of the lagoon, join the rebels on
the Faleula side.  Whole bodies of warriors, sometimes hundreds strong,
departed with their arms and ammunition.  On the 7th of September, for
instance, the day after Leary's letter, Too and Mataia left with their
contingents, and the whole Aana people returned home in a body to hold a
parliament.  Ten days later, it is true, a part of them returned to their
duty; but another part branched off by the way and carried their
services, and Tamasese's dear-bought guns, to Faleula.

On the 8th, there was a defection of a different kind, but yet sensible.
The High Chief Seumanu had been still detained in Mulinuu under anxious
observation.  His people murmured at his absence, threatened to "take
away his name," and had already attempted a rescue.  The adventure was
now taken in hand by his wife Faatulia, a woman of much sense and spirit
and a strong partisan; and by her contrivance, Seumanu gave his guardians
the slip and rejoined his clan at Faleula.  This process of winnowing was
of course counterbalanced by another of recruitment.  But the harshness
of European and military rule had made Brandeis detested and Tamasese
unpopular with many; and the force on Mulinuu is thought to have done
little more than hold its own.  Mataafa sympathisers set it down at about
two or three thousand.  I have no estimate from the other side; but
Becker admits they were not strong enough to keep the field in the open.

The political significance of Mulinuu was great, but in a military sense
the position had defects.  If it was difficult to carry, it was easy to
blockade: and to be hemmed in on that narrow finger of land were an
inglorious posture for the monarch of Samoa.  The peninsula, besides, was
scant of food and destitute of water.  Pressed by these considerations,
Brandeis extended his lines till he had occupied the whole foreshore of
Apia bay and the opposite point, Matautu.  His men were thus drawn out
along some three nautical miles of irregular beach, everywhere with their
backs to the sea, and without means of communication or mutual support
except by water.  The extension led to fresh sorrows.  The Tamasese men
quartered themselves in the houses of the absent men of the Vaimaunga.
Disputes arose with English and Americans.  Leary interposed in a loud
voice of menace.  It was said the firm profited by the confusion to
buttress up imperfect land claims; I am sure the other whites would not
be far behind the firm.  Properties were fenced in, fences and houses
were torn down, scuffles ensued.  The German example at Mulinuu was
followed with laughable unanimity; wherever an Englishman or an American
conceived himself to have a claim, he set up the emblem of his country;
and the beach twinkled with the flags of nations.

All this, it will be observed, was going forward in that neutral
territory, sanctified by treaty against the presence of armed Samoans.
The insurgents themselves looked on in wonder: on the 4th, trembling to
transgress against the great Powers, they had written for a delimitation
of the _Eleele Sa_; and Becker, in conversation with the British consul,
replied that he recognised none.  So long as Tamasese held the ground,
this was expedient.  But suppose Tamasese worsted, it might prove awkward
for the stores, mills, and offices of a great German firm, thus bared of
shelter by the act of their own consul.

On the morning of the 9th September, just ten days after the death of
Saifaleupolu, Mataafa, under the name of Malietoa To'oa Mataafa, was
crowned king at Faleula.  On the 11th he wrote to the British and
American consuls: "Gentlemen, I write this letter to you two very humbly
and entreatingly, on account of this difficulty that has come before me.
I desire to know from you two gentlemen the truth where the boundaries of
the neutral territory are.  You will observe that I am now at Vaimoso [a
step nearer the enemy], and I have stopped here until I knew what you say
regarding the neutral territory.  I wish to know where I can go, and
where the forbidden ground is, for I do not wish to go on any neutral
territory, or on any foreigner's property.  I do not want to offend any
of the great Powers.  Another thing I would like.  Would it be possible
for you three consuls to make Tamasese remove from German property? for I
am in awe of going on German land."  He must have received a reply
embodying Becker's renunciation of the principle, at once; for he broke
camp the same day, and marched eastward through the bush behind Apia.

Brandeis, expecting attack, sought to improve his indefensible position.
He reformed his centre by the simple expedient of suppressing it.  Apia
was evacuated.  The two flanks, Mulinuu and Matautu, were still held and
fortified, Mulinuu (as I have said) to the isthmus, Matautu on a line
from the bayside to the little river Fuisa.  The centre was represented
by the trajectory of a boat across the bay from one flank to another, and
was held (we may say) by the German war-ship.  Mataafa decided (I am
assured) to make a feint on Matautu, induce Brandeis to deplete Mulinuu
in support, and then fall upon and carry that.  And there is no doubt in
my mind that such a plan was bruited abroad, for nothing but a belief in
it could explain the behaviour of Brandeis on the 12th.  That it was
seriously entertained by Mataafa I stoutly disbelieve; the German flag
and sailors forbidding the enterprise in Mulinuu.  So that we may call
this false intelligence the beginning and the end of Mataafa's strategy.

The whites who sympathised with the revolt were uneasy and impatient.
They will still tell you, though the dates are there to show them wrong,
that Mataafa, even after his coronation, delayed extremely: a proof of
how long two days may seem to last when men anticipate events.  On the
evening of the 11th, while the new king was already on the march, one of
these walked into Matautu.  The moon was bright.  By the way he observed
the native houses dark and silent; the men had been about a fortnight in
the bush, but now the women and children were gone also; at which he
wondered.  On the sea-beach, in the camp of the Tamaseses, the solitude
was near as great; he saw three or four men smoking before the British
consulate, perhaps a dozen in all; the rest were behind in the bush upon
their line of forts.  About the midst he sat down, and here a woman drew
near to him.  The moon shone in her face, and he knew her for a
householder near by, and a partisan of Mataafa's.  She looked about her
as she came, and asked him, trembling, what he did in the camp of
Tamasese.  He was there after news, he told her.  She took him by the
hand.  "You must not stay here, you will get killed," she said.  "The
bush is full of our people, the others are watching them, fighting may
begin at any moment, and we are both here too long."  So they set off
together; and she told him by the way that she had came to the hostile
camp with a present of bananas, so that the Tamasese men might spare her
house.  By the Vaisingano they met an old man, a woman, and a child; and
these also she warned and turned back.  Such is the strange part played
by women among the scenes of Samoan warfare, such were the liberties then
permitted to the whites, that these two could pass the lines, talk
together in Tamasese's camp on the eve of an engagement, and pass forth
again bearing intelligence, like privileged spies.  And before a few
hours the white man was in direct communication with the opposing
general.  The next morning he was accosted "about breakfast-time" by two
natives who stood leaning against the pickets of a public-house, where
the Siumu road strikes in at right angles to the main street of Apia.
They told him battle was imminent, and begged him to pass a little way
inland and speak with Mataafa.  The road is at this point broad and
fairly good, running between thick groves of cocoa-palm and breadfruit.  A
few hundred yards along this the white man passed a picket of four armed
warriors, with red handkerchiefs and their faces blackened in the form of
a full beard, the Mataafa rallying signs for the day; a little farther
on, some fifty; farther still, a hundred; and at last a quarter of a mile
of them sitting by the wayside armed and blacked.

Near by, in the verandah of a house on a knoll, he found Mataafa seated
in white clothes, a Winchester across his knees.  His men, he said, were
still arriving from behind, and there was a turning movement in operation
beyond the Fuisa, so that the Tamaseses should be assailed at the same
moment from the south and east.  And this is another indication that the
attack on Matautu was the true attack; had any design on Mulinuu been in
the wind, not even a Samoan general would have detached these troops upon
the other side.  While they still spoke, five Tamasese women were brought
in with their hands bound; they had been stealing "our" bananas.

All morning the town was strangely deserted, the very children gone.  A
sense of expectation reigned, and sympathy for the attack was expressed
publicly.  Some men with unblacked faces came to Moors's store for
biscuit.  A native woman, who was there marketing, inquired after the
news, and, hearing that the battle was now near at hand, "Give them two
more tins," said she; "and don't put them down to my husband--he would
growl; put them down to me."  Between twelve and one, two white men
walked toward Matautu, finding as they went no sign of war until they had
passed the Vaisingano and come to the corner of a by-path leading to the
bush.  Here were four blackened warriors on guard,--the extreme left wing
of the Mataafa force, where it touched the waters of the bay.  Thence the
line (which the white men followed) stretched inland among bush and
marsh, facing the forts of the Tamaseses.  The warriors lay as yet
inactive behind trees; but all the young boys and harlots of Apia toiled
in the front upon a trench, digging with knives and cocoa-shells; and a
continuous stream of children brought them water.  The young sappers
worked crouching; from the outside only an occasional head, or a hand
emptying a shell of earth, was visible; and their enemies looked on inert
from the line of the opposing forts.  The lists were not yet prepared,
the tournament was not yet open; and the attacking force was suffered to
throw up works under the silent guns of the defence.  But there is an end
even to the delay of islanders.  As the white men stood and looked, the
Tamasese line thundered into a volley; it was answered; the crowd of
silent workers broke forth in laughter and cheers; and the battle had
begun.

Thenceforward, all day and most of the next night, volley followed
volley; and pounds of lead and pounds sterling of money continued to be
blown into the air without cessation and almost without result.  Colonel
de Coetlogon, an old soldier, described the noise as deafening.  The
harbour was all struck with shots; a man was knocked over on the German
war-ship; half Apia was under fire; and a house was pierced beyond the
Mulivai.  All along the two lines of breastwork, the entrenched enemies
exchanged this hail of balls; and away on the east of the battle the
fusillade was maintained, with equal spirit, across the narrow barrier of
the Fuisa.  The whole rear of the Tamaseses was enfiladed by this flank
fire; and I have seen a house there, by the river brink, that was riddled
with bullets like a piece of worm-eaten wreck-wood.  At this point of the
field befell a trait of Samoan warfare worth recording.  Taiese (brother
to Siteoni already mentioned) shot a Tamasese man.  He saw him fall, and,
inflamed with the lust of glory, passed the river single-handed in that
storm of missiles to secure the head.  On the farther bank, as was but
natural, he fell himself; he who had gone to take a trophy remained to
afford one; and the Mataafas, who had looked on exulting in the prospect
of a triumph, saw themselves exposed instead to a disgrace.  Then rose
one Vingi, passed the deadly water, swung the body of Taiese on his back,
and returned unscathed to his own side, the head saved, the corpse filled
with useless bullets.

At this rate of practice, the ammunition soon began to run low, and from
an early hour of the afternoon, the Malietoa stores were visited by
customers in search of more.  An elderly man came leaping and cheering,
his gun in one hand, a basket of three heads in the other.  A fellow came
shot through the forearm.  "It doesn't hurt now," he said, as he bought
his cartridges; "but it will hurt to-morrow, and I want to fight while I
can."  A third followed, a mere boy, with the end of his nose shot off:
"Have you any painkiller? give it me quick, so that I can get back to
fight."  On either side, there was the same delight in sound and smoke
and schoolboy cheering, the same unsophisticated ardour of battle; and
the misdirected skirmish proceeded with a din, and was illustrated with
traits of bravery that would have fitted a Waterloo or a Sedan.

I have said how little I regard the alleged plan of battle.  At least it
was now all gone to water.  The whole forces of Mataafa had leaked out,
man by man, village by village, on the so-called false attack.  They were
all pounding for their lives on the front and the left flank of Matautu.
About half-past three they enveloped the right flank also.  The defenders
were driven back along the beach road as far as the pilot station at the
turn of the land.  From this also they were dislodged, stubbornly
fighting.  One, it is told, retreated to his middle in the lagoon; stood
there, loading and firing, till he fell; and his body was found on the
morrow pierced with four mortal wounds.  The Tamasese force was now
enveloped on three sides; it was besides almost cut off from the sea; and
across its whole rear and only way of retreat a fire of hostile bullets
crossed from east and west, in the midst of which men were surprised to
observe the birds continuing to sing, and a cow grazed all afternoon
unhurt.  Doubtless here was the defence in a poor way; but then the
attack was in irons.  For the Mataafas about the pilot house could
scarcely advance beyond without coming under the fire of their own men
from the other side of the Fuisa; and there was not enough organisation,
perhaps not enough authority, to divert or to arrest that fire.

The progress of the fight along the beach road was visible from Mulinuu,
and Brandeis despatched ten boats of reinforcements.  They crossed the
harbour, paused for a while beside the _Adler_--it is supposed for
ammunition--and drew near the Matautu shore.  The Mataafa men lay close
among the shore-side bushes, expecting their arrival; when a silly lad,
in mere lightness of heart, fired a shot in the air.  My native friend,
Mrs. Mary Hamilton, ran out of her house and gave the culprit a good
shaking: an episode in the midst of battle as incongruous as the grazing
cow.  But his sillier comrades followed his example; a harmless volley
warned the boats what they might expect; and they drew back and passed
outside the reef for the passage of the Fuisa.  Here they came under the
fire of the right wing of the Mataafas on the river-bank.  The beach,
raked east and west, appeared to them no place to land on.  And they hung
off in the deep water of the lagoon inside the barrier reef, feebly
fusillading the pilot house.

Between four and five, the Fabeata regiment (or folk of that village) on
the Mataafa left, which had been under arms all day, fell to be withdrawn
for rest and food; the Siumu regiment, which should have relieved it, was
not ready or not notified in time; and the Tamaseses, gallantly profiting
by the mismanagement, recovered the most of the ground in their proper
right.  It was not for long.  They lost it again, yard by yard and from
house to house, till the pilot station was once more in the hands of the
Mataafas.  This is the last definite incident in the battle.  The
vicissitudes along the line of the entrenchments remain concealed from us
under the cover of the forest.  Some part of the Tamasese position there
appears to have been carried, but what part, or at what hour, or whether
the advantage was maintained, I have never learned.  Night and rain, but
not silence, closed upon the field.  The trenches were deep in mud; but
the younger folk wrecked the houses in the neighbourhood, carried the
roofs to the front, and lay under them, men and women together, through a
long night of furious squalls and furious and useless volleys.  Meanwhile
the older folk trailed back into Apia in the rain; they talked as they
went of who had fallen and what heads had been taken upon either
side--they seemed to know by name the losses upon both; and drenched with
wet and broken with excitement and fatigue, they crawled into the
verandahs of the town to eat and sleep.  The morrow broke grey and
drizzly, but as so often happens in the islands, cleared up into a
glorious day.  During the night, the majority of the defenders had taken
advantage of the rain and darkness and stolen from their forts
unobserved.  The rallying sign of the Tamaseses had been a white
handkerchief.  With the dawn, the de Coetlogons from the English
consulate beheld the ground strewn with these badges discarded; and close
by the house, a belated turncoat was still changing white for red.
Matautu was lost; Tamasese was confined to Mulinuu; and by nine o'clock
two Mataafa villages paraded the streets of Apia, taking possession.  The
cost of this respectable success in ammunition must have been enormous;
in life it was but small.  Some compute forty killed on either side,
others forty on both, three or four being women and one a white man,
master of a schooner from Fiji.  Nor was the number even of the wounded
at all proportionate to the surprising din and fury of the affair while
it lasted.




CHAPTER VI--LAST EXPLOITS OF BECKER


_September-November_ 1888

Brandeis had held all day by Mulinuu, expecting the reported real attack.
He woke on the 13th to find himself cut off on that unwatered promontory,
and the Mataafa villagers parading Apia.  The same day Fritze received a
letter from Mataafa summoning him to withdraw his party from the isthmus;
and Fritze, as if in answer, drew in his ship into the small harbour
close to Mulinuu, and trained his port battery to assist in the defence.
From a step so decisive, it might be thought the German plans were
unaffected by the disastrous issue of the battle.  I conceive nothing
would be further from the truth.  Here was Tamasese penned on Mulinuu
with his troops; Apia, from which alone these could be subsisted, in the
hands of the enemy; a battle imminent, in which the German vessel must
apparently take part with men and battery, and the buildings of the
German firm were apparently destined to be the first target of fire.
Unless Becker re-established that which he had so lately and so artfully
thrown down--the neutral territory--the firm would have to suffer.  If he
re-established it, Tamasese must retire from Mulinuu.  If Becker saved
his goose, he lost his cabbage.  Nothing so well depicts the man's
effrontery as that he should have conceived the design of saving both,--of
re-establishing only so much of the neutral territory as should hamper
Mataafa, and leaving in abeyance all that could incommode Tamasese.  By
drawing the boundary where he now proposed, across the isthmus, he
protected the firm, drove back the Mataafas out of almost all that they
had conquered, and, so far from disturbing Tamasese, actually fortified
him in his old position.

The real story of the negotiations that followed we shall perhaps never
learn.  But so much is plain: that while Becker was thus outwardly
straining decency in the interest of Tamasese, he was privately
intriguing, or pretending to intrigue, with Mataafa.  In his despatch of
the 11th, he had given an extended criticism of that chieftain, whom he
depicts as very dark and artful; and while admitting that his assumption
of the name of Malietoa might raise him up followers, predicted that he
could not make an orderly government or support himself long in sole
power "without very energetic foreign help."  Of what help was the consul
thinking?  There was no helper in the field but Germany.  On the 15th he
had an interview with the victor; told him that Tamasese's was the only
government recognised by Germany, and that he must continue to recognise
it till he received "other instructions from his government, whom he was
now advising of the late events"; refused, accordingly, to withdraw the
guard from the isthmus; and desired Mataafa, "until the arrival of these
fresh instructions," to refrain from an attack on Mulinuu.  One thing of
two: either this language is extremely perfidious, or Becker was
preparing to change sides.  The same detachment appears in his despatch
of October 7th.  He computes the losses of the German firm with an easy
cheerfulness.  If Tamasese get up again (_gelingt die Wiederherstellung
der Regierung Tamasese's_), Tamasese will have to pay.  If not, then
Mataafa.  This is not the language of a partisan.  The tone of
indifference, the easy implication that the case of Tamasese was already
desperate, the hopes held secretly forth to Mataafa and secretly reported
to his government at home, trenchantly contrast with his external
conduct.  At this very time he was feeding Tamasese; he had German
sailors mounting guard on Tamasese's battlements; the German war-ship lay
close in, whether to help or to destroy.  If he meant to drop the cause
of Tamasese, he had him in a corner, helpless, and could stifle him
without a sob.  If he meant to rat, it was to be with every condition of
safety and every circumstance of infamy.

Was it conceivable, then, that he meant it?  Speaking with a gentleman
who was in the confidence of Dr. Knappe: "Was it not a pity," I asked,
"that Knappe did not stick to Becker's policy of supporting Mataafa?"
"You are quite wrong there; that was not Knappe's doing," was the reply.
"Becker had changed his mind before Knappe came."  Why, then, had he
changed it?  This excellent, if ignominious, idea once entertained, why
was it let drop?  It is to be remembered there was another German in the
field, Brandeis, who had a respect, or rather, perhaps, an affection, for
Tamasese, and who thought his own honour and that of his country engaged
in the support of that government which they had provoked and founded.
Becker described the captain to Laupepa as "a quiet, sensible gentleman."
If any word came to his ears of the intended manoeuvre, Brandeis would
certainly show himself very sensible of the affront; but Becker might
have been tempted to withdraw his former epithet of quiet.  Some such
passage, some such threatened change of front at the consulate, opposed
with outcry, would explain what seems otherwise inexplicable, the bitter,
indignant, almost hostile tone of a subsequent letter from Brandeis to
Knappe--"Brandeis's inflammatory letter," Bismarck calls it--the
proximate cause of the German landing and reverse at Fangalii.

But whether the advances of Becker were sincere or not--whether he
meditated treachery against the old king or was practising treachery upon
the new, and the choice is between one or other--no doubt but he
contrived to gain his points with Mataafa, prevailing on him to change
his camp for the better protection of the German plantations, and
persuading him (long before he could persuade his brother consuls) to
accept that miraculous new neutral territory of his, with a piece cut out
for the immediate needs of Tamasese.

During the rest of September, Tamasese continued to decline.  On the 19th
one village and half of another deserted him; on the 22nd two more.  On
the 21st the Mataafas burned his town of Leulumoenga, his own splendid
house flaming with the rest; and there are few things of which a native
thinks more, or has more reason to think well, than of a fine Samoan
house.  Tamasese women and children were marched up the same day from
Atua, and handed over with their sleeping-mats to Mulinuu: a most
unwelcome addition to a party already suffering from want.  By the 20th,
they were being watered from the _Adler_.  On the 24th the Manono fleet
of sixteen large boats, fortified and rendered unmanageable with tons of
firewood, passed to windward to intercept supplies from Atua.  By the
27th the hungry garrison flocked in great numbers to draw rations at the
German firm.  On the 28th the same business was repeated with a different
issue.  Mataafas crowded to look on; words were exchanged, blows
followed; sticks, stones, and bottles were caught up; the detested
Brandeis, at great risk, threw himself between the lines and expostulated
with the Mataafas--his only personal appearance in the wars, if this
could be called war.  The same afternoon, the Tamasese boats got in with
provisions, having passed to seaward of the lumbering Manono fleet; and
from that day on, whether from a high degree of enterprise on the one
side or a great lack of capacity on the other, supplies were maintained
from the sea with regularity.  Thus the spectacle of battle, or at least
of riot, at the doors of the German firm was not repeated.  But the
memory must have hung heavy on the hearts, not of the Germans only, but
of all Apia.  The Samoans are a gentle race, gentler than any in Europe;
we are often enough reminded of the circumstance, not always by their
friends.  But a mob is a mob, and a drunken mob is a drunken mob, and a
drunken mob with weapons in its hands is a drunken mob with weapons in
its hands, all the world over: elementary propositions, which some of us
upon these islands might do worse than get by rote, but which must have
been evident enough to Becker.  And I am amazed by the man's constancy,
that, even while blows were going at the door of that German firm which
he was in Samoa to protect, he should have stuck to his demands.  Ten
days before, Blacklock had offered to recognise the old territory,
including Mulinuu, and Becker had refused, and still in the midst of
these "alarums and excursions," he continued to refuse it.

On October 2nd, anchored in Apia bay H.B.M.S. _Calliope_, Captain Kane,
carrying the flag of Rear-Admiral Fairfax, and the gunboat _Lizard_,
Lieutenant-Commander Pelly.  It was rumoured the admiral had come to
recognise the government of Tamasese, I believe in error.  And at least
the day for that was quite gone by; and he arrived not to salute the
king's accession, but to arbitrate on his remains.  A conference of the
consuls and commanders met on board the _Calliope_, October 4th, Fritze
alone being absent, although twice invited: the affair touched politics,
his consul was to be there; and even if he came to the meeting (so he
explained to Fairfax) he would have no voice in its deliberations.  The
parties were plainly marked out: Blacklock and Leary maintaining their
offer of the old neutral territory, and probably willing to expand or to
contract it to any conceivable extent, so long as Mulinuu was still
included; Knappe offered (if the others liked) to include "the whole
eastern end of the island," but quite fixed upon the one point that
Mulinuu should be left out; the English willing to meet either view, and
singly desirous that Apia should be neutralised.  The conclusion was
foregone.  Becker held a trump card in the consent of Mataafa; Blacklock
and Leary stood alone, spoke with all ill grace, and could not long hold
out.  Becker had his way; and the neutral boundary was chosen just where
he desired: across the isthmus, the firm within, Mulinuu without.  He did
not long enjoy the fruits of victory.

On the 7th, three days after the meeting, one of the Scanlons (well-known
and intelligent half-castes) came to Blacklock with a complaint.  The
Scanlon house stood on the hither side of the Tamasese breastwork, just
inside the newly accepted territory, and within easy range of the firm.
Armed men, to the number of a hundred, had issued from Mulinuu, had
"taken charge" of the house, had pointed a gun at Scanlon's head, and had
twice "threatened to kill" his pigs.  I hear elsewhere of some effects
(_Gegenstande_) removed.  At the best a very pale atrocity, though we
shall find the word employed.  Germans declare besides that Scanlon was
no American subject; they declare the point had been decided by court-
martial in 1875; that Blacklock had the decision in the consular
archives; and that this was his reason for handing the affair to Leary.
It is not necessary to suppose so.  It is plain he thought little of the
business; thought indeed nothing of it; except in so far as armed men had
entered the neutral territory from Mulinuu; and it was on this ground
alone, and the implied breach of Becker's engagement at the conference,
that he invited Leary's attention to the tale.  The impish ingenuity of
the commander perceived in it huge possibilities of mischief.  He took up
the Scanlon outrage, the atrocity of the threatened pigs; and with that
poor instrument--I am sure, to his own wonder--drove Tamasese out of
Mulinuu.  It was "an intrigue," Becker complains.  To be sure it was; but
who was Becker to be complaining of intrigue?

On the 7th Leary laid before Fritze the following conundrum: "As the
natives of Mulinuu appear to be under the protection of the Imperial
German naval guard belonging to the vessel under your command, I have the
honour to request you to inform me whether or not they are under such
protection?  Amicable relations," pursued the humorist, "amicable
relations exist between the government of the United States and His
Imperial German Majesty's government, but we do not recognise Tamasese's
government, and I am desirous of locating the responsibility for
violations of American rights."  Becker and Fritze lost no time in
explanation or denial, but went straight to the root of the matter and
sought to buy off Scanlon.  Becker declares that every reparation was
offered.  Scanlon takes a pride to recapitulate the leases and the
situations he refused, and the long interviews in which he was tempted
and plied with drink by Becker or Beckmann of the firm.  No doubt, in
short, that he was offered reparation in reason and out of reason, and,
being thoroughly primed, refused it all.  Meantime some answer must be
made to Leary; and Fritze repeated on the 8th his oft-repeated assurances
that he was not authorised to deal with politics.  The same day Leary
retorted: "The question is not one of diplomacy nor of politics.  It is
strictly one of military jurisdiction and responsibility.  Under the
shadow of the German fort at Mulinuu," continued the hyperbolical
commander, "atrocities have been committed. . . . And I again have the
honour respectfully to request to be informed whether or not the armed
natives at Mulinuu are under the protection of the Imperial German naval
guard belonging to the vessel under your command."  To this no answer was
vouchsafed till the 11th, and then in the old terms; and meanwhile, on
the 10th, Leary got into his gaiters--the sure sign, as was both said and
sung aboard his vessel, of some desperate or some amusing service--and
was set ashore at the Scanlons' house.  Of this he took possession at the
head of an old woman and a mop, and was seen from the Tamasese breastwork
directing operations and plainly preparing to install himself there in a
military posture.  So much he meant to be understood; so much he meant to
carry out, and an armed party from the _Adams_ was to have garrisoned on
the morrow the scene of the atrocity.  But there is no doubt he managed
to convey more.  No doubt he was a master in the art of loose speaking,
and could always manage to be overheard when he wanted; and by this, or
some other equally unofficial means, he spread the rumour that on the
morrow he was to bombard.

The proposed post, from its position, and from Leary's well-established
character as an artist in mischief, must have been regarded by the
Germans with uneasiness.  In the bombardment we can scarce suppose them
to have believed.  But Tamasese must have both believed and trembled.  The
prestige of the European Powers was still unbroken.  No native would then
have dreamed of defying these colossal ships, worked by mysterious
powers, and laden with outlandish instruments of death.  None would have
dreamed of resisting those strange but quite unrealised Great Powers,
understood (with difficulty) to be larger than Tonga and Samoa put
together, and known to be prolific of prints, knives, hard biscuit,
picture-books, and other luxuries, as well as of overbearing men and
inconsistent orders.  Laupepa had fallen in ill-blood with one of them;
his only idea of defence had been to throw himself in the arms of
another; his name, his rank, and his great following had not been able to
preserve him; and he had vanished from the eyes of men--as the Samoan
thinks of it, beyond the sky.  Asi, Maunga, Tuiletu-funga, had followed
him in that new path of doom.  We have seen how carefully Mataafa still
walked, how he dared not set foot on the neutral territory till assured
it was no longer sacred, how he withdrew from it again as soon as its
sacredness had been restored, and at the bare word of a consul (however
gilded with ambiguous promises) paused in his course of victory and left
his rival unassailed in Mulinuu.  And now it was the rival's turn.
Hitherto happy in the continued support of one of the white Powers, he
now found himself--or thought himself--threatened with war by no less
than two others.

Tamasese boats as they passed Matautu were in the habit of firing on the
shore, as like as not without particular aim, and more in high spirits
than hostility.  One of these shots pierced the house of a British
subject near the consulate; the consul reported to Admiral Fairfax; and,
on the morning of the 10th, the admiral despatched Captain Kane of the
_Calliope_ to Mulinuu.  Brandeis met the messenger with voluble excuses
and engagements for the future.  He was told his explanations were
satisfactory so far as they went, but that the admiral's message was to
Tamasese, the _de facto_ king.  Brandeis, not very well assured of his
puppet's courage, attempted in vain to excuse him from appearing.  No _de
facto_ king, no message, he was told: produce your _de facto_ king.  And
Tamasese had at last to be produced.  To him Kane delivered his errand:
that the _Lizard_ was to remain for the protection of British subjects;
that a signalman was to be stationed at the consulate; that, on any
further firing from boats, the signalman was to notify the _Lizard_ and
she to fire one gun, on which all boats must lower sail and come
alongside for examination and the detection of the guilty; and that, "in
the event of the boats not obeying the gun, the admiral would not be
responsible for the consequences."  It was listened to by Brandeis and
Tamasese "with the greatest attention."  Brandeis, when it was done,
desired his thanks to the admiral for the moderate terms of his message,
and, as Kane went to his boat, repeated the expression of his gratitude
as though he meant it, declaring his own hands would be thus strengthened
for the maintenance of discipline.  But I have yet to learn of any
gratitude on the part of Tamasese.  Consider the case of the poor owlish
man hearing for the first time our diplomatic commonplaces.  The admiral
would not be answerable for the consequences.  Think of it!  A devil of a
position for a _de facto_ king.  And here, the same afternoon, was Leary
in the Scanlon house, mopping it out for unknown designs by the hands of
an old woman, and proffering strange threats of bloodshed.  Scanlon and
his pigs, the admiral and his gun, Leary and his bombardment,--what a
kettle of fish!

I dwell on the effect on Tamasese.  Whatever the faults of Becker, he was
not timid; he had already braved so much for Mulinuu that I cannot but
think he might have continued to hold up his head even after the outrage
of the pigs, and that the weakness now shown originated with the king.
Late in the night, Blacklock was wakened to receive a despatch addressed
to Leary.  "You have asked that I and my government go away from Mulinuu,
because you pretend a man who lives near Mulinuu and who is under your
protection, has been threatened by my soldiers.  As your Excellency has
forbidden the man to accept any satisfaction, and as I do not wish to
make war against the United States, I shall remove my government from
Mulinuu to another place."  It was signed by Tamasese, but I think more
heads than his had wagged over the direct and able letter.  On the
morning of the 11th, accordingly, Mulinuu the much defended lay desert.
Tamasese and Brandeis had slipped to sea in a schooner; their troops had
followed them in boats; the German sailors and their war-flag had
returned on board the _Adler_; and only the German merchant flag blew
there for Weber's land-claim.  Mulinuu, for which Becker had intrigued so
long and so often, for which he had overthrown the municipality, for
which he had abrogated and refused and invented successive schemes of
neutral territory, was now no more to the Germans than a very
unattractive, barren peninsula and a very much disputed land-claim of Mr.
Weber's.  It will scarcely be believed that the tale of the Scanlon
outrages was not yet finished.  Leary had gained his point, but Scanlon
had lost his compensation.  And it was months later, and this time in the
shape of a threat of bombardment in black and white, that Tamasese heard
the last of the absurd affair.  Scanlon had both his fun and his money,
and Leary's practical joke was brought to an artistic end.

Becker sought and missed an instant revenge.  Mataafa, a devout Catholic,
was in the habit of walking every morning to mass from his camp at Vaiala
beyond Matautu to the mission at the Mulivai.  He was sometimes escorted
by as many as six guards in uniform, who displayed their proficiency in
drill by perpetually shifting arms as they marched.  Himself, meanwhile,
paced in front, bareheaded and barefoot, a staff in his hand, in the
customary chief's dress of white kilt, shirt, and jacket, and with a
conspicuous rosary about his neck.  Tall but not heavy, with eager eyes
and a marked appearance of courage and capacity, Mataafa makes an
admirable figure in the eyes of Europeans; to those of his countrymen, he
may seem not always to preserve that quiescence of manner which is
thought becoming in the great.  On the morning of October 16th he reached
the mission before day with two attendants, heard mass, had coffee with
the fathers, and left again in safety.  The smallness of his following we
may suppose to have been reported.  He was scarce gone, at least, before
Becker had armed men at the mission gate and came in person seeking him.

The failure of this attempt doubtless still further exasperated the
consul, and he began to deal as in an enemy's country.  He had marines
from the _Adler_ to stand sentry over the consulate and parade the
streets by threes and fours.  The bridge of the Vaisingano, which cuts in
half the English and American quarters, he closed by proclamation and
advertised for tenders to demolish it.  On the 17th Leary and Pelly
landed carpenters and repaired it in his teeth.  Leary, besides, had
marines under arms, ready to land them if it should be necessary to
protect the work.  But Becker looked on without interference, perhaps
glad enough to have the bridge repaired; for even Becker may not always
have offended intentionally.  Such was now the distracted posture of the
little town: all government extinct, the German consul patrolling it with
armed men and issuing proclamations like a ruler, the two other Powers
defying his commands, and at least one of them prepared to use force in
the defiance.  Close on its skirts sat the warriors of Mataafa, perhaps
four thousand strong, highly incensed against the Germans, having all to
gain in the seizure of the town and firm, and, like an army in a fairy
tale, restrained by the air-drawn boundary of the neutral ground.

I have had occasion to refer to the strange appearance in these islands
of an American adventurer with a battery of cannon.  The adventurer was
long since gone, but his guns remained, and one of them was now to make
fresh history.  It had been cast overboard by Brandeis on the outer reef
in the course of this retreat; and word of it coming to the ears of the
Mataafas, they thought it natural that they should serve themselves the
heirs of Tamasese.  On the 23rd a Manono boat of the kind called
_taumualua_ dropped down the coast from Mataafa's camp, called in broad
day at the German quarter of the town for guides, and proceeded to the
reef.  Here, diving with a rope, they got the gun aboard; and the night
being then come, returned by the same route in the shallow water along
shore, singing a boat-song.  It will be seen with what childlike reliance
they had accepted the neutrality of Apia bay; they came for the gun
without concealment, laboriously dived for it in broad day under the eyes
of the town and shipping, and returned with it, singing as they went.  On
Grevsmuhl's wharf, a light showed them a crowd of German blue-jackets
clustered, and a hail was heard.  "Stop the singing so that we may hear
what is said," said one of the chiefs in the _taumualua_.  The song
ceased; the hail was heard again, "_Au mai le fana_--bring the gun"; and
the natives report themselves to have replied in the affirmative, and
declare that they had begun to back the boat.  It is perhaps not needful
to believe them.  A volley at least was fired from the wharf, at about
fifty yards' range and with a very ill direction, one bullet whistling
over Pelly's head on board the _Lizard_.  The natives jumped overboard;
and swimming under the lee of the _taumualua_ (where they escaped a
second volley) dragged her towards the east.  As soon as they were out of
range and past the Mulivai, the German border, they got on board and
(again singing--though perhaps a different song) continued their return
along the English and American shore.  Off Matautu they were hailed from
the seaward by one of the _Adler's_ boats, which had been suddenly
despatched on the sound of the firing or had stood ready all evening to
secure the gun.  The hail was in German; the Samoans knew not what it
meant, but took the precaution to jump overboard and swim for land.  Two
volleys and some dropping shot were poured upon them in the water; but
they dived, scattered, and came to land unhurt in different quarters of
Matautu.  The volleys, fired inshore, raked the highway, a British house
was again pierced by numerous bullets, and these sudden sounds of war
scattered consternation through the town.

Two British subjects, Hetherington-Carruthers, a solicitor, and Maben, a
land-surveyor--the first being in particular a man well versed in the
native mind and language--hastened at once to their consul; assured him
the Mataafas would be roused to fury by this onslaught in the neutral
zone, that the German quarter would be certainly attacked, and the rest
of the town and white inhabitants exposed to a peril very difficult of
estimation; and prevailed upon him to intrust them with a mission to the
king.  By the time they reached headquarters, the warriors were already
taking post round Matafele, and the agitation of Mataafa himself was
betrayed in the fact that he spoke with the deputation standing and gun
in hand: a breach of high-chief dignity perhaps unparalleled.  The usual
result, however, followed: the whites persuaded the Samoan; and the
attack was countermanded, to the benefit of all concerned, and not least
of Mataafa.  To the benefit of all, I say; for I do not think the Germans
were that evening in a posture to resist; the liquor-cellars of the firm
must have fallen into the power of the insurgents; and I will repeat my
formula that a mob is a mob, a drunken mob is a drunken mob, and a
drunken mob with weapons in its hands is a drunken mob with weapons in
its hands, all the world over.

In the opinion of some, then, the town had narrowly escaped destruction,
or at least the miseries of a drunken sack.  To the knowledge of all, the
air of the neutral territory had once more whistled with bullets.  And it
was clear the incident must have diplomatic consequences.  Leary and
Pelly both protested to Fritze.  Leary announced he should report the
affair to his government "as a gross violation of the principles of
international law, and as a breach of the neutrality."  "I positively
decline the protest," replied Fritze, "and cannot fail to express my
astonishment at the tone of your last letter."  This was trenchant.  It
may be said, however, that Leary was already out of court; that, after
the night signals and the Scanlon incident, and so many other acts of
practical if humorous hostility, his position as a neutral was no better
than a doubtful jest.  The case with Pelly was entirely different; and
with Pelly, Fritze was less well inspired.  In his first note, he was on
the old guard; announced that he had acted on the requisition of his
consul, who was alone responsible on "the legal side"; and declined
accordingly to discuss "whether the lives of British subjects were in
danger, and to what extent armed intervention was necessary."  Pelly
replied judiciously that he had nothing to do with political matters,
being only responsible for the safety of Her Majesty's ships under his
command and for the lives and property of British subjects; that he had
considered his protest a purely naval one; and as the matter stood could
only report the case to the admiral on the station.  "I have the honour,"
replied Fritze, "to refuse to entertain the protest concerning the safety
of Her Britannic Majesty's ship _Lizard_ as being a naval matter.  The
safety of Her Majesty's ship _Lizard_ was never in the least endangered.
This was guaranteed by the disciplined fire of a few shots under the
direction of two officers."  This offensive note, in view of Fritze's
careful and honest bearing among so many other complications, may be
attributed to some misunderstanding.  His small knowledge of English
perhaps failed him.  But I cannot pass it by without remarking how far
too much it is the custom of German officials to fall into this style.  It
may be witty, I am sure it is not wise.  It may be sometimes necessary to
offend for a definite object, it can never be diplomatic to offend
gratuitously.

Becker was more explicit, although scarce less curt.  And his defence may
be divided into two statements: first, that the _taumualua_ was
proceeding to land with a hostile purpose on Mulinuu; second, that the
shots complained of were fired by the Samoans.  The second may be
dismissed with a laugh.  Human nature has laws.  And no men hitherto
discovered, on being suddenly challenged from the sea, would have turned
their backs upon the challenger and poured volleys on the friendly shore.
The first is not extremely credible, but merits examination.  The story
of the recovered gun seems straightforward; it is supported by much
testimony, the diving operations on the reef seem to have been watched
from shore with curiosity; it is hard to suppose that it does not roughly
represent the fact.  And yet if any part of it be true, the whole of
Becker's explanation falls to the ground.  A boat which had skirted the
whole eastern coast of Mulinuu, and was already opposite a wharf in
Matafele, and still going west, might have been guilty on a thousand
points--there was one on which she was necessarily innocent; she was
necessarily innocent of proceeding on Mulinuu.  Or suppose the diving
operations, and the native testimony, and Pelly's chart of the boat's
course, and the boat itself, to be all stages of some epidemic
hallucination or steps in a conspiracy--suppose even a second _taumualua_
to have entered Apia bay after nightfall, and to have been fired upon
from Grevsmuhl's wharf in the full career of hostilities against
Mulinuu--suppose all this, and Becker is not helped.  At the time of the
first fire, the boat was off Grevsmuhl's wharf.  At the time of the
second (and that is the one complained of) she was off Carruthers's wharf
in Matautu.  Was she still proceeding on Mulinuu?  I trow not.  The
danger to German property was no longer imminent, the shots had been
fired upon a very trifling provocation, the spirit implied was that of
designed disregard to the neutrality.  Such was the impression here on
the spot; such in plain terms the statement of Count Hatzfeldt to Lord
Salisbury at home: that the neutrality of Apia was only "to prevent the
natives from fighting," not the Germans; and that whatever Becker might
have promised at the conference, he could not "restrict German
war-vessels in their freedom of action."

There was nothing to surprise in this discovery; and had events been
guided at the same time with a steady and discreet hand, it might have
passed with less observation.  But the policy of Becker was felt to be
not only reckless, it was felt to be absurd also.  Sudden nocturnal
onfalls upon native boats could lead, it was felt, to no good end whether
of peace or war; they could but exasperate; they might prove, in a
moment, and when least expected, ruinous.  To those who knew how nearly
it had come to fighting, and who considered the probable result, the
future looked ominous.  And fear was mingled with annoyance in the minds
of the Anglo-Saxon colony.  On the 24th, a public meeting appealed to the
British and American consuls.  At half-past seven in the evening guards
were landed at the consulates.  On the morrow they were each fortified
with sand-bags; and the subjects informed by proclamation that these
asylums stood open to them on any alarm, and at any hour of the day or
night.  The social bond in Apia was dissolved.  The consuls, like barons
of old, dwelt each in his armed citadel.  The rank and file of the white
nationalities dared each other, and sometimes fell to on the street like
rival clansmen.  And the little town, not by any fault of the
inhabitants, rather by the act of Becker, had fallen back in civilisation
about a thousand years.

There falls one more incident to be narrated, and then I can close with
this ungracious chapter.  I have mentioned the name of the new English
consul.  It is already familiar to English readers; for the gentleman who
was fated to undergo some strange experiences in Apia was the same de
Coetlogon who covered Hicks's flank at the time of the disaster in the
desert, and bade farewell to Gordon in Khartoum before the investment.
The colonel was abrupt and testy; Mrs. de Coetlogon was too exclusive for
society like that of Apia; but whatever their superficial disabilities,
it is strange they should have left, in such an odour of unpopularity, a
place where they set so shining an example of the sterling virtues.  The
colonel was perhaps no diplomatist; he was certainly no lawyer; but he
discharged the duties of his office with the constancy and courage of an
old soldier, and these were found sufficient.  He and his wife had no
ambition to be the leaders of society; the consulate was in their time no
house of feasting; but they made of it that house of mourning to which
the preacher tells us it is better we should go.  At an early date after
the battle of Matautu, it was opened as a hospital for the wounded.  The
English and Americans subscribed what was required for its support.  Pelly
of the _Lizard_ strained every nerve to help, and set up tents on the
lawn to be a shelter for the patients.  The doctors of the English and
American ships, and in particular Dr. Oakley of the _Lizard_, showed
themselves indefatigable.  But it was on the de Coetlogons that the
distress fell.  For nearly half a year, their lawn, their verandah,
sometimes their rooms, were cumbered with the sick and dying, their ears
were filled with the complaints of suffering humanity, their time was too
short for the multiplicity of pitiful duties.  In Mrs. de Coetlogon, and
her helper, Miss Taylor, the merit of this endurance was perhaps to be
looked for; in a man of the colonel's temper, himself painfully
suffering, it was viewed with more surprise, if with no more admiration.
Doubtless all had their reward in a sense of duty done; doubtless, also,
as the days passed, in the spectacle of many traits of gratitude and
patience, and in the success that waited on their efforts.  Out of a
hundred cases treated, only five died.  They were all well-behaved,
though full of childish wiles.  One old gentleman, a high chief, was
seized with alarming symptoms of belly-ache whenever Mrs. de Coetlogon
went her rounds at night: he was after brandy.  Others were insatiable
for morphine or opium.  A chief woman had her foot amputated under
chloroform.  "Let me see my foot!  Why does it not hurt?" she cried.  "It
hurt so badly before I went to sleep."  Siteoni, whose name has been
already mentioned, had his shoulder-blade excised, lay the longest of
any, perhaps behaved the worst, and was on all these grounds the
favourite.  At times he was furiously irritable, and would rail upon his
family and rise in bed until he swooned with pain.  Once on the balcony
he was thought to be dying, his family keeping round his mat, his father
exhorting him to be prepared, when Mrs. de Coetlogon brought him round
again with brandy and smelling-salts.  After discharge, he returned upon
a visit of gratitude; and it was observed, that instead of coming
straight to the door, he went and stood long under his umbrella on that
spot of ground where his mat had been stretched and he had endured pain
so many months.  Similar visits were the rule, I believe without
exception; and the grateful patients loaded Mrs. de Coetlogon with gifts
which (had that been possible in Polynesia) she would willingly have
declined, for they were often of value to the givers.

The tissue of my story is one of rapacity, intrigue, and the triumphs of
temper; the hospital at the consulate stands out almost alone as an
episode of human beauty, and I dwell on it with satisfaction.  But it was
not regarded at the time with universal favour; and even to-day its
institution is thought by many to have been impolitic.  It was opened, it
stood open, for the wounded of either party.  As a matter of fact it was
never used but by the Mataafas, and the Tamaseses were cared for
exclusively by German doctors.  In the progressive decivilisation of the
town, these duties of humanity became thus a ground of quarrel.  When the
Mataafa hurt were first brought together after the battle of Matautu, and
some more or less amateur surgeons were dressing wounds on a green by the
wayside, one from the German consulate went by in the road.  "Why don't
you let the dogs die?" he asked.  "Go to hell," was the rejoinder.  Such
were the amenities of Apia.  But Becker reserved for himself the extreme
expression of this spirit.  On November 7th hostilities began again
between the Samoan armies, and an inconclusive skirmish sent a fresh crop
of wounded to the de Coetlogons.  Next door to the consulate, some native
houses and a chapel (now ruinous) stood on a green.  Chapel and houses
were certainly Samoan, but the ground was under a land-claim of the
German firm; and de Coetlogon wrote to Becker requesting permission (in
case it should prove necessary) to use these structures for his wounded.
Before an answer came, the hospital was startled by the appearance of a
case of gangrene, and the patient was hastily removed into the chapel.  A
rebel laid on German ground--here was an atrocity!  The day before his
own relief, November 11th, Becker ordered the man's instant removal.  By
his aggressive carriage and singular mixture of violence and cunning, he
had already largely brought about the fall of Brandeis, and forced into
an attitude of hostility the whole non-German population of the islands.
Now, in his last hour of office, by this wanton buffet to his English
colleague, he prepared a continuance of evil days for his successor.  If
the object of diplomacy be the organisation of failure in the midst of
hate, he was a great diplomatist.  And amongst a certain party on the
beach he is still named as the ideal consul.




CHAPTER VII--THE SAMOAN CAMPS


_November_ 1888

When Brandeis and Tamasese fled by night from Mulinuu, they carried their
wandering government some six miles to windward, to a position above
Lotoanuu.  For some three miles to the eastward of Apia, the shores of
Upolu are low and the ground rises with a gentle acclivity, much of which
waves with German plantations.  A barrier reef encloses a lagoon passable
for boats: and the traveller skims there, on smooth, many-tinted
shallows, between the wall of the breakers on the one hand, and on the
other a succession of palm-tree capes and cheerful beach-side villages.
Beyond the great plantation of Vailele, the character of the coast is
changed.  The barrier reef abruptly ceases, the surf beats direct upon
the shore; and the mountains and untenanted forest of the interior
descend sheer into the sea.  The first mountain promontory is Letongo.
The bay beyond is called Laulii, and became the headquarters of Mataafa.
And on the next projection, on steep, intricate ground, veiled in forest
and cut up by gorges and defiles, Tamasese fortified his lines.  This
greenwood citadel, which proved impregnable by Samoan arms, may be
regarded as his front; the sea covered his right; and his rear extended
along the coast as far as Saluafata, and thus commanded and drew upon a
rich country, including the plain of Falefa.

He was left in peace from 11th October till November 6th.  But his
adversary is not wholly to be blamed for this delay, which depended upon
island etiquette.  His Savaii contingent had not yet come in, and to have
moved again without waiting for them would have been surely to offend,
perhaps to lose them.  With the month of November they began to arrive:
on the 2nd twenty boats, on the 3rd twenty-nine, on the 5th seventeen.  On
the 6th the position Mataafa had so long occupied on the skirts of Apia
was deserted; all that day and night his force kept streaming eastward to
Laulii; and on the 7th the siege of Lotoanuu was opened with a brisk
skirmish.

Each side built forts, facing across the gorge of a brook.  An endless
fusillade and shouting maintained the spirit of the warriors; and at
night, even if the firing slackened, the pickets continued to exchange
from either side volleys of songs and pungent pleasantries.  Nearer
hostilities were rendered difficult by the nature of the ground, where
men must thread dense bush and clamber on the face of precipices.  Apia
was near enough; a man, if he had a dollar or two, could walk in before a
battle and array himself in silk or velvet.  Casualties were not common;
there was nothing to cast gloom upon the camps, and no more danger than
was required to give a spice to the perpetual firing.  For the young
warriors it was a period of admirable enjoyment.  But the anxiety of
Mataafa must have been great and growing.  His force was now
considerable.  It was scarce likely he should ever have more.  That he
should be long able to supply them with ammunition seemed incredible; at
the rates then or soon after current, hundreds of pounds sterling might
be easily blown into the air by the skirmishers in the course of a few
days.  And in the meanwhile, on the mountain opposite, his outnumbered
adversary held his ground unshaken.

By this time the partisanship of the whites was unconcealed.  Americans
supplied Mataafa with ammunition; English and Americans openly subscribed
together and sent boat-loads of provisions to his camp.  One such boat
started from Apia on a day of rain; it was pulled by six oars, three
being paid by Moors, three by the MacArthurs; Moors himself and a clerk
of the MacArthurs' were in charge; and the load included not only beef
and biscuit, but three or four thousand rounds of ammunition.  They came
ashore in Laulii, and carried the gift to Mataafa.  While they were yet
in his house a bullet passed overhead; and out of his door they could see
the Tamasese pickets on the opposite hill.  Thence they made their way to
the left flank of the Mataafa position next the sea.  A Tamasese
barricade was visible across the stream.  It rained, but the warriors
crowded in their shanties, squatted in the mud, and maintained an excited
conversation.  Balls flew; either faction, both happy as lords, spotting
for the other in chance shots, and missing.  One point is characteristic
of that war; experts in native feeling doubt if it will characterise the
next.  The two white visitors passed without and between the lines to a
rocky point upon the beach.  The person of Moors was well known; the
purpose of their coming to Laulii must have been already bruited abroad;
yet they were not fired upon.  From the point they spied a crow's nest,
or hanging fortification, higher up; and, judging it was a good position
for a general view, obtained a guide.  He led them up a steep side of the
mountain, where they must climb by roots and tufts of grass; and coming
to an open hill-top with some scattered trees, bade them wait, let him
draw the fire, and then be swift to follow.  Perhaps a dozen balls
whistled about him ere he had crossed the dangerous passage and dropped
on the farther side into the crow's-nest; the white men, briskly
following, escaped unhurt.  The crow's-nest was built like a bartizan on
the precipitous front of the position.  Across the ravine, perhaps at
five hundred yards, heads were to be seen popping up and down in a fort
of Tamesese's.  On both sides the same enthusiasm without council, the
same senseless vigilance, reigned.  Some took aim; some blazed before
them at a venture.  Now--when a head showed on the other side--one would
take a crack at it, remarking that it would never do to "miss a chance."
Now they would all fire a volley and bob down; a return volley rang
across the ravine, and was punctually answered: harmless as lawn-tennis.
The whites expostulated in vain.  The warriors, drunken with noise, made
answer by a fresh general discharge and bade their visitors run while it
was time.  Upon their return to headquarters, men were covering the front
with sheets of coral limestone, two balls having passed through the house
in the interval.  Mataafa sat within, over his kava bowl, unmoved.  The
picture is of a piece throughout: excellent courage, super-excellent
folly, a war of school-children; expensive guns and cartridges used like
squibs or catherine-wheels on Guy Fawkes's Day.

On the 20th Mataafa changed his attack.  Tamasese's front was seemingly
impregnable.  Something must be tried upon his rear.  There was his bread-
basket; a small success in that direction would immediately curtail his
resources; and it might be possible with energy to roll up his line along
the beach and take the citadel in reverse.  The scheme was carried out as
might be expected from these childish soldiers.  Mataafa, always uneasy
about Apia, clung with a portion of his force to Laulii; and thus, had
the foe been enterprising, exposed himself to disaster.  The expedition
fell successfully enough on Saluafata and drove out the Tamaseses with a
loss of four heads; but so far from improving the advantage, yielded
immediately to the weakness of the Samoan warrior, and ranged farther
east through unarmed populations, bursting with shouts and blackened
faces into villages terrified or admiring, making spoil of pigs, burning
houses, and destroying gardens.  The Tamasese had at first evacuated
several beach towns in succession, and were still in retreat on Lotoanuu;
finding themselves unpursued, they reoccupied them one after another, and
re-established their lines to the very borders of Saluafata.  Night fell;
Mataafa had taken Saluafata, Tamasese had lost it; and that was all.  But
the day came near to have a different and very singular issue.  The
village was not long in the hands of the Mataafas, when a schooner,
flying German colours, put into the bay and was immediately surrounded by
their boats.  It chanced that Brandeis was on board.  Word of it had gone
abroad, and the boats as they approached demanded him with threats.  The
late premier, alone, entirely unarmed, and a prey to natural and painful
feelings, concealed himself below.  The captain of the schooner remained
on deck, pointed to the German colours, and defied approaching boats.
Again the prestige of a great Power triumphed; the Samoans fell back
before the bunting; the schooner worked out of the bay; Brandeis escaped.
He himself apprehended the worst if he fell into Samoan hands; it is my
diffident impression that his life would have been safe.

On the 22nd, a new German war-ship, the _Eber_, of tragic memory, came to
Apia from the Gilberts, where she had been disarming turbulent islands.
The rest of that day and all night she loaded stores from the firm, and
on the morrow reached Saluafata bay.  Thanks to the misconduct of the
Mataafas, the most of the foreshore was still in the hands of the
Tamaseses; and they were thus able to receive from the _Eber_ both the
stores and weapons.  The weapons had been sold long since to Tarawa,
Apaiang, and Pleasant Island; places unheard of by the general reader,
where obscure inhabitants paid for these instruments of death in money or
in labour, misused them as it was known they would be misused, and had
been disarmed by force.  The _Eber_ had brought back the guns to a German
counter, whence many must have been originally sold; and was here
engaged, like a shopboy, in their distribution to fresh purchasers.  Such
is the vicious circle of the traffic in weapons of war.  Another aid of a
more metaphysical nature was ministered by the _Eber_ to Tamasese, in the
shape of uncountable German flags.  The full history of this epidemic of
bunting falls to be told in the next chapter.  But the fact has to be
chronicled here, for I believe it was to these flags that we owe the
visit of the _Adams_, and my next and best authentic glance into a native
camp.  The _Adams_ arrived in Saluafata on the 26th.  On the morrow Leary
and Moors landed at the village.  It was still occupied by Mataafas,
mostly from Manono and Savaii, few in number, high in spirit.  The
Tamasese pickets were meanwhile within musket range; there was maintained
a steady sputtering of shots; and yet a party of Tamasese women were here
on a visit to the women of Manono, with whom they sat talking and
smoking, under the fire of their own relatives.  It was reported that
Leary took part in a council of war, and promised to join with his
broadside in the next attack.  It is certain he did nothing of the sort:
equally certain that, in Tamasese circles, he was firmly credited with
having done so.  And this heightens the extraordinary character of what I
have now to tell.  Prudence and delicacy alike ought to have forbid the
camp of Tamasese to the feet of either Leary or Moors.  Moors was the
original--there was a time when he had been the only--opponent of the
puppet king.  Leary had driven him from the seat of government; it was
but a week or two since he had threatened to bombard him in his present
refuge.  Both were in close and daily council with his adversary, and it
was no secret that Moors was supplying the latter with food.  They were
partisans; it lacked but a hair that they should be called belligerents;
it were idle to try to deny they were the most dangerous of spies.  And
yet these two now sailed across the bay and landed inside the Tamasese
lines at Salelesi.  On the very beach they had another glimpse of the
artlessness of Samoan war.  Hitherto the Tamasese fleet, being hardy and
unencumbered, had made a fool of the huge floating forts upon the other
side; and here they were toiling, not to produce another boat on their
own pattern in which they had always enjoyed the advantage, but to make a
new one the type of their enemies', of which they had now proved the
uselessness for months.  It came on to rain as the Americans landed; and
though none offered to oppose their coming ashore, none invited them to
take shelter.  They were nowise abashed, entered a house unbidden, and
were made welcome with obvious reserve.  The rain clearing off, they set
forth westward, deeper into the heart of the enemies' position.  Three or
four young men ran some way before them, doubtless to give warning; and
Leary, with his indomitable taste for mischief, kept inquiring as he went
after "the high chief" Tamasese.  The line of the beach was one
continuous breastwork; some thirty odd iron cannon of all sizes and
patterns stood mounted in embrasures; plenty grape and canister lay
ready; and at every hundred yards or so the German flag was flying.  The
numbers of the guns and flags I give as I received them, though they test
my faith.  At the house of Brandeis--a little, weatherboard house,
crammed at the time with natives, men, women, and squalling
children--Leary and Moors again asked for "the high chief," and, were
again assured that he was farther on.  A little beyond, the road ran in
one place somewhat inland, the two Americans had gone down to the line of
the beach to continue their inspection of the breastwork, when Brandeis
himself, in his shirt-sleeves and accompanied by several German officers,
passed them by the line of the road.  The two parties saluted in silence.
Beyond Eva Point there was an observable change for the worse in the
reception of the Americans; some whom they met began to mutter at Moors;
and the adventurers, with tardy but commendable prudence, desisted from
their search after the high chief, and began to retrace their steps.  On
the return, Suatele and some chiefs were drinking kava in a "big house,"
and called them in to join--their only invitation.  But the night was
closing, the rain had begun again: they stayed but for civility, and
returned on board the _Adams_, wet and hungry, and I believe delighted
with their expedition.  It was perhaps the last as it was certainly one
of the most extreme examples of that divinity which once hedged the white
in Samoa.  The feeling was already different in the camp of Mataafa,
where the safety of a German loiterer had been a matter of extreme
concern.  Ten days later, three commissioners, an Englishman, an
American, and a German, approached a post of Mataafas, were challenged by
an old man with a gun, and mentioned in answer what they were.  "_Ifea
Siamani_?  Which is the German?" cried the old gentleman, dancing, and
with his finger on the trigger; and the commissioners stood somewhile in
a very anxious posture, till they were released by the opportune arrival
of a chief.  It was November the 27th when Leary and Moors completed
their absurd excursion; in about three weeks an event was to befall which
changed at once, and probably for ever, the relations of the natives and
the whites.

By the 28th Tamasese had collected seventeen hundred men in the trenches
before Saluafata, thinking to attack next day.  But the Mataafas
evacuated the place in the night.  At half-past five on the morning of
the 29th a signal-gun was fired in the trenches at Laulii, and the
Tamasese citadel was assaulted and defended with a fury new among
Samoans.  When the battle ended on the following day, one or more
outworks remained in the possession of Mataafa.  Another had been taken
and lost as many as four times.  Carried originally by a mixed force from
Savaii and Tuamasanga, the victors, instead of completing fresh defences
or pursuing their advantage, fell to eat and smoke and celebrate their
victory with impromptu songs.  In this humour a rally of the Tamaseses
smote them, drove them out pell-mell, and tumbled them into the ravine,
where many broke their heads and legs.  Again the work was taken, again
lost.  Ammunition failed the belligerents; and they fought hand to hand
in the contested fort with axes, clubs, and clubbed rifles.  The
sustained ardour of the engagement surprised even those who were engaged;
and the butcher's bill was counted extraordinary by Samoans.  On December
1st the women of either side collected the headless bodies of the dead,
each easily identified by the name tattooed on his forearm.  Mataafa is
thought to have lost sixty killed; and the de Coetlogons' hospital
received three women and forty men.  The casualties on the Tamasese side
cannot be accepted, but they were presumably much less.




CHAPTER VIII--AFFAIRS OF LAULII AND FANGALII


_November-December_ 1888

For Becker I have not been able to conceal my distaste, for he seems to
me both false and foolish.  But of his successor, the unfortunately
famous Dr. Knappe, we may think as of a good enough fellow driven
distraught.  Fond of Samoa and the Samoans, he thought to bring peace and
enjoy popularity among the islanders; of a genial, amiable, and sanguine
temper, he made no doubt but he could repair the breach with the English
consul.  Hope told a flattering tale.  He awoke to find himself
exchanging defiances with de Coetlogon, beaten in the field by Mataafa,
surrounded on the spot by general exasperation, and disowned from home by
his own government.  The history of his administration leaves on the mind
of the student a sentiment of pity scarcely mingled.

On Blacklock he did not call, and, in view of Leary's attitude, may be
excused.  But the English consul was in a different category.  England,
weary of the name of Samoa, and desirous only to see peace established,
was prepared to wink hard during the process and to welcome the result of
any German settlement.  It was an unpardonable fault in Becker to have
kicked and buffeted his ready-made allies into a state of jealousy,
anger, and suspicion.  Knappe set himself at once to efface these
impressions, and the English officials rejoiced for the moment in the
change.  Between Knappe and de Coetlogon there seems to have been mutual
sympathy; and, in considering the steps by which they were led at last
into an attitude of mutual defiance, it must be remembered that both the
men were sick,--Knappe from time to time prostrated with that formidable
complaint, New Guinea fever, and de Coetlogon throughout his whole stay
in the islands continually ailing.

Tamasese was still to be recognised, and, if possible, supported: such
was the German policy.  Two days after his arrival, accordingly, Knappe
addressed to Mataafa a threatening despatch.  The German plantation was
suffering from the proximity of his "war-party."  He must withdraw from
Laulii at once, and, whithersoever he went, he must approach no German
property nor so much as any village where there was a German trader.  By
five o'clock on the morrow, if he were not gone, Knappe would turn upon
him "the attention of the man-of-war" and inflict a fine.  The same
evening, November 14th, Knappe went on board the _Adler_, which began to
get up steam.

Three months before, such direct intervention on the part of Germany
would have passed almost without protest; but the hour was now gone by.
Becker's conduct, equally timid and rash, equally inconclusive and
offensive, had forced the other nations into a strong feeling of common
interest with Mataafa.  Even had the German demands been moderate, de
Coetlogon could not have forgotten the night of the _taumualua_, nor how
Mataafa had relinquished, at his request, the attack upon the German
quarter.  Blacklock, with his driver of a captain at his elbow, was not
likely to lag behind.  And Mataafa having communicated Knappe's letter,
the example of the Germans was on all hands exactly followed; the consuls
hastened on board their respective war-ships, and these began to get up
steam.  About midnight, in a pouring rain, Pelly communicated to Fritze
his intention to follow him and protect British interests; and Knappe
replied that he would come on board the _Lizard_ and see de Coetlogon
personally.  It was deep in the small hours, and de Coetlogon had been
long asleep, when he was wakened to receive his colleague; but he started
up with an old soldier's readiness.  The conference was long.  De
Coetlogon protested, as he did afterwards in writing, against Knappe's
claim: the Samoans were in a state of war; they had territorial rights;
it was monstrous to prevent them from entering one of their own villages
because a German trader kept the store; and in case property suffered, a
claim for compensation was the proper remedy.  Knappe argued that this
was a question between Germans and Samoans, in which de Coetlogon had
nothing to see; and that he must protect German property according to his
instructions.  To which de Coetlogon replied that he was himself in the
same attitude to the property of the British; that he understood Knappe
to be intending hostilities against Laulii; that Laulii was mortgaged to
the MacArthurs; that its crops were accordingly British property; and
that, while he was ever willing to recognise the territorial rights of
the Samoans, he must prevent that property from being molested "by any
other nation."  "But if a German man-of-war does it?" asked Knappe.--"We
shall prevent it to the best of our ability," replied the colonel.  It is
to the credit of both men that this trying interview should have been
conducted and concluded without heat; but Knappe must have returned to
the _Adler_ with darker anticipations.

At sunrise on the morning of the 15th, the three ships, each loaded with
its consul, put to sea.  It is hard to exaggerate the peril of the
forenoon that followed, as they lay off Laulii.  Nobody desired a
collision, save perhaps the reckless Leary; but peace and war trembled in
the balance; and when the _Adler_, at one period, lowered her gun ports,
war appeared to preponderate.  It proved, however, to be a last--and
therefore surely an unwise--extremity.  Knappe contented himself with
visiting the rival kings, and the three ships returned to Apia before
noon.  Beyond a doubt, coming after Knappe's decisive letter of the day
before, this impotent conclusion shook the credit of Germany among the
natives of both sides; the Tamaseses fearing they were deserted, the
Mataafas (with secret delight) hoping they were feared.  And it gave an
impetus to that ridiculous business which might have earned for the whole
episode the name of the war of flags.  British and American flags had
been planted the night before, and were seen that morning flying over
what they claimed about Laulii.  British and American passengers, on the
way up and down, pointed out from the decks of the war-ships, with
generous vagueness, the boundaries of problematical estates.  Ten days
later, the beach of Saluafata bay fluttered (as I have told in the last
chapter) with the flag of Germany.  The Americans riposted with a claim
to Tamasese's camp, some small part of which (says Knappe) did really
belong to "an American nigger."  The disease spread, the flags were
multiplied, the operations of war became an egg-dance among miniature
neutral territories; and though all men took a hand in these proceedings,
all men in turn were struck with their absurdity.  Mullan, Leary's
successor, warned Knappe, in an emphatic despatch, not to squander and
discredit the solemnity of that emblem which was all he had to be a
defence to his own consulate.  And Knappe himself, in his despatch of
March 21st, 1889, castigates the practice with much sense.  But this was
after the tragicomic culmination had been reached, and the burnt rags of
one of these too-frequently mendacious signals gone on a progress to
Washington, like Caesar's body, arousing indignation where it came.  To
such results are nations conducted by the patent artifices of a Becker.

The discussion of the morning, the silent menace and defiance of the
voyage to Laulii, might have set the best-natured by the ears.  But
Knappe and de Coetlogon took their difference in excellent part.  On the
morrow, November 16th, they sat down together with Blacklock in
conference.  The English consul introduced his colleagues, who shook
hands.  If Knappe were dead-weighted with the inheritance of Becker,
Blacklock was handicapped by reminiscences of Leary; it is the more to
the credit of this inexperienced man that he should have maintained in
the future so excellent an attitude of firmness and moderation, and that
when the crash came, Knappe and de Coetlogon, not Knappe and Blacklock,
were found to be the protagonists of the drama.  The conference was
futile.  The English and American consuls admitted but one cure of the
evils of the time: that the farce of the Tamasese monarchy should cease.
It was one which the German refused to consider.  And the agents
separated without reaching any result, save that diplomatic relations had
been restored between the States and Germany, and that all three were
convinced of their fundamental differences.

Knappe and de Coetlogon were still friends; they had disputed and
differed and come within a finger's breadth of war, and they were still
friends.  But an event was at hand which was to separate them for ever.
On December 4th came the _Royalist_, Captain Hand, to relieve the
_Lizard_.  Pelly of course had to take his canvas from the consulate
hospital; but he had in charge certain awnings belonging to the
_Royalist_, and with these they made shift to cover the wounded, at that
time (after the fight at Laulii) more than usually numerous.  A
lieutenant came to the consulate, and delivered (as I have received it)
the following message: "Captain Hand's compliments, and he says you must
get rid of these niggers at once, and he will help you to do it."
Doubtless the reply was no more civil than the message.  The promised
"help," at least, followed promptly.  A boat's crew landed and the
awnings were stripped from the wounded, Hand himself standing on the
colonel's verandah to direct operations.  It were fruitless to discuss
this passage from the humanitarian point of view, or from that of formal
courtesy.  The mind of the new captain was plainly not directed to these
objects.  But it is understood that he considered the existence of a
hospital a source of irritation to Germans and a fault in policy.  His
own rude act proved in the result far more impolitic.  The hospital had
now been open some two months, and de Coetlogon was still on friendly
terms with Knappe, and he and his wife were engaged to dine with him that
day.  By the morrow that was practically ended.  For the rape of the
awnings had two results: one, which was the fault of de Coetlogon, not at
all of Hand, who could not have foreseen it; the other which it was his
duty to have seen and prevented.  The first was this: the de Coetlogons
found themselves left with their wounded exposed to the inclemencies of
the season; they must all be transported into the house and verandah; in
the distress and pressure of this task, the dinner engagement was too
long forgotten; and a note of excuse did not reach the German consulate
before the table was set, and Knappe dressed to receive his visitors.  The
second consequence was inevitable.  Captain Hand was scarce landed ere it
became public (was "_sofort bekannt_," writes Knappe) that he and the
consul were in opposition.  All that had been gained by the demonstration
at Laulii was thus immediately cast away; de Coetlogon's prestige was
lessened; and it must be said plainly that Hand did less than nothing to
restore it.  Twice indeed he interfered, both times with success; and
once, when his own person had been endangered, with vehemence; but during
all the strange doings I have to narrate, he remained in close intimacy
with the German consulate, and on one occasion may be said to have acted
as its marshal.  After the worst is over, after Bismarck has told Knappe
that "the protests of his English colleague were grounded," that his own
conduct "has not been good," and that in any dispute which may arise he
"will find himself in the wrong," Knappe can still plead in his defence
that Captain Hand "has always maintained friendly intercourse with the
German authorities."  Singular epitaph for an English sailor.  In this
complicity on the part of Hand we may find the reason--and I had almost
said, the excuse--of much that was excessive in the bearing of the
unfortunate Knappe.

On the 11th December, Mataafa received twenty-eight thousand cartridges,
brought into the country in salt-beef kegs by the British ship
_Richmond_.  This not only sharpened the animosity between whites;
following so closely on the German fizzle at Laulii, it raised a
convulsion in the camp of Tamasese.  On the 13th Brandeis addressed to
Knappe his famous and fatal letter.  I may not describe it as a letter of
burning words, but it is plainly dictated by a burning heart.  Tamasese
and his chiefs, he announces, are now sick of the business, and ready to
make peace with Mataafa.  They began the war relying upon German help;
they now see and say that "_e faaalo Siamani i Peritania ma America_,
that Germany is subservient to England and the States."  It is grimly
given to be understood that the despatch is an ultimatum, and a last
chance is being offered for the recreant ally to fulfil her pledge.  To
make it more plain, the document goes on with a kind of bilious irony:
"The two German war-ships now in Samoa are here for the protection of
German property alone; and when the _Olga_ shall have arrived" [she
arrived on the morrow] "the German war-ships will continue to do against
the insurgents precisely as little as they have done heretofore."  Plant
flags, in fact.

Here was Knappe's opportunity, could he have stooped to seize it.  I find
it difficult to blame him that he could not.  Far from being so
inglorious as the treachery once contemplated by Becker, the acceptance
of this ultimatum would have been still in the nature of a disgrace.
Brandeis's letter, written by a German, was hard to swallow.  It would
have been hard to accept that solution which Knappe had so recently and
so peremptorily refused to his brother consuls.  And he was tempted, on
the other hand, by recent changes.  There was no Pelly to support de
Coetlogon, who might now be disregarded.  Mullan, Leary's successor, even
if he were not precisely a Hand, was at least no Leary; and even if
Mullan should show fight, Knappe had now three ships and could defy or
sink him without danger.  Many small circumstances moved him in the same
direction.  The looting of German plantations continued; the whole force
of Mataafa was to a large extent subsisted from the crops of Vailele; and
armed men were to be seen openly plundering bananas, breadfruit, and
cocoa-nuts under the walls of the plantation building.  On the night of
the 13th the consulate stable had been broken into and a horse removed.
On the 16th there was a riot in Apia between half-castes and sailors from
the new ship _Olga_, each side claiming that the other was the worse of
drink, both (for a wager) justly.  The multiplication of flags and little
neutral territories had, besides, begun to irritate the Samoans.  The
protests of German settlers had been received uncivilly.  On the 16th the
Mataafas had again sought to land in Saluafata bay, with the manifest
intention to attack the Tamaseses, or (in other words) "to trespass on
German lands, covered, as your Excellency knows, with flags."  I quote
from his requisition to Fritze, December 17th.  Upon all these
considerations, he goes on, it is necessary to bring the fighting to an
end.  Both parties are to be disarmed and returned to their
villages--Mataafa first.  And in case of any attempt upon Apia, the roads
thither are to be held by a strong landing-party.  Mataafa was to be
disarmed first, perhaps rightly enough in his character of the last
insurgent.  Then was to have come the turn of Tamasese; but it does not
appear the disarming would have had the same import or have been gone
about in the same way.  Germany was bound to Tamasese.  No honest man
would dream of blaming Knappe because he sought to redeem his country's
word.  The path he chose was doubtless that of honour, so far as honour
was still left.  But it proved to be the road to ruin.

Fritze, ranking German officer, is understood to have opposed the
measure.  His attitude earned him at the time unpopularity among his
country-people on the spot, and should now redound to his credit.  It is
to be hoped he extended his opposition to some of the details.  If it
were possible to disarm Mataafa at all, it must be done rather by
prestige than force.  A party of blue-jackets landed in Samoan bush, and
expected to hold against Samoans a multiplicity of forest paths, had
their work cut out for them.  And it was plain they should be landed in
the light of day, with a discouraging openness, and even with parade.  To
sneak ashore by night was to increase the danger of resistance and to
minimise the authority of the attack.  The thing was a bluff, and it is
impossible to bluff with stealth.  Yet this was what was tried.  A
landing-party was to leave the _Olga_ in Apia bay at two in the morning;
the landing was to be at four on two parts of the foreshore of Vailele.
At eight they were to be joined by a second landing-party from the
_Eber_.  By nine the Olgas were to be on the crest of Letongo Mountain,
and the Ebers to be moving round the promontory by the seaward paths,
"with measures of precaution," disarming all whom they encountered.  There
was to be no firing unless fired upon.  At the appointed hour (or perhaps
later) on the morning of the 19th, this unpromising business was put in
hand, and there moved off from the _Olga_ two boats with some fifty blue-
jackets between them, and a _praam_ or punt containing ninety,--the boats
and the whole expedition under the command of Captain-Lieutenant Jaeckel,
the praam under Lieutenant Spengler.  The men had each forty rounds, one
day's provisions, and their flasks filled.

In the meanwhile, Mataafa sympathisers about Apia were on the alert.
Knappe had informed the consuls that the ships were to put to sea next
day for the protection of German property; but the Tamaseses had been
less discreet.  "To-morrow at the hour of seven," they had cried to their
adversaries, "you will know of a difficulty, and our guns shall be made
good in broken bones."  An accident had pointed expectation towards Apia.
The wife of Le Mamea washed for the German ships--a perquisite, I
suppose, for her husband's unwilling fidelity.  She sent a man with linen
on board the _Adler_, where he was surprised to see Le Mamea in person,
and to be himself ordered instantly on shore.  The news spread.  If Mamea
were brought down from Lotoanuu, others might have come at the same time.
Tamasese himself and half his army might perhaps lie concealed on board
the German ships.  And a watch was accordingly set and warriors collected
along the line of the shore.  One detachment lay in some rifle-pits by
the mouth of the Fuisa.  They were commanded by Seumanu; and with his
party, probably as the most contiguous to Apia, was the
war-correspondent, John Klein.  Of English birth, but naturalised
American, this gentleman had been for some time representing the _New
York World_ in a very effective manner, always in the front, living in
the field with the Samoans, and in all vicissitudes of weather, toiling
to and fro with his despatches.  His wisdom was perhaps not equal to his
energy.  He made himself conspicuous, going about armed to the teeth in a
boat under the stars and stripes; and on one occasion, when he supposed
himself fired upon by the Tamaseses, had the petulance to empty his
revolver in the direction of their camp.  By the light of the moon, which
was then nearly down, this party observed the _Olga's_ two boats and the
praam, which they described as "almost sinking with men," the boats
keeping well out towards the reef, the praam at the moment apparently
heading for the shore.  An extreme agitation seems to have reigned in the
rifle-pits.  What were the newcomers?  What was their errand?  Were they
Germans or Tamaseses?  Had they a mind to attack?  The praam was hailed
in Samoan and did not answer.  It was proposed to fire upon her ere she
drew near.  And at last, whether on his own suggestion or that of
Seumanu, Klein hailed her in English, and in terms of unnecessary
melodrama.  "Do not try to land here," he cried.  "If you do, your blood
will be upon your head."  Spengler, who had never the least intention to
touch at the Fuisa, put up the head of the praam to her true course and
continued to move up the lagoon with an offing of some seventy or eighty
yards.  Along all the irregularities and obstructions of the beach,
across the mouth of the Vaivasa, and through the startled village of
Matafangatele, Seumanu, Klein, and seven or eight others raced to keep
up, spreading the alarm and rousing reinforcements as they went.
Presently a man on horse-back made his appearance on the opposite beach
of Fangalii.  Klein and the natives distinctly saw him signal with a
lantern; which is the more strange, as the horseman (Captain Hufnagel,
plantation manager of Vailele) had never a lantern to signal with.  The
praam kept in.  Many men in white were seen to stand up, step overboard,
and wade to shore.  At the same time the eye of panic descried a
breastwork of "foreign stone" (brick) upon the beach.  Samoans are
prepared to-day to swear to its existence, I believe conscientiously,
although no such thing was ever made or ever intended in that place.  The
hour is doubtful.  "It was the hour when the streak of dawn is seen, the
hour known in the warfare of heathen times as the hour of the night
attack," says the Mataafa official account.  A native whom I met on the
field declared it was at cock-crow.  Captain Hufnagel, on the other hand,
is sure it was long before the day.  It was dark at least, and the moon
down.  Darkness made the Samoans bold; uncertainty as to the composition
and purpose of the landing-party made them desperate.  Fire was opened on
the Germans, one of whom was here killed.  The Germans returned it, and
effected a lodgment on the beach; and the skirmish died again to silence.
It was at this time, if not earlier, that Klein returned to Apia.

Here, then, were Spengler and the ninety men of the praam, landed on the
beach in no very enviable posture, the woods in front filled with
unnumbered enemies, but for the time successful.  Meanwhile, Jaeckel and
the boats had gone outside the reef, and were to land on the other side
of the Vailele promontory, at Sunga, by the buildings of the plantation.
It was Hufnagel's part to go and meet them.  His way led straight into
the woods and through the midst of the Samoans, who had but now ceased
firing.  He went in the saddle and at a foot's pace, feeling speed and
concealment to be equally helpless, and that if he were to fall at all,
he had best fall with dignity.  Not a shot was fired at him; no effort
made to arrest him on his errand.  As he went, he spoke and even jested
with the Samoans, and they answered in good part.  One fellow was
leaping, yelling, and tossing his axe in the air, after the way of an
excited islander.  "_Faimalosi_! go it!" said Hufnagel, and the fellow
laughed and redoubled his exertions.  As soon as the boats entered the
lagoon, fire was again opened from the woods.  The fifty blue-jackets
jumped overboard, hove down the boats to be a shield, and dragged them
towards the landing-place.  In this way, their rations, and (what was
more unfortunate) some of their miserable provision of forty rounds got
wetted; but the men came to shore and garrisoned the plantation house
without a casualty.  Meanwhile the sound of the firing from Sunga
immediately renewed the hostilities at Fangalii.  The civilians on shore
decided that Spengler must be at once guided to the house, and Haideln,
the surveyor, accepted the dangerous errand.  Like Hufnagel, he was
suffered to pass without question through the midst of these platonic
enemies.  He found Spengler some way inland on a knoll, disastrously
engaged, the woods around him filled with Samoans, who were continuously
reinforced.  In three successive charges, cheering as they ran, the blue-
jackets burst through their scattered opponents, and made good their
junction with Jaeckel.  Four men only remained upon the field, the other
wounded being helped by their comrades or dragging themselves painfully
along.

The force was now concentrated in the house and its immediate patch of
garden.  Their rear, to the seaward, was unmolested; but on three sides
they were beleaguered.  On the left, the Samoans occupied and fired from
some of the plantation offices.  In front, a long rising crest of land in
the horse-pasture commanded the house, and was lined with the assailants.
And on the right, the hedge of the same paddock afforded them a dangerous
cover.  It was in this place that a Samoan sharpshooter was knocked over
by Jaeckel with his own hand.  The fire was maintained by the Samoans in
the usual wasteful style.  The roof was made a sieve; the balls passed
clean through the house; Lieutenant Sieger, as he lay, already dying, on
Hufnagel's bed, was despatched with a fresh wound.  The Samoans showed
themselves extremely enterprising: pushed their lines forward, ventured
beyond cover, and continually threatened to envelop the garden.  Thrice,
at least, it was necessary to repel them by a sally.  The men were
brought into the house from the rear, the front doors were thrown
suddenly open, and the gallant blue-jackets issued cheering: necessary,
successful, but extremely costly sorties.  Neither could these be pushed
far.  The foes were undaunted; so soon as the sailors advanced at all
deep in the horse-pasture, the Samoans began to close in upon both
flanks; and the sally had to be recalled.  To add to the dangers of the
German situation, ammunition began to run low; and the cartridge-boxes of
the wounded and the dead had been already brought into use before, at
about eight o'clock, the _Eber_ steamed into the bay.  Her commander,
Wallis, threw some shells into Letongo, one of which killed five men
about their cooking-pot.  The Samoans began immediately to withdraw;
their movements were hastened by a sortie, and the remains of the landing-
party brought on board.  This was an unfortunate movement; it gave an
irremediable air of defeat to what might have been else claimed for a
moderate success.  The blue-jackets numbered a hundred and forty all
told; they were engaged separately and fought under the worst conditions,
in the dark and among woods; their position in the house was scarce
tenable; they lost in killed and wounded fifty-six,--forty per cent.; and
their spirit to the end was above question.  Whether we think of the poor
sailor lads, always so pleasantly behaved in times of peace, or whether
we call to mind the behaviour of the two civilians, Haideln and Hufnagel,
we can only regret that brave men should stand to be exposed upon so poor
a quarrel, or lives cast away upon an enterprise so hopeless.

News of the affair reached Apia early, and Moors, always curious of these
spectacles of war, was immediately in the saddle.  Near Matafangatele he
met a Manono chief, whom he asked if there were any German dead.  "I
think there are about thirty of them knocked over," said he.  "Have you
taken their heads?" asked Moors.  "Yes," said the chief.  "Some foolish
people did it, but I have stopped them.  We ought not to cut off their
heads when they do not cut off ours."  He was asked what had been done
with the heads.  "Two have gone to Mataafa," he replied, "and one is
buried right under where your horse is standing, in a basket wrapped in
tapa."  This was afterwards dug up, and I am told on native authority
that, besides the three heads, two ears were taken.  Moors next asked the
Manono man how he came to be going away.  "The man-of-war is throwing
shells," said he.  "When they stopped firing out of the house, we stopped
firing also; so it was as well to scatter when the shells began.  We
could have killed all the white men.  I wish they had been Tamaseses."
This is an _ex parte_ statement, and I give it for such; but the course
of the affair, and in particular the adventures of Haideln and Hufnagel,
testify to a surprising lack of animosity against the Germans.  About the
same time or but a little earlier than this conversation, the same spirit
was being displayed.  Hufnagel, with a party of labour, had gone out to
bring in the German dead, when he was surprised to be suddenly fired on
from the wood.  The boys he had with him were not negritos, but
Polynesians from the Gilbert Islands; and he suddenly remembered that
these might be easily mistaken for a detachment of Tamaseses.  Bidding
his boys conceal themselves in a thicket, this brave man walked into the
open.  So soon as he was recognised, the firing ceased, and the labourers
followed him in safety.  This is chivalrous war; but there was a side to
it less chivalrous.  As Moors drew nearer to Vailele, he began to meet
Samoans with hats, guns, and even shirts, taken from the German sailors.
With one of these who had a hat and a gun he stopped and spoke.  The hat
was handed up for him to look at; it had the late owner's name on the
inside.  "Where is he?" asked Moors.  "He is dead; I cut his head off."
"You shot him?"  "No, somebody else shot him in the hip.  When I came, he
put up his hands, and cried: 'Don't kill me; I am a Malietoa man.'  I did
not believe him, and I cut his head off...... Have you any ammunition to
fit that gun?"  "I do not know."  "What has become of the
cartridge-belt?"  "Another fellow grabbed that and the cartridges, and he
won't give them to me."  A dreadful and silly picture of barbaric war.
The words of the German sailor must be regarded as imaginary: how was the
poor lad to speak native, or the Samoan to understand German?  When Moors
came as far as Sunga, the _Eber_ was yet in the bay, the smoke of battle
still lingered among the trees, which were themselves marked with a
thousand bullet-wounds.  But the affair was over, the combatants, German
and Samoan, were all gone, and only a couple of negrito labour boys
lurked on the scene.  The village of Letongo beyond was equally silent;
part of it was wrecked by the shells of the _Eber_, and still smoked; the
inhabitants had fled.  On the beach were the native boats, perhaps five
thousand dollars' worth, deserted by the Mataafas and overlooked by the
Germans, in their common hurry to escape.  Still Moors held eastward by
the sea-paths.  It was his hope to get a view from the other side of the
promontory, towards Laulii.  In the way he found a house hidden in the
wood and among rocks, where an aged and sick woman was being tended by
her elderly daughter.  Last lingerers in that deserted piece of coast,
they seemed indifferent to the events which had thus left them solitary,
and, as the daughter said, did not know where Mataafa was, nor where
Tamasese.

It is the official Samoan pretension that the Germans fired first at
Fangalii.  In view of all German and some native testimony, the text of
Fritze's orders, and the probabilities of the case, no honest mind will
believe it for a moment.  Certainly the Samoans fired first.  As
certainly they were betrayed into the engagement in the agitation of the
moment, and it was not till afterwards that they understood what they had
done.  Then, indeed, all Samoa drew a breath of wonder and delight.  The
invincible had fallen; the men of the vaunted war-ships had been met in
the field by the braves of Mataafa: a superstition was no more.  Conceive
this people steadily as schoolboys; and conceive the elation in any
school if the head boy should suddenly arise and drive the rector from
the schoolhouse.  I have received one instance of the feeling instantly
aroused.  There lay at the time in the consular hospital an old chief who
was a pet of the colonel's.  News reached him of the glorious event; he
was sick, he thought himself sinking, sent for the colonel, and gave him
his gun.  "Don't let the Germans get it," said the old gentleman, and
having received a promise, was at peace.




CHAPTER IX--"FUROR CONSULARIS"


_December_ 1888 _to March_ 1889

Knappe, in the _Adler_, with a flag of truce at the fore, was entering
Laulii Bay when the _Eber_ brought him the news of the night's reverse.
His heart was doubtless wrung for his young countrymen who had been
butchered and mutilated in the dark woods, or now lay suffering, and some
of them dying, on the ship.  And he must have been startled as he
recognised his own position.  He had gone too far; he had stumbled into
war, and, what was worse, into defeat; he had thrown away German lives
for less than nothing, and now saw himself condemned either to accept
defeat, or to kick and pummel his failure into something like success;
either to accept defeat, or take frenzy for a counsellor.  Yesterday, in
cold blood, he had judged it necessary to have the woods to the westward
guarded lest the evacuation of Laulii should prove only the peril of
Apia.  To-day, in the irritation and alarm of failure, he forgot or
despised his previous reasoning, and, though his detachment was beat back
to the ships, proceeded with the remainder of his maimed design.  The
only change he made was to haul down the flag of truce.  He had now no
wish to meet with Mataafa.  Words were out of season, shells must speak.

At this moment an incident befell him which must have been trying to his
self-command.  The new American ship _Nipsic_ entered Laulii Bay; her
commander, Mullan, boarded the _Adler_ to protest, succeeded in wresting
from Knappe a period of delay in order that the women might be spared,
and sent a lieutenant to Mataafa with a warning.  The camp was already
excited by the news and the trophies of Fangalii.  Already Tamasese and
Lotoanuu seemed secondary objectives to the Germans and Apia.  Mullan's
message put an end to hesitation.  Laulii was evacuated.  The troops
streamed westward by the mountain side, and took up the same day a strong
position about Tanungamanono and Mangiangi, some two miles behind Apia,
which they threatened with the one hand, while with the other they
continued to draw their supplies from the devoted plantations of the
German firm.  Laulii, when it was shelled, was empty.  The British flags
were, of course, fired upon; and I hear that one of them was struck down,
but I think every one must be privately of the mind that it was fired
upon and fell, in a place where it had little business to be shown.

Such was the military epilogue to the ill-judged adventure of Fangalii;
it was difficult for failure to be more complete.  But the other
consequences were of a darker colour and brought the whites immediately
face to face in a spirit of ill-favoured animosity.  Knappe was mourning
the defeat and death of his country-folk, he was standing aghast over the
ruin of his own career, when Mullan boarded him.  The successor of Leary
served himself, in that bitter moment, heir to Leary's part.  And in
Mullan, Knappe saw more even than the successor of Leary,--he saw in him
the representative of Klein.  Klein had hailed the praam from the rifle-
pits; he had there uttered ill-chosen words, unhappily prophetic; it is
even likely that he was present at the time of the first fire.  To accuse
him of the design and conduct of the whole attack was but a step forward;
his own vapouring served to corroborate the accusation; and it was not
long before the German consulate was in possession of sworn native
testimony in support.  The worth of native testimony is small, the worth
of white testimony not overwhelming; and I am in the painful position of
not being able to subscribe either to Klein's own account of the affair
or to that of his accusers.  Klein was extremely flurried; his interest
as a reporter must have tempted him at first to make the most of his
share in the exploit, the immediate peril in which he soon found himself
to stand must have at least suggested to him the idea of minimising it;
one way and another, he is not a good witness.  As for the natives, they
were no doubt cross-examined in that hall of terror, the German
consulate, where they might be trusted to lie like schoolboys, or (if the
reader prefer it) like Samoans.  By outside white testimony, it remains
established for me that Klein returned to Apia either before or
immediately after the first shots.  That he ever sought or was ever
allowed a share in the command may be denied peremptorily; but it is more
than likely that he expressed himself in an excited manner and with a
highly inflammatory effect upon his hearers.  He was, at least, severely
punished.  The Germans, enraged by his provocative behaviour and what
they thought to be his German birth, demanded him to be tried before
court-martial; he had to skulk inside the sentries of the American
consulate, to be smuggled on board a war-ship, and to be carried almost
by stealth out of the island; and what with the agitations of his mind,
and the results of a marsh fever contracted in the lines of Mataafa,
reached Honolulu a very proper object of commiseration.  Nor was Klein
the only accused: de Coetlogon was himself involved.  As the boats passed
Matautu, Knappe declares a signal was made from the British consulate.
Perhaps we should rather read "from its neighbourhood"; since, in the
general warding of the coast, the point of Matautu could scarce have been
neglected.  On the other hand, there is no doubt that the Samoans, in the
anxiety of that night of watching and fighting, crowded to the friendly
consul for advice.  Late in the night, the wounded Siteoni, lying on the
colonel's verandah, one corner of which had been blinded down that he
might sleep, heard the coming and going of bare feet and the voices of
eager consultation.  And long after, a man who had been discharged from
the colonel's employment took upon himself to swear an affidavit as to
the nature of the advice then given, and to carry the document to the
German consul.  It was an act of private revenge; it fell long out of
date in the good days of Dr. Stuebel, and had no result but to discredit
the gentleman who volunteered it.  Colonel de Coetlogon had his faults,
but they did not touch his honour; his bare word would always outweigh a
waggon-load of such denunciations; and he declares his behaviour on that
night to have been blameless.  The question was besides inquired into on
the spot by Sir John Thurston, and the colonel honourably acquitted.  But
during the weeks that were now to follow, Knappe believed the contrary;
he believed not only that Moors and others had supplied ammunition and
Klein commanded in the field, but that de Coetlogon had made the signal
of attack; that though his blue-jackets had bled and fallen against the
arms of Samoans, these were supplied, inspired, and marshalled by
Americans and English.

The legend was the more easily believed because it embraced and was
founded upon so much truth.  Germans lay dead, the German wounded groaned
in their cots; and the cartridges by which they fell had been sold by an
American and brought into the country in a British bottom.  Had the
transaction been entirely mercenary, it would already have been hard to
swallow; but it was notoriously not so.  British and Americans were
notoriously the partisans of Mataafa.  They rejoiced in the result of
Fangalii, and so far from seeking to conceal their rejoicing, paraded and
displayed it.  Calumny ran high.  Before the dead were buried, while the
wounded yet lay in pain and fever, cowardly accusations of cowardice were
levelled at the German blue-jackets.  It was said they had broken and run
before their enemies, and that they had huddled helpless like sheep in
the plantation house.  Small wonder if they had; small wonder had they
been utterly destroyed.  But the fact was heroically otherwise; and these
dastard calumnies cut to the blood.  They are not forgotten; perhaps they
will never be forgiven.

In the meanwhile, events were pressing towards a still more trenchant
opposition.  On the 20th, the three consuls met and parted without
agreement, Knappe announcing that he had lost men and must take the
matter in his own hands to avenge their death.  On the 21st the _Olga_
came before Matafangatele, ordered the delivery of all arms within the
hour, and at the end of that period, none being brought, shelled and
burned the village.  The shells fell for the most part innocuous; an
eyewitness saw children at play beside the flaming houses; not a soul was
injured; and the one noteworthy event was the mutilation of Captain
Hamilton's American flag.  In one sense an incident too small to be
chronicled, in another this was of historic interest and import.  These
rags of tattered bunting occasioned the display of a new sentiment in the
United States; and the republic of the West, hitherto so apathetic and
unwieldy, but already stung by German nonchalance, leaped to its feet for
the first time at the news of this fresh insult.  As though to make the
inefficiency of the war-ships more apparent, three shells were thrown
inland at Mangiangi; they flew high over the Mataafa camp, where the
natives could "hear them singing" as they flew, and fell behind in the
deep romantic valley of the Vaisingano.  Mataafa had been already
summoned on board the _Adler_; his life promised if he came, declared "in
danger" if he came not; and he had declined in silence the unattractive
invitation.  These fresh hostile acts showed him that the worst had come.
He was in strength, his force posted along the whole front of the
mountain behind Apia, Matautu occupied, the Siumu road lined up to the
houses of the town with warriors passionate for war.  The occasion was
unique, and there is no doubt that he designed to seize it.  The same day
of this bombardment, he sent word bidding all English and Americans wear
a black band upon their arm, so that his men should recognise and spare
them.  The hint was taken, and the band worn for a continuance of days.
To have refused would have been insane; but to consent was unhappily to
feed the resentment of the Germans by a fresh sign of intelligence with
their enemies, and to widen the breach between the races by a fresh and a
scarce pardonable mark of their division.  The same day again the Germans
repeated one of their earlier offences by firing on a boat within the
harbour.  Times were changed; they were now at war and in peril, the
rigour of military advantage might well be seized by them and pardoned by
others; but it so chanced that the bullets flew about the ears of Captain
Hand, and that commander is said to have been insatiable of apologies.
The affair, besides, had a deplorable effect on the inhabitants.  A black
band (they saw) might protect them from the Mataafas, not from
undiscriminating shots.  Panic ensued.  The war-ships were open to
receive the fugitives, and the gentlemen who had made merry over Fangalii
were seen to thrust each other from the wharves in their eagerness to
flee Apia.  I willingly drop the curtain on the shameful picture.

Meanwhile, on the German side of the bay, a more manly spirit was
exhibited in circumstances of alarming weakness.  The plantation managers
and overseers had all retreated to Matafele, only one (I understand)
remaining at his post.  The whole German colony was thus collected in one
spot, and could count and wonder at its scanty numbers.  Knappe declares
(to my surprise) that the war-ships could not spare him more than fifty
men a day.  The great extension of the German quarter, he goes on, did
not "allow a full occupation of the outer line"; hence they had shrunk
into the western end by the firm buildings, and the inhabitants were
warned to fall back on this position, in the case of an alert.  So that
he who had set forth, a day or so before, to disarm the Mataafas in the
open field, now found his resources scarce adequate to garrison the
buildings of the firm.  But Knappe seemed unteachable by fate.  It is
probable he thought he had

   "Already waded in so deep,
   Returning were as tedious as go o'er";

it is certain that he continued, on the scene of his defeat and in the
midst of his weakness, to bluster and menace like a conqueror.  Active
war, which he lacked the means of attempting, was continually threatened.
On the 22nd he sought the aid of his brother consuls to maintain the
neutral territory against Mataafa; and at the same time, as though
meditating instant deeds of prowess, refused to be bound by it himself.
This singular proposition was of course refused: Blacklock remarking that
he had no fear of the natives, if these were let alone; de Coetlogon
refusing in the circumstances to recognise any neutral territory at all.
In vain Knappe amended and baited his proposal with the offer of forty-
eight or ninety-six hours' notice, according as his objective should be
near or within the boundary of the _Eleele Sa_.  It was rejected; and he
learned that he must accept war with all its consequences--and not that
which he desired--war with the immunities of peace.

This monstrous exigence illustrates the man's frame of mind.  It has been
still further illuminated in the German white-book by printing alongside
of his despatches those of the unimpassioned Fritze.  On January 8th the
consulate was destroyed by fire.  Knappe says it was the work of
incendiaries, "without doubt"; Fritze admits that "everything seems to
show" it was an accident.  "Tamasese's people fit to bear arms," writes
Knappe, "are certainly for the moment equal to Mataafa's," though
restrained from battle by the lack of ammunition.  "As for Tamasese,"
says Fritze of the same date, "he is now but a phantom--_dient er nur als
Gespenst_.  His party, for practical purposes, is no longer large.  They
pretend ammunition to be lacking, but what they lack most is good-will.
Captain Brandeis, whose influence is now small, declares they can no
longer sustain a serious engagement, and is himself in the intention of
leaving Samoa by the _Lubeck_ of the 5th February."  And Knappe, in the
same despatch, confutes himself and confirms the testimony of his naval
colleague, by the admission that "the re-establishment of Tamasese's
government is, under present circumstances, not to be thought of."
Plainly, then, he was not so much seeking to deceive others, as he was
himself possessed; and we must regard the whole series of his acts and
despatches as the agitations of a fever.

The British steamer _Richmond_ returned to Apia, January 15th.  On the
last voyage she had brought the ammunition already so frequently referred
to; as a matter of fact, she was again bringing contraband of war.  It is
necessary to be explicit upon this, which served as spark to so great a
flame of scandal.  Knappe was justified in interfering; he would have
been worthy of all condemnation if he had neglected, in his posture of
semi-investment, a precaution so elementary; and the manner in which he
set about attempting it was conciliatory and almost timid.  He applied to
Captain Hand, and begged him to accept himself the duty of "controlling"
the discharge of the _Richmond's_ cargo.  Hand was unable to move without
his consul; and at night an armed boat from the Germans boarded,
searched, and kept possession of, the suspected ship.  The next day, as
by an after-thought, war and martial law were proclaimed for the Samoan
Islands, the introduction of contraband of war forbidden, and ships and
boats declared liable to search.  "All support of the rebels will be
punished by martial law," continued the proclamation, "no matter to what
nationality the person [_Thater_] may belong."

Hand, it has been seen, declined to act in the matter of the _Richmond_
without the concurrence of his consul; but I have found no evidence that
either Hand or Knappe communicated with de Coetlogon, with whom they were
both at daggers drawn.  First the seizure and next the proclamation seem
to have burst on the English consul from a clear sky; and he wrote on the
same day, throwing doubt on Knappe's authority to declare war.  Knappe
replied on the 20th that the Imperial German Government had been at war
as a matter of fact since December 19th, and that it was only for the
convenience of the subjects of other states that he had been empowered to
make a formal declaration.  "From that moment," he added, "martial law
prevails in Samoa."  De Coetlogon instantly retorted, declining martial
law for British subjects, and announcing a proclamation in that sense.
Instantly, again, came that astonishing document, Knappe's rejoinder,
without pause, without reflection--the pens screeching on the paper, the
messengers (you would think) running from consulate to consulate: "I have
had the honour to receive your Excellency's [_Hochwohlgeboren_] agreeable
communication of to-day.  Since, on the ground of received instructions,
martial law has been declared in Samoa, British subjects as well as
others fall under its application.  I warn you therefore to abstain from
such a proclamation as you announce in your letter.  It will be such a
piece of business as shall make yourself answerable under martial law.
Besides, your proclamation will be disregarded."  De Coetlogon of course
issued his proclamation at once, Knappe retorted with another, and night
closed on the first stage of this insane collision.  I hear the German
consul was on this day prostrated with fever; charity at least must
suppose him hardly answerable for his language.

Early on the 21st, Mr. Mansfield Gallien, a passing traveller, was seized
in his berth on board the _Richmond_, and carried, half-dressed, on board
a German war-ship.  His offence was, in the circumstances and after the
proclamation, substantial.  He had gone the day before, in the spirit of
a tourist to Mataafa's camp, had spoken with the king, and had even
recommended him an appeal to Sir George Grey.  Fritze, I gather, had been
long uneasy; this arrest on board a British ship fitted the measure.
Doubtless, as he had written long before, the consul alone was
responsible "on the legal side"; but the captain began to ask himself,
"What next?"--telegraphed direct home for instructions, "Is arrest of
foreigners on foreign vessels legal?"--and was ready, at a word from
Captain Hand, to discharge his dangerous prisoner.  The word in question
(so the story goes) was not without a kind of wit.  "I wish you would set
that man ashore," Hand is reported to have said, indicating Gallien; "I
wish you would set that man ashore, to save me the trouble."  The same
day de Coetlogon published a proclamation requesting captains to submit
to search for contraband of war.

On the 22nd the _Samoa Times and South Sea Advertiser_ was suppressed by
order of Fritze.  I have hitherto refrained from mentioning the single
paper of our islands, that I might deal with it once for all.  It is of
course a tiny sheet; but I have often had occasion to wonder at the
ability of its articles, and almost always at the decency of its tone.
Officials may at times be a little roughly, and at times a little
captiously, criticised; private persons are habitually respected; and
there are many papers in England, and still more in the States, even of
leading organs in chief cities, that might envy, and would do well to
imitate, the courtesy and discretion of the _Samoa Times_.  Yet the
editor, Cusack, is only an amateur in journalism, and a carpenter by
trade.  His chief fault is one perhaps inevitable in so small a
place--that he seems a little in the leading of a clique; but his
interest in the public weal is genuine and generous.  One man's meat is
another man's poison: Anglo-Saxons and Germans have been differently
brought up. To our galled experience the paper appears moderate; to their
untried sensations it seems violent.  We think a public man fair game; we
think it a part of his duty, and I am told he finds it a part of his
reward, to be continually canvassed by the press.  For the Germans, on
the other hand, an official wears a certain sacredness; when he is called
over the coals, they are shocked, and (if the official be a German) feel
that Germany itself has been insulted.  The _Samoa Times_ had been long a
mountain of offence.  Brandeis had imported from the colonies another
printer of the name of Jones, to deprive Cusack of the government
printing.  German sailors had come ashore one day, wild with offended
patriotism, to punish the editor with stripes, and the result was
delightfully amusing.  The champions asked for the English printer.  They
were shown the wrong man, and the blows intended for Cusack had hailed on
the shoulders of his rival Jones.  On the 12th, Cusack had reprinted an
article from a San Francisco paper; the Germans had complained; and de
Coetlogon, in a moment of weakness, had fined the editor twenty pounds.
The judgment was afterwards reversed in Fiji; but even at the time it had
not satisfied the Germans.  And so now, on the third day of martial law,
the paper was suppressed.  Here we have another of these international
obscurities.  To Fritze the step seemed natural and obvious; for Anglo-
Saxons it was a hand laid upon the altar; and the month was scarce out
before the voice of Senator Frye announced to his colleagues that free
speech had been suppressed in Samoa.

Perhaps we must seek some similar explanation for Fritze's short-lived
code, published and withdrawn the next day, the 23rd.  Fritze himself was
in no humour for extremities.  He was much in the position of a
lieutenant who should perceive his captain urging the ship upon the
rocks.  It is plain he had lost all confidence in his commanding officer
"upon the legal side"; and we find him writing home with anxious candour.
He had understood that martial law implied military possession; he was in
military possession of nothing but his ship, and shrewdly suspected that
his martial jurisdiction should be confined within the same limits.  "As
a matter of fact," he writes, "we do not occupy the territory, and cannot
give foreigners the necessary protection, because Mataafa and his people
can at any moment forcibly interrupt me in my jurisdiction."  Yet in the
eyes of Anglo-Saxons the severity of his code appeared burlesque.  I give
but three of its provisions.  The crime of inciting German troops "by any
means, as, for instance, informing them of proclamations by the enemy,"
was punishable with death; that of "publishing or secretly distributing
anything, whether printed or written, bearing on the war," with prison or
deportation; and that of calling or attending a public meeting, unless
permitted, with the same.  Such were the tender mercies of Knappe,
lurking in the western end of the German quarter, where Mataafa could "at
any moment" interrupt his jurisdiction.

On the 22nd (day of the suppression of the _Times_) de Coetlogon wrote to
inquire if hostilities were intended against Great Britain, which Knappe
on the same day denied.  On the 23rd de Coetlogon sent a complaint of
hostile acts, such as the armed and forcible entry of the _Richmond_
before the declaration and arrest of Gallien.  In his reply, dated the
24th, Knappe took occasion to repeat, although now with more
self-command, his former threat against de Coetlogon.  "I am still of the
opinion," he writes, "that even foreign consuls are liable to the
application of martial law, if they are guilty of offences against the
belligerent state."  The same day (24th) de Coetlogon complained that
Fletcher, manager for Messrs. MacArthur, had been summoned by Fritze.  In
answer, Knappe had "the honour to inform your Excellency that since the
declaration of the state of war, British subjects are liable to martial
law, and Mr. Fletcher will be arrested if he does not appear."  Here,
then, was the gauntlet thrown down, and de Coetlogon was burning to
accept it.  Fletcher's offence was this.  Upon the 22nd a steamer had
come in from Wellington, specially chartered to bring German despatches
to Apia.  The rumour came along with her from New Zealand that in these
despatches Knappe would find himself rebuked, and Fletcher was accused of
having "interested himself in the spreading of this rumour."  His arrest
was actually ordered, when Hand succeeded in persuading him to surrender.
At the German court, the case was dismissed "_wegen Nichtigkeit_"; and
the acute stage of these distempers may be said to have ended.  Blessed
are the peacemakers.  Hand had perhaps averted a collision.  What is more
certain, he had offered to the world a perfectly original reading of the
part of British seaman.

Hand may have averted a collision, I say; but I am tempted to believe
otherwise.  I am tempted to believe the threat to arrest Fletcher was the
last mutter of the declining tempest and a mere sop to Knappe's
self-respect.  I am tempted to believe the rumour in question was
substantially correct, and the steamer from Wellington had really brought
the German consul grounds for hesitation, if not orders to retreat.  I
believe the unhappy man to have awakened from a dream, and to have read
ominous writing on the wall.  An enthusiastic popularity surrounded him
among the Germans.  It was natural.  Consul and colony had passed through
an hour of serious peril, and the consul had set the example of undaunted
courage.  He was entertained at dinner.  Fritze, who was known to have
secretly opposed him, was scorned and avoided.  But the clerks of the
German firm were one thing, Prince Bismarck was another; and on a cold
review of these events, it is not improbable that Knappe may have envied
the position of his naval colleague.  It is certain, at least, that he
set himself to shuffle and capitulate; and when the blow fell, he was
able to reply that the martial law business had in the meanwhile come
right; that the English and American consular courts stood open for
ordinary cases and that in different conversations with Captain Hand,
"who has always maintained friendly intercourse with the German
authorities," it had been repeatedly explained that only the supply of
weapons and ammunition, or similar aid and support, was to come under
German martial law.  Was it weapons or ammunition that Fletcher had
supplied?  But it is unfair to criticise these wrigglings of an
unfortunate in a false position.

In a despatch of the 23rd, which has not been printed, Knappe had told
his story: how he had declared war, subjected foreigners to martial law,
and been received with a counter-proclamation by the English consul; and
how (in an interview with Mataafa chiefs at the plantation house of
Motuotua, of which I cannot find the date) he had demanded the cession of
arms and of ringleaders for punishment, and proposed to assume the
government of the islands.  On February 12th he received Bismarck's
answer: "You had no right to take foreigners from the jurisdiction of
their consuls.  The protest of your English colleague is grounded.  In
disputes which may arise from this cause you will find yourself in the
wrong.  The demand formulated by you, as to the assumption of the
government of Samoa by Germany, lay outside of your instructions and of
our design.  Take it immediately back.  If your telegram is here rightly
understood, I cannot call your conduct good."  It must be a hard heart
that does not sympathise with Knappe in the hour when he received this
document.  Yet it may be said that his troubles were still in the
beginning.  Men had contended against him, and he had not prevailed; he
was now to be at war with the elements, and find his name identified with
an immense disaster.

One more date, however, must be given first.  It was on February 27th
that Fritze formally announced martial law to be suspended, and himself
to have relinquished the control of the police.




CHAPTER X--THE HURRICANE


_March_ 1889

The so-called harbour of Apia is formed in part by a recess of the coast-
line at Matautu, in part by the slim peninsula of Mulinuu, and in part by
the fresh waters of the Mulivai and Vaisingano.  The barrier reef--that
singular breakwater that makes so much of the circuit of Pacific
islands--is carried far to sea at Matautu and Mulinuu; inside of these
two horns it runs sharply landward, and between them it is burst or
dissolved by the fresh water.  The shape of the enclosed anchorage may be
compared to a high-shouldered jar or bottle with a funnel mouth.  Its
sides are almost everywhere of coral; for the reef not only bounds it to
seaward and forms the neck and mouth, but skirting about the beach, it
forms the bottom also.  As in the bottle of commerce, the bottom is re-
entrant, and the shore-reef runs prominently forth into the basin and
makes a dangerous cape opposite the fairway of the entrance.  Danger is,
therefore, on all hands.  The entrance gapes three cables wide at the
narrowest, and the formidable surf of the Pacific thunders both outside
and in.  There are days when speech is difficult in the chambers of shore-
side houses; days when no boat can land, and when men are broken by
stroke of sea against the wharves.  As I write these words, three miles
in the mountains, and with the land-breeze still blowing from the island
summit, the sound of that vexed harbour hums in my ears.  Such a creek in
my native coast of Scotland would scarce be dignified with the mark of an
anchor in the chart; but in the favoured climate of Samoa, and with the
mechanical regularity of the winds in the Pacific, it forms, for ten or
eleven months out of the twelve, a safe if hardly a commodious port.  The
ill-found island traders ride there with their insufficient moorings the
year through, and discharge, and are loaded, without apprehension.  Of
danger, when it comes, the glass gives timely warning; and that any
modern war-ship, furnished with the power of steam, should have been lost
in Apia, belongs not so much to nautical as to political history.

The weather throughout all that winter (the turbulent summer of the
islands) was unusually fine, and the circumstance had been commented on
as providential, when so many Samoans were lying on their weapons in the
bush.  By February it began to break in occasional gales.  On February
10th a German brigantine was driven ashore.  On the 14th the same
misfortune befell an American brigantine and a schooner.  On both these
days, and again on the 7th March, the men-of-war must steam to their
anchors.  And it was in this last month, the most dangerous of the
twelve, that man's animosities crowded that indentation of the reef with
costly, populous, and vulnerable ships.

I have shown, perhaps already at too great a length, how violently
passion ran upon the spot; how high this series of blunders and mishaps
had heated the resentment of the Germans against all other nationalities
and of all other nationalities against the Germans.  But there was one
country beyond the borders of Samoa where the question had aroused a
scarce less angry sentiment.  The breach of the Washington Congress, the
evidence of Sewall before a sub-committee on foreign relations, the
proposal to try Klein before a military court, and the rags of Captain
Hamilton's flag, had combined to stir the people of the States to an
unwonted fervour.  Germany was for the time the abhorred of nations.
Germans in America publicly disowned the country of their birth.  In
Honolulu, so near the scene of action, German and American young men fell
to blows in the street.  In the same city, from no traceable source, and
upon no possible authority, there arose a rumour of tragic news to arrive
by the next occasion, that the _Nipsic_ had opened fire on the _Adler_,
and the _Adler_ had sunk her on the first reply.  Punctually on the day
appointed, the news came; and the two nations, instead of being plunged
into war, could only mingle tears over the loss of heroes.

By the second week in March three American ships were in Apia bay,--the
_Nipsic_, the _Vandalia_, and the _Trenton_, carrying the flag of Rear-
Admiral Kimberley; three German,--the _Adler_, the _Eber_, and the
_Olga_; and one British,--the _Calliope_, Captain Kane.  Six merchant-
men, ranging from twenty-five up to five hundred tons, and a number of
small craft, further encumbered the anchorage.  Its capacity is estimated
by Captain Kane at four large ships; and the latest arrivals, the
_Vandalia_ and _Trenton_, were in consequence excluded, and lay without
in the passage.  Of the seven war-ships, the seaworthiness of two was
questionable: the _Trenton's_, from an original defect in her
construction, often reported, never remedied--her hawse-pipes leading in
on the berth-deck; the _Eber's_, from an injury to her screw in the blow
of February 14th.  In this overcrowding of ships in an open entry of the
reef, even the eye of the landsman could spy danger; and
Captain-Lieutenant Wallis of the _Eber_ openly blamed and lamented, not
many hours before the catastrophe, their helpless posture.  Temper once
more triumphed.  The army of Mataafa still hung imminent behind the town;
the German quarter was still daily garrisoned with fifty sailors from the
squadron; what was yet more influential, Germany and the States, at least
in Apia bay, were on the brink of war, viewed each other with looks of
hatred, and scarce observed the letter of civility.  On the day of the
admiral's arrival, Knappe failed to call on him, and on the morrow called
on him while he was on shore.  The slight was remarked and resented, and
the two squadrons clung more obstinately to their dangerous station.

On the 15th the barometer fell to 29.11 in. by 2 P.M.  This was the
moment when every sail in port should have escaped.  Kimberley, who flew
the only broad pennant, should certainly have led the way: he clung,
instead, to his moorings, and the Germans doggedly followed his example:
semi-belligerents, daring each other and the violence of heaven.  Kane,
less immediately involved, was led in error by the report of residents
and a fallacious rise in the glass; he stayed with the others, a
misjudgment that was like to cost him dear.  All were moored, as is the
custom in Apia, with two anchors practically east and west, clear hawse
to the north, and a kedge astern.  Topmasts were struck, and the ships
made snug.  The night closed black, with sheets of rain.  By midnight it
blew a gale; and by the morning watch, a tempest.  Through what remained
of darkness, the captains impatiently expected day, doubtful if they were
dragging, steaming gingerly to their moorings, and afraid to steam too
much.

Day came about six, and presented to those on shore a seizing and
terrific spectacle.  In the pressure of the squalls the bay was obscured
as if by midnight, but between them a great part of it was clearly if
darkly visible amid driving mist and rain.  The wind blew into the
harbour mouth.  Naval authorities describe it as of hurricane force.  It
had, however, few or none of the effects on shore suggested by that
ominous word, and was successfully withstood by trees and buildings.  The
agitation of the sea, on the other hand, surpassed experience and
description.  Seas that might have awakened surprise and terror in the
midst of the Atlantic ranged bodily and (it seemed to observers) almost
without diminution into the belly of that flask-shaped harbour; and the
war-ships were alternately buried from view in the trough, or seen
standing on end against the breast of billows.

The _Trenton_ at daylight still maintained her position in the neck of
the bottle.  But five of the remaining ships tossed, already close to the
bottom, in a perilous and helpless crowd; threatening ruin to each other
as they tossed; threatened with a common and imminent destruction on the
reefs.  Three had been already in collision: the _Olga_ was injured in
the quarter, the _Adler_ had lost her bowsprit; the _Nipsic_ had lost her
smoke-stack, and was making steam with difficulty, maintaining her fire
with barrels of pork, and the smoke and sparks pouring along the level of
the deck.  For the seventh war-ship the day had come too late; the _Eber_
had finished her last cruise; she was to be seen no more save by the eyes
of divers.  A coral reef is not only an instrument of destruction, but a
place of sepulchre; the submarine cliff is profoundly undercut, and
presents the mouth of a huge antre in which the bodies of men and the
hulls of ships are alike hurled down and buried.  The _Eber_ had dragged
anchors with the rest; her injured screw disabled her from steaming
vigorously up; and a little before day she had struck the front of the
coral, come off, struck again, and gone down stern foremost, oversetting
as she went, into the gaping hollow of the reef.  Of her whole complement
of nearly eighty, four souls were cast alive on the beach; and the bodies
of the remainder were, by the voluminous outpouring of the flooded
streams, scoured at last from the harbour, and strewed naked on the
seaboard of the island.

Five ships were immediately menaced with the same destruction.  The
_Eber_ vanished--the four poor survivors on shore--read a dreadful
commentary on their danger; which was swelled out of all proportion by
the violence of their own movements as they leaped and fell among the
billows.  By seven the _Nipsic_ was so fortunate as to avoid the reef and
beach upon a space of sand; where she was immediately deserted by her
crew, with the assistance of Samoans, not without loss of life.  By about
eight it was the turn of the _Adler_.  She was close down upon the reef;
doomed herself, it might yet be possible to save a portion of her crew;
and for this end Captain Fritze placed his reliance on the very hugeness
of the seas that threatened him.  The moment was watched for with the
anxiety of despair, but the coolness of disciplined courage.  As she rose
on the fatal wave, her moorings were simultaneously slipped; she broached
to in rising; and the sea heaved her bodily upward and cast her down with
a concussion on the summit of the reef, where she lay on her beam-ends,
her back broken, buried in breaching seas, but safe.  Conceive a table:
the _Eber_ in the darkness had been smashed against the rim and flung
below; the _Adler_, cast free in the nick of opportunity, had been thrown
upon the top.  Many were injured in the concussion; many tossed into the
water; twenty perished.  The survivors crept again on board their ship,
as it now lay, and as it still remains, keel to the waves, a monument of
the sea's potency.  In still weather, under a cloudless sky, in those
seasons when that ill-named ocean, the Pacific, suffers its vexed shores
to rest, she lies high and dry, the spray scarce touching her--the hugest
structure of man's hands within a circuit of a thousand miles--tossed up
there like a schoolboy's cap upon a shelf; broken like an egg; a thing to
dream of.

The unfriendly consuls of Germany and Britain were both that morning in
Matautu, and both displayed their nobler qualities.  De Coetlogon, the
grim old soldier, collected his family and kneeled with them in an agony
of prayer for those exposed.  Knappe, more fortunate in that he was
called to a more active service, must, upon the striking of the _Adler_,
pass to his own consulate.  From this he was divided by the Vaisingano,
now a raging torrent, impetuously charioting the trunks of trees.  A
kelpie might have dreaded to attempt the passage; we may conceive this
brave but unfortunate and now ruined man to have found a natural joy in
the exposure of his life; and twice that day, coming and going, he braved
the fury of the river.  It was possible, in spite of the darkness of the
hurricane and the continual breaching of the seas, to remark human
movements on the _Adler_; and by the help of Samoans, always nobly
forward in the work, whether for friend or enemy, Knappe sought long to
get a line conveyed from shore, and was for long defeated.  The shore
guard of fifty men stood to their arms the while upon the beach, useless
themselves, and a great deterrent of Samoan usefulness.  It was perhaps
impossible that this mistake should be avoided.  What more natural, to
the mind of a European, than that the Mataafas should fall upon the
Germans in this hour of their disadvantage?  But they had no other
thought than to assist; and those who now rallied beside Knappe braved
(as they supposed) in doing so a double danger, from the fury of the sea
and the weapons of their enemies.  About nine, a quarter-master swam
ashore, and reported all the officers and some sixty men alive but in
pitiable case; some with broken limbs, others insensible from the
drenching of the breakers.  Later in the forenoon, certain valorous
Samoans succeeded in reaching the wreck and returning with a line; but it
was speedily broken; and all subsequent attempts proved unavailing, the
strongest adventurers being cast back again by the bursting seas.
Thenceforth, all through that day and night, the deafened survivors must
continue to endure their martyrdom; and one officer died, it was supposed
from agony of mind, in his inverted cabin.

Three ships still hung on the next margin of destruction, steaming
desperately to their moorings, dashed helplessly together.  The
_Calliope_ was the nearest in; she had the _Vandalia_ close on her port
side and a little ahead, the _Olga_ close a-starboard, the reef under her
heel; and steaming and veering on her cables, the unhappy ship fenced
with her three dangers.  About a quarter to nine she carried away the
_Vandalia's_ quarter gallery with her jib-boom; a moment later, the
_Olga_ had near rammed her from the other side.  By nine the _Vandalia_
dropped down on her too fast to be avoided, and clapped her stern under
the bowsprit of the English ship, the fastenings of which were burst
asunder as she rose.  To avoid cutting her down, it was necessary for the
_Calliope_ to stop and even to reverse her engines; and her rudder was at
the moment--or it seemed so to the eyes of those on board--within ten
feet of the reef.  "Between the _Vandalia_ and the reef" (writes Kane, in
his excellent report) "it was destruction."  To repeat Fritze's manoeuvre
with the _Adler_ was impossible; the _Calliope_ was too heavy.  The one
possibility of escape was to go out.  If the engines should stand, if
they should have power to drive the ship against wind and sea, if she
should answer the helm, if the wheel, rudder, and gear should hold out,
and if they were favoured with a clear blink of weather in which to see
and avoid the outer reef--there, and there only, were safety.  Upon this
catalogue of "ifs" Kane staked his all.  He signalled to the engineer for
every pound of steam--and at that moment (I am told) much of the
machinery was already red-hot.  The ship was sheered well to starboard of
the _Vandalia_, the last remaining cable slipped.  For a time--and there
was no onlooker so cold-blooded as to offer a guess at its duration--the
_Calliope_ lay stationary; then gradually drew ahead.  The highest speed
claimed for her that day is of one sea-mile an hour.  The question of
times and seasons, throughout all this roaring business, is obscured by a
dozen contradictions; I have but chosen what appeared to be the most
consistent; but if I am to pay any attention to the time named by Admiral
Kimberley, the _Calliope_, in this first stage of her escape, must have
taken more than two hours to cover less than four cables.  As she thus
crept seaward, she buried bow and stem alternately under the billows.

In the fairway of the entrance the flagship _Trenton_ still held on.  Her
rudder was broken, her wheel carried away; within she was flooded with
water from the peccant hawse-pipes; she had just made the signal "fires
extinguished," and lay helpless, awaiting the inevitable end.  Between
this melancholy hulk and the external reef Kane must find a path.
Steering within fifty yards of the reef (for which she was actually
headed) and her foreyard passing on the other hand over the _Trenton's_
quarter as she rolled, the _Calliope_ sheered between the rival dangers,
came to the wind triumphantly, and was once more pointed for the sea and
safety.  Not often in naval history was there a moment of more sickening
peril, and it was dignified by one of those incidents that reconcile the
chronicler with his otherwise abhorrent task.  From the doomed flagship
the Americans hailed the success of the English with a cheer.  It was led
by the old admiral in person, rang out over the storm with holiday
vigour, and was answered by the Calliopes with an emotion easily
conceived.  This ship of their kinsfolk was almost the last external
object seen from the _Calliope_ for hours; immediately after, the mists
closed about her till the morrow.  She was safe at sea again--_una de
multis_--with a damaged foreyard, and a loss of all the ornamental work
about her bow and stern, three anchors, one kedge-anchor, fourteen
lengths of chain, four boats, the jib-boom, bobstay, and bands and
fastenings of the bowsprit.

Shortly after Kane had slipped his cable, Captain Schoonmaker, despairing
of the _Vandalia_, succeeded in passing astern of the _Olga_, in the hope
to beach his ship beside the _Nipsic_.  At a quarter to eleven her stern
took the reef, her hand swung to starboard, and she began to fill and
settle.  Many lives of brave men were sacrificed in the attempt to get a
line ashore; the captain, exhausted by his exertions, was swept from deck
by a sea; and the rail being soon awash, the survivors took refuge in the
tops.

Out of thirteen that had lain there the day before, there were now but
two ships afloat in Apia harbour, and one of these was doomed to be the
bane of the other.  About 3 P.M. the _Trenton_ parted one cable, and
shortly after a second.  It was sought to keep her head to wind with
storm-sails and by the ingenious expedient of filling the rigging with
seamen; but in the fury of the gale, and in that sea, perturbed alike by
the gigantic billows and the volleying discharges of the rivers, the
rudderless ship drove down stern foremost into the inner basin; ranging,
plunging, and striking like a frightened horse; drifting on destruction
for herself and bringing it to others.  Twice the _Olga_ (still well
under command) avoided her impact by the skilful use of helm and engines.
But about four the vigilance of the Germans was deceived, and the ships
collided; the _Olga_ cutting into the _Trenton's_ quarters, first from
one side, then from the other, and losing at the same time two of her own
cables.  Captain von Ehrhardt instantly slipped the remainder of his
moorings, and setting fore and aft canvas, and going full steam ahead,
succeeded in beaching his ship in Matautu; whither Knappe, recalled by
this new disaster, had returned.  The berth was perhaps the best in the
harbour, and von Ehrhardt signalled that ship and crew were in security.

The _Trenton_, guided apparently by an under-tow or eddy from the
discharge of the Vaisingano, followed in the course of the _Nipsic_ and
_Vandalia_, and skirted south-eastward along the front of the shore reef,
which her keel was at times almost touching.  Hitherto she had brought
disaster to her foes; now she was bringing it to friends.  She had
already proved the ruin of the _Olga_, the one ship that had rid out the
hurricane in safety; now she beheld across her course the submerged
_Vandalia_, the tops filled with exhausted seamen.  Happily the approach
of the _Trenton_ was gradual, and the time employed to advantage.  Rockets
and lines were thrown into the tops of the friendly wreck; the approach
of danger was transformed into a means of safety; and before the ships
struck, the men from the _Vandalia's_ main and mizzen masts, which went
immediately by the board in the collision, were already mustered on the
_Trenton's_ decks.  Those from the foremast were next rescued; and the
flagship settled gradually into a position alongside her neighbour,
against which she beat all night with violence.  Out of the crew of the
_Vandalia_ forty-three had perished; of the four hundred and fifty on
board the _Trenton_, only one.

The night of the 16th was still notable for a howling tempest and
extraordinary floods of rain.  It was feared the wreck could scarce
continue to endure the breaching of the seas; among the Germans, the fate
of those on board the _Adler_ awoke keen anxiety; and Knappe, on the
beach of Matautu, and the other officers of his consulate on that of
Matafele, watched all night.  The morning of the 17th displayed a scene
of devastation rarely equalled: the _Adler_ high and dry, the _Olga_ and
_Nipsic_ beached, the _Trenton_ partly piled on the _Vandalia_ and
herself sunk to the gun-deck; no sail afloat; and the beach heaped high
with the _debris_ of ships and the wreck of mountain forests.  Already,
before the day, Seumanu, the chief of Apia, had gallantly ventured forth
by boat through the subsiding fury of the seas, and had succeeded in
communicating with the admiral; already, or as soon after as the dawn
permitted, rescue lines were rigged, and the survivors were with
difficulty and danger begun to be brought to shore.  And soon the
cheerful spirit of the admiral added a new feature to the scene.
Surrounded as he was by the crews of two wrecked ships, he paraded the
band of the _Trenton_, and the bay was suddenly enlivened with the
strains of "Hail Columbia."

During a great part of the day the work of rescue was continued, with
many instances of courage and devotion; and for a long time succeeding,
the almost inexhaustible harvest of the beach was to be reaped.  In the
first employment, the Samoans earned the gratitude of friend and foe; in
the second, they surprised all by an unexpected virtue, that of honesty.
The greatness of the disaster, and the magnitude of the treasure now
rolling at their feet, may perhaps have roused in their bosoms an emotion
too serious for the rule of greed, or perhaps that greed was for the
moment satiated.  Sails that twelve strong Samoans could scarce drag from
the water, great guns (one of which was rolled by the sea on the body of
a man, the only native slain in all the hurricane), an infinite wealth of
rope and wood, of tools and weapons, tossed upon the beach.  Yet I have
never heard that much was stolen; and beyond question, much was very
honestly returned.  On both accounts, for the saving of life and the
restoration of property, the government of the United States showed
themselves generous in reward.  A fine boat was fitly presented to
Seumanu; and rings, watches, and money were lavished on all who had
assisted.  The Germans also gave money at the rate (as I receive the
tale) of three dollars a head for every German saved.  The obligation was
in this instance incommensurably deep, those with whom they were at war
had saved the German blue-jackets at the venture of their lives; Knappe
was, besides, far from ungenerous; and I can only explain the niggard
figure by supposing it was paid from his own pocket.  In one case, at
least, it was refused.  "I have saved three Germans," said the rescuer;
"I will make you a present of the three."

The crews of the American and German squadrons were now cast, still in a
bellicose temper, together on the beach.  The discipline of the Americans
was notoriously loose; the crew of the _Nipsic_ had earned a character
for lawlessness in other ports; and recourse was had to stringent and
indeed extraordinary measures.  The town was divided in two camps, to
which the different nationalities were confined.  Kimberley had his
quarter sentinelled and patrolled.  Any seaman disregarding a challenge
was to be shot dead; any tavern-keeper who sold spirits to an American
sailor was to have his tavern broken and his stock destroyed.  Many of
the publicans were German; and Knappe, having narrated these rigorous but
necessary dispositions, wonders (grinning to himself over his despatch)
how far these Americans will go in their assumption of jurisdiction over
Germans.  Such as they were, the measures were successful.  The
incongruous mass of castaways was kept in peace, and at last shipped in
peace out of the islands.

Kane returned to Apia on the 19th, to find the _Calliope_ the sole
survivor of thirteen sail.  He thanked his men, and in particular the
engineers, in a speech of unusual feeling and beauty, of which one who
was present remarked to another, as they left the ship, "This has been a
means of grace."  Nor did he forget to thank and compliment the admiral;
and I cannot deny myself the pleasure of transcribing from Kimberley's
reply some generous and engaging words.  "My dear captain," he wrote,
"your kind note received.  You went out splendidly, and we all felt from
our hearts for you, and our cheers came with sincerity and admiration for
the able manner in which you handled your ship.  We could not have been
gladder if it had been one of our ships, for in a time like that I can
truly say with old Admiral Josiah Latnall, 'that blood is thicker than
water.'"  One more trait will serve to build up the image of this typical
sea-officer.  A tiny schooner, the _Equator_, Captain Edwin Reid, dear to
myself from the memories of a six months' cruise, lived out upon the high
seas the fury of that tempest which had piled with wrecks the harbour of
Apia, found a refuge in Pango-Pango, and arrived at last in the desolated
port with a welcome and lucrative cargo of pigs.  The admiral was glad to
have the pigs; but what most delighted the man's noble and childish soul,
was to see once more afloat the colours of his country.

Thus, in what seemed the very article of war, and within the duration of
a single day, the sword-arm of each of the two angry Powers was broken;
their formidable ships reduced to junk; their disciplined hundreds to a
horde of castaways, fed with difficulty, and the fear of whose misconduct
marred the sleep of their commanders.  Both paused aghast; both had time
to recognise that not the whole Samoan Archipelago was worth the loss in
men and costly ships already suffered.  The so-called hurricane of March
16th made thus a marking epoch in world-history; directly, and at once,
it brought about the congress and treaty of Berlin; indirectly, and by a
process still continuing, it founded the modern navy of the States.
Coming years and other historians will declare the influence of that.




CHAPTER XI--LAUPEPA AND MATAAFA


1889-1892

With the hurricane, the broken war-ships, and the stranded sailors, I am
at an end of violence, and my tale flows henceforth among carpet
incidents.  The blue-jackets on Apia beach were still jealously held
apart by sentries, when the powers at home were already seeking a
peaceable solution.  It was agreed, so far as might be, to obliterate two
years of blundering; and to resume in 1889, and at Berlin, those
negotiations which had been so unhappily broken off at Washington in
1887.  The example thus offered by Germany is rare in history; in the
career of Prince Bismarck, so far as I am instructed, it should stand
unique.  On a review of these two years of blundering, bullying, and
failure in a little isle of the Pacific, he seems magnanimously to have
owned his policy was in the wrong.  He left Fangalii unexpiated; suffered
that house of cards, the Tamasese government, to fall by its own frailty
and without remark or lamentation; left the Samoan question openly and
fairly to the conference: and in the meanwhile, to allay the local heats
engendered by Becker and Knappe, he sent to Apia that invaluable public
servant, Dr. Stuebel.  I should be a dishonest man if I did not bear
testimony to the loyalty since shown by Germans in Samoa.  Their position
was painful; they had talked big in the old days, now they had to sing
small.  Even Stuebel returned to the islands under the prejudice of an
unfortunate record.  To the minds of the Samoans his name represented the
beginning of their sorrows; and in his first term of office he had
unquestionably driven hard.  The greater his merit in the surprising
success of the second.  So long as he stayed, the current of affairs
moved smoothly; he left behind him on his departure all men at peace; and
whether by fortune, or for the want of that wise hand of guidance, he was
scarce gone before the clouds began to gather once more on our horizon.

Before the first convention, Germany and the States hauled down their
flags.  It was so done again before the second; and Germany, by a still
more emphatic step of retrogression, returned the exile Laupepa to his
native shores.  For two years the unfortunate man had trembled and
suffered in the Cameroons, in Germany, in the rainy Marshalls.  When he
left (September 1887) Tamasese was king, served by five iron war-ships;
his right to rule (like a dogma of the Church) was placed outside
dispute; the Germans were still, as they were called at that last tearful
interview in the house by the river, "the invincible strangers"; the
thought of resistance, far less the hope of success, had not yet dawned
on the Samoan mind.  He returned (November 1889) to a changed world.  The
Tupua party was reduced to sue for peace, Brandeis was withdrawn,
Tamasese was dying obscurely of a broken heart; the German flag no longer
waved over the capital; and over all the islands one figure stood
supreme.  During Laupepa's absence this man had succeeded him in all his
honours and titles, in tenfold more than all his power and popularity.  He
was the idol of the whole nation but the rump of the Tamaseses, and of
these he was already the secret admiration.  In his position there was
but one weak point,--that he had even been tacitly excluded by the
Germans.  Becker, indeed, once coquetted with the thought of patronising
him; but the project had no sequel, and it stands alone.  In every other
juncture of history the German attitude has been the same.  Choose whom
you will to be king; when he has failed, choose whom you please to
succeed him; when the second fails also, replace the first: upon the one
condition, that Mataafa be excluded.  "_Pourvu qu'il sache signer_!"--an
official is said to have thus summed up the qualifications necessary in a
Samoan king.  And it was perhaps feared that Mataafa could do no more and
might not always do so much.  But this original diffidence was heightened
by late events to something verging upon animosity.  Fangalii was
unavenged: the arms of Mataafa were

   _Nondum inexpiatis uncta cruoribus_,
   Still soiled with the unexpiated blood

of German sailors; and though the chief was not present in the field, nor
could have heard of the affair till it was over, he had reaped from it
credit with his countrymen and dislike from the Germans.

I may not say that trouble was hoped.  I must say--if it were not feared,
the practice of diplomacy must teach a very hopeful view of human nature.
Mataafa and Laupepa, by the sudden repatriation of the last, found
themselves face to face in conditions of exasperating rivalry.  The one
returned from the dead of exile to find himself replaced and excelled.
The other, at the end of a long, anxious, and successful struggle, beheld
his only possible competitor resuscitated from the grave.  The qualities
of both, in this difficult moment, shone out nobly.  I feel I seem always
less than partial to the lovable Laupepa; his virtues are perhaps not
those which chiefly please me, and are certainly not royal; but he found
on his return an opportunity to display the admirable sweetness of his
nature.  The two entered into a competition of generosity, for which I
can recall no parallel in history, each waiving the throne for himself,
each pressing it upon his rival; and they embraced at last a compromise
the terms of which seem to have been always obscure and are now disputed.
Laupepa at least resumed his style of King of Samoa; Mataafa retained
much of the conduct of affairs, and continued to receive much of the
attendance and respect befitting royalty; and the two Malietoas, with so
many causes of disunion, dwelt and met together in the same town like
kinsmen.  It was so, that I first saw them; so, in a house set about with
sentries--for there was still a haunting fear of Germany,--that I heard
them relate their various experience in the past; heard Laupepa tell with
touching candour of the sorrows of his exile, and Mataafa with mirthful
simplicity of his resources and anxieties in the war.  The relation was
perhaps too beautiful to last; it was perhaps impossible but the titular
king should grow at last uneasily conscious of the _maire de palais_ at
his side, or the king-maker be at last offended by some shadow of
distrust or assumption in his creature.  I repeat the words king-maker
and creature; it is so that Mataafa himself conceives of their relation:
surely not without justice; for, had he not contended and prevailed, and
been helped by the folly of consuls and the fury of the storm, Laupepa
must have died in exile.

Foreigners in these islands know little of the course of native intrigue.
Partly the Samoans cannot explain, partly they will not tell.  Ask how
much a master can follow of the puerile politics in any school; so much
and no more we may understand of the events which surround and menace us
with their results.  The missions may perhaps have been to blame.
Missionaries are perhaps apt to meddle overmuch outside their discipline;
it is a fault which should be judged with mercy; the problem is sometimes
so insidiously presented that even a moderate and able man is betrayed
beyond his own intention; and the missionary in such a land as Samoa is
something else besides a minister of mere religion; he represents
civilisation, he is condemned to be an organ of reform, he could scarce
evade (even if he desired) a certain influence in political affairs.  And
it is believed, besides, by those who fancy they know, that the effective
force of division between Mataafa and Laupepa came from the natives
rather than from whites.  Before the end of 1890, at least, it began to
be rumoured that there was dispeace between the two Malietoas; and
doubtless this had an unsettling influence throughout the islands.  But
there was another ingredient of anxiety.  The Berlin convention had long
closed its sittings; the text of the Act had been long in our hands;
commissioners were announced to right the wrongs of the land question,
and two high officials, a chief justice and a president, to guide policy
and administer law in Samoa.  Their coming was expected with an
impatience, with a childishness of trust, that can hardly be exaggerated.
Months passed, these angel-deliverers still delayed to arrive, and the
impatience of the natives became changed to an ominous irritation.  They
have had much experience of being deceived, and they began to think they
were deceived again.  A sudden crop of superstitious stories buzzed about
the islands.  Rivers had come down red; unknown fishes had been taken on
the reef and found to be marked with menacing runes; a headless lizard
crawled among chiefs in council; the gods of Upolu and Savaii made war by
night, they swam the straits to battle, and, defaced by dreadful wounds,
they had besieged the house of a medical missionary.  Readers will
remember the portents in mediaeval chronicles, or those in _Julius Caesar_
when

   "Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds
   In ranks and squadrons."

And doubtless such fabrications are, in simple societies, a natural
expression of discontent; and those who forge, and even those who spread
them, work towards a conscious purpose.

Early in January 1891 this period of expectancy was brought to an end by
the arrival of Conrad Cedarcrantz, chief justice of Samoa.  The event was
hailed with acclamation, and there was much about the new official to
increase the hopes already entertained.  He was seen to be a man of
culture and ability; in public, of an excellent presence--in private, of
a most engaging cordiality.  But there was one point, I scarce know
whether to say of his character or policy, which immediately and
disastrously affected public feeling in the islands.  He had an aversion,
part judicial, part perhaps constitutional, to haste; and he announced
that, until he should have well satisfied his own mind, he should do
nothing; that he would rather delay all than do aught amiss.  It was
impossible to hear this without academical approval; impossible to hear
it without practical alarm.  The natives desired to see activity; they
desired to see many fair speeches taken on a body of deeds and works of
benefit.  Fired by the event of the war, filled with impossible hopes,
they might have welcomed in that hour a ruler of the stamp of Brandeis,
breathing hurry, perhaps dealing blows.  And the chief justice,
unconscious of the fleeting opportunity, ripened his opinions
deliberately in Mulinuu; and had been already the better part of half a
year in the islands before he went through the form of opening his court.
The curtain had risen; there was no play.  A reaction, a chill sense of
disappointment, passed about the island; and intrigue, one moment
suspended, was resumed.

In the Berlin Act, the three Powers recognise, on the threshold, "the
independence of the Samoan government, and the free right of the natives
to elect their chief or king and choose their form of government."  True,
the text continues that, "in view of the difficulties that surround an
election in the present disordered condition of the government," Malietoa
Laupepa shall be recognised as king, "unless the three Powers shall by
common accord otherwise declare."  But perhaps few natives have followed
it so far, and even those who have, were possibly all cast abroad again
by the next clause: "and his successor shall be duly elected according to
the laws and customs of Samoa."  The right to elect, freely given in one
sentence, was suspended in the next, and a line or so further on appeared
to be reconveyed by a side-wind.  The reason offered for suspension was
ludicrously false; in May 1889, when Sir Edward Malet moved the matter in
the conference, the election of Mataafa was not only certain to have been
peaceful, it could not have been opposed; and behind the English puppet
it was easy to suspect the hand of Germany.  No one is more swift to
smell trickery than a Samoan; and the thought, that, under the long,
bland, benevolent sentences of the Berlin Act, some trickery lay lurking,
filled him with the breath of opposition.  Laupepa seems never to have
been a popular king.  Mataafa, on the other hand, holds an unrivalled
position in the eyes of his fellow-countrymen; he was the hero of the
war, he had lain with them in the bush, he had borne the heat and burthen
of the day; they began to claim that he should enjoy more largely the
fruits of victory; his exclusion was believed to be a stroke of German
vengeance, his elevation to the kingship was looked for as the fitting
crown and copestone of the Samoan triumph; and but a little after the
coming of the chief justice, an ominous cry for Mataafa began to arise in
the islands.  It is difficult to see what that official could have done
but what he did.  He was loyal, as in duty bound, to the treaty and to
Laupepa; and when the orators of the important and unruly islet of Manono
demanded to his face a change of kings, he had no choice but to refuse
them, and (his reproof being unheeded) to suspend the meeting.  Whether
by any neglect of his own or the mere force of circumstance, he failed,
however, to secure the sympathy, failed even to gain the confidence, of
Mataafa.  The latter is not without a sense of his own abilities or of
the great service he has rendered to his native land.  He felt himself
neglected; at the very moment when the cry for his elevation rang
throughout the group he thought himself made little of on Mulinuu; and he
began to weary of his part.  In this humour, he was exposed to a
temptation which I must try to explain, as best I may be able, to
Europeans.

The bestowal of the great name, Malietoa, is in the power of the district
of Malie, some seven miles to the westward of Apia.  The most noisy and
conspicuous supporters of that party are the inhabitants of Manono.  Hence
in the elaborate, allusive oratory of Samoa, Malie is always referred to
by the name of _Pule_ (authority) as having the power of the name, and
Manono by that of _Ainga_ (clan, sept, or household) as forming the
immediate family of the chief.  But these, though so important, are only
small communities; and perhaps the chief numerical force of the Malietoas
inhabits the island of Savaii.  Savaii has no royal name to bestow, all
the five being in the gift of different districts of Upolu; but she has
the weight of numbers, and in these latter days has acquired a certain
force by the preponderance in her councils of a single man, the orator
Lauati.  The reader will now understand the peculiar significance of a
deputation which should embrace Lauati and the orators of both Malie and
Manono, how it would represent all that is most effective on the Malietoa
side, and all that is most considerable in Samoan politics, except the
opposite feudal party of the Tupua.  And in the temptation brought to
bear on Mataafa, even the Tupua was conjoined.  Tamasese was dead.  His
followers had conceived a not unnatural aversion to all Germans, from
which only the loyal Brandeis is excepted; and a not unnatural admiration
for their late successful adversary.  Men of his own blood and clan, men
whom he had fought in the field, whom he had driven from Matautu, who had
smitten him back time and again from before the rustic bulwarks of
Lotoanuu, they approached him hand in hand with their ancestral enemies
and concurred in the same prayer.  The treaty (they argued) was not
carried out.  The right to elect their king had been granted them; or if
that were denied or suspended, then the right to elect "his successor."
They were dissatisfied with Laupepa, and claimed, "according to the laws
and customs of Samoa," duly to appoint another.  The orators of Malie
declared with irritation that their second appointment was alone valid
and Mataafa the sole Malietoa; the whole body of malcontents named him as
their choice for king; and they requested him in consequence to leave
Apia and take up his dwelling in Malie, the name-place of Malietoa; a
step which may be described, to European ears, as placing before the
country his candidacy for the crown.

I do not know when the proposal was first made.  Doubtless the
disaffection grew slowly, every trifle adding to its force; doubtless
there lingered for long a willingness to give the new government a trial.
The chief justice at least had been nearly five months in the country,
and the president, Baron Senfft von Pilsach, rather more than a month
before the mine was sprung.  On May 31, 1891, the house of Mataafa was
found empty, he and his chiefs had vanished from Apia, and, what was
worse, three prisoners, liberated from the gaol, had accompanied them in
their secession; two being political offenders, and the third (accused of
murder) having been perhaps set free by accident.  Although the step had
been discussed in certain quarters, it took all men by surprise.  The
inhabitants at large expected instant war.  The officials awakened from a
dream to recognise the value of that which they had lost.  Mataafa at
Vaiala, where he was the pledge of peace, had perhaps not always been
deemed worthy of particular attention; Mataafa at Malie was seen, twelve
hours too late, to be an altogether different quantity.  With excess of
zeal on the other side, the officials trooped to their boats and
proceeded almost in a body to Malie, where they seem to have employed
every artifice of flattery and every resource of eloquence upon the
fugitive high chief.  These courtesies, perhaps excessive in themselves,
had the unpardonable fault of being offered when too late.  Mataafa
showed himself facile on small issues, inflexible on the main; he
restored the prisoners, he returned with the consuls to Apia on a flying
visit; he gave his word that peace should be preserved--a pledge in which
perhaps no one believed at the moment, but which he has since nobly
redeemed.  On the rest he was immovable; he had cast the die, he had
declared his candidacy, he had gone to Malie.  Thither, after his visit
to Apia, he returned again; there he has practically since resided.

Thus was created in the islands a situation, strange in the beginning,
and which, as its inner significance is developed, becomes daily stranger
to observe.  On the one hand, Mataafa sits in Malie, assumes a regal
state, receives deputations, heads his letters "Government of Samoa,"
tacitly treats the king as a co-ordinate; and yet declares himself, and
in many ways conducts himself, as a law-abiding citizen.  On the other,
the white officials in Mulinuu stand contemplating the phenomenon with
eyes of growing stupefaction; now with symptoms of collapse, now with
accesses of violence.  For long, even those well versed in island manners
and the island character daily expected war, and heard imaginary drums
beat in the forest.  But for now close upon a year, and against every
stress of persuasion and temptation, Mataafa has been the bulwark of our
peace.  Apia lay open to be seized, he had the power in his hand, his
followers cried to be led on, his enemies marshalled him the same way by
impotent examples; and he has never faltered.  Early in the day, a white
man was sent from the government of Mulinuu to examine and report upon
his actions: I saw the spy on his return; "It was only our rebel that
saved us," he said, with a laugh.  There is now no honest man in the
islands but is well aware of it; none but knows that, if we have enjoyed
during the past eleven months the conveniences of peace, it is due to the
forbearance of "our rebel."  Nor does this part of his conduct stand
alone.  He calls his party at Malie the government,--"our
government,"--but he pays his taxes to the government at Mulinuu.  He
takes ground like a king; he has steadily and blandly refused to obey all
orders as to his own movements or behaviour; but upon requisition he
sends offenders to be tried under the chief justice.

We have here a problem of conduct, and what seems an image of
inconsistency, very hard at the first sight to be solved by any European.
Plainly Mataafa does not act at random.  Plainly, in the depths of his
Samoan mind, he regards his attitude as regular and constitutional.  It
may be unexpected, it may be inauspicious, it may be undesirable; but he
thinks it--and perhaps it is--in full accordance with those "laws and
customs of Samoa" ignorantly invoked by the draughtsmen of the Berlin
Act.  The point is worth an effort of comprehension; a man's life may yet
depend upon it.  Let us conceive, in the first place, that there are five
separate kingships in Samoa, though not always five different kings; and
that though one man, by holding the five royal names, might become king
in _all parts_ of Samoa, there is perhaps no such matter as a kingship of
all Samoa.  He who holds one royal name would be, upon this view, as much
a sovereign person as he who should chance to hold the other four; he
would have less territory and fewer subjects, but the like independence
and an equal royalty.  Now Mataafa, even if all debatable points were
decided against him, is still Tuiatua, and as such, on this hypothesis, a
sovereign prince.  In the second place, the draughtsmen of the Act,
waxing exceeding bold, employed the word "election," and implicitly
justified all precedented steps towards the kingship according with the
"customs of Samoa."  I am not asking what was intended by the gentlemen
who sat and debated very benignly and, on the whole, wisely in Berlin; I
am asking what will be understood by a Samoan studying their literary
work, the Berlin Act; I am asking what is the result of taking a word out
of one state of society, and applying it to another, of which the writers
know less than nothing, and no European knows much.  Several interpreters
and several days were employed last September in the fruitless attempt to
convey to the mind of Laupepa the sense of the word "resignation."  What
can a Samoan gather from the words, _election_? _election of a king_?
_election of a king according to the laws and customs of Samoa_?  What
are the electoral measures, what is the method of canvassing, likely to
be employed by two, three, four, or five, more or less absolute
princelings, eager to evince each other?  And who is to distinguish such
a process from the state of war?  In such international--or, I should
say, interparochial--differences, the nearest we can come towards
understanding is to appreciate the cloud of ambiguity in which all
parties grope--

   "Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
   Half flying."

Now, in one part of Mataafa's behaviour his purpose is beyond mistake.
Towards the provisions of the Berlin Act, his desire to be formally
obedient is manifest.  The Act imposed the tax.  He has paid his taxes,
although he thus contributes to the ways and means of his immediate
rival.  The Act decreed the supreme court, and he sends his partisans to
be tried at Mulinuu, although he thus places them (as I shall have
occasion to show) in a position far from wholly safe.  From this literal
conformity, in matters regulated, to the terms of the Berlin
plenipotentiaries, we may plausibly infer, in regard to the rest, a no
less exact observance of the famous and obscure "laws and customs of
Samoa."

But though it may be possible to attain, in the study, to some such
adumbration of an understanding, it were plainly unfair to expect it of
officials in the hurry of events.  Our two white officers have
accordingly been no more perspicacious than was to be looked for, and I
think they have sometimes been less wise.  It was not wise in the
president to proclaim Mataafa and his followers rebels and their estates
confiscated.  Such words are not respectable till they repose on force;
on the lips of an angry white man, standing alone on a small promontory,
they were both dangerous and absurd; they might have provoked ruin;
thanks to the character of Mataafa, they only raised a smile and damaged
the authority of government.  And again it is not wise in the government
of Mulinuu to have twice attempted to precipitate hostilities, once in
Savaii, once here in the Tuamasanga.  The fate of the Savaii attempt I
never heard; it seems to have been stillborn.  The other passed under my
eyes.  A war-party was armed in Apia, and despatched across the island
against Mataafa villages, where it was to seize the women and children.
It was absent for some days, engaged in feasting with those whom it went
out to fight; and returned at last, innocuous and replete.  In this
fortunate though undignified ending we may read the fact that the natives
on Laupepa's side are sometimes more wise than their advisers.  Indeed,
for our last twelve months of miraculous peace under what seem to be two
rival kings, the credit is due first of all to Mataafa, and second to the
half-heartedness, or the forbearance, or both, of the natives in the
other camp.  The voice of the two whites has ever been for war.  They
have published at least one incendiary proclamation; they have armed and
sent into the field at least one Samoan war-party; they have continually
besieged captains of war-ships to attack Malie, and the captains of the
war-ships have religiously refused.  Thus in the last twelve months our
European rulers have drawn a picture of themselves, as bearded like the
pard, full of strange oaths, and gesticulating like semaphores; while
over against them Mataafa reposes smilingly obstinate, and their own
retainers surround them, frowningly inert.  Into the question of motive I
refuse to enter; but if we come to war in these islands, and with no
fresh occasion, it will be a manufactured war, and one that has been
manufactured, against the grain of opinion, by two foreigners.

For the last and worst of the mistakes on the Laupepa side it would be
unfair to blame any but the king himself.  Capable both of virtuous
resolutions and of fits of apathetic obstinacy, His Majesty is usually
the whip-top of competitive advisers; and his conduct is so unstable as
to wear at times an appearance of treachery which would surprise himself
if he could see it.  Take, for example, the experience of Lieutenant
Ulfsparre, late chief of police, and (so to speak) commander of the
forces.  His men were under orders for a certain hour; he found himself
almost alone at the place of muster, and learned the king had sent the
soldiery on errands.  He sought an audience, explained that he was here
to implant discipline, that (with this purpose in view) his men could
only receive orders through himself, and if that condition were not
agreed to and faithfully observed, he must send in his papers.  The king
was as usual easily persuaded, the interview passed and ended to the
satisfaction of all parties engaged--and the bargain was kept for one
day.  On the day after, the troops were again dispersed as post-runners,
and their commander resigned.  With such a sovereign, I repeat, it would
be unfair to blame any individual minister for any specific fault.  And
yet the policy of our two whites against Mataafa has appeared uniformly
so excessive and implacable, that the blame of the last scandal is laid
generally at their doors.  It is yet fresh.  Lauati, towards the end of
last year, became deeply concerned about the situation; and by great
personal exertions and the charms of oratory brought Savaii and Manono
into agreement upon certain terms of compromise: Laupepa still to be
king, Mataafa to accept a high executive office comparable to that of our
own prime minister, and the two governments to coalesce.  Intractable
Manono was a party.  Malie was said to view the proposal with
resignation, if not relief.  Peace was thought secure.  The night before
the king was to receive Lauati, I met one of his company,--the family
chief, Iina,--and we shook hands over the unexpected issue of our
troubles.  What no one dreamed was that Laupepa would refuse.  And he
did.  He refused undisputed royalty for himself and peace for these
unhappy islands; and the two whites on Mulinuu rightly or wrongly got the
blame of it.

But their policy has another and a more awkward side.  About the time of
the secession to Malie, many ugly things were said; I will not repeat
that which I hope and believe the speakers did not wholly mean; let it
suffice that, if rumour carried to Mataafa the language I have heard used
in my own house and before my own native servants, he would be highly
justified in keeping clear of Apia and the whites.  One gentleman whose
opinion I respect, and am so bold as to hope I may in some points modify,
will understand the allusion and appreciate my reserve.  About the same
time there occurred an incident, upon which I must be more particular.
_A_ was a gentleman who had long been an intimate of Mataafa's, and had
recently (upon account, indeed, of the secession to Malie) more or less
wholly broken off relations.  To him came one whom I shall call _B_ with
a dastardly proposition.  It may have been _B_'s own, in which case he
were the more unpardonable; but from the closeness of his intercourse
with the chief justice, as well as from the terms used in the interview,
men judged otherwise.  It was proposed that _A_ should simulate a renewal
of the friendship, decoy Mataafa to a suitable place, and have him there
arrested.  What should follow in those days of violent speech was at the
least disputable; and the proposal was of course refused.  "You do not
understand," was the base rejoinder.  "_You_ will have no discredit.  The
Germans are to take the blame of the arrest."  Of course, upon the
testimony of a gentleman so depraved, it were unfair to hang a dog; and
both the Germans and the chief justice must be held innocent.  But the
chief justice has shown that he can himself be led, by his animosity
against Mataafa, into questionable acts.  Certain natives of Malie were
accused of stealing pigs; the chief justice summoned them through
Mataafa; several were sent, and along with them a written promise that,
if others were required, these also should be forthcoming upon
requisition.  Such as came were duly tried and acquitted; and Mataafa's
offer was communicated to the chief justice, who made a formal answer,
and the same day (in pursuance of his constant design to have Malie
attacked by war-ships) reported to one of the consuls that his warrant
would not run in the country and that certain of the accused had been
withheld.  At least, this is not fair dealing; and the next instance I
have to give is possibly worse.  For one blunder the chief justice is
only so far responsible, in that he was not present where it seems he
should have been, when it was made.  He had nothing to do with the silly
proscription of the Mataafas; he has always disliked the measure; and it
occurred to him at last that he might get rid of this dangerous absurdity
and at the same time reap a further advantage.  Let Mataafa leave Malie
for any other district in Samoa; it should be construed as an act of
submission and the confiscation and proscription instantly recalled.  This
was certainly well devised; the government escaped from their own false
position, and by the same stroke lowered the prestige of their
adversaries.  But unhappily the chief justice did not put all his eggs in
one basket.  Concurrently with these negotiations he began again to move
the captain of one of the war-ships to shell the rebel village; the
captain, conceiving the extremity wholly unjustified, not only refused
these instances, but more or less publicly complained of their being
made; the matter came to the knowledge of the white resident who was at
that time playing the part of intermediary with Malie; and he, in natural
anger and disgust, withdrew from the negotiation.  These duplicities,
always deplorable when discovered, are never more fatal than with men
imperfectly civilised.  Almost incapable of truth themselves, they
cherish a particular score of the same fault in whites.  And Mataafa is
besides an exceptional native.  I would scarce dare say of any Samoan
that he is truthful, though I seem to have encountered the phenomenon;
but I must say of Mataafa that he seems distinctly and consistently
averse to lying.

For the affair of the Manono prisoners, the chief justice is only again
in so far answerable as he was at the moment absent from the seat of his
duties; and the blame falls on Baron Senfft von Pilsach, president of the
municipal council.  There were in Manono certain dissidents, loyal to
Laupepa.  Being Manono people, I daresay they were very annoying to their
neighbours; the majority, as they belonged to the same island, were the
more impatient; and one fine day fell upon and destroyed the houses and
harvests of the dissidents "according to the laws and customs of Samoa."
The president went down to the unruly island in a war-ship and was landed
alone upon the beach.  To one so much a stranger to the mansuetude of
Polynesians, this must have seemed an act of desperation; and the baron's
gallantry met with a deserved success.  The six ringleaders, acting in
Mataafa's interest, had been guilty of a delict; with Mataafa's approval,
they delivered themselves over to be tried.  On Friday, September 4,
1891, they were convicted before a native magistrate and sentenced to six
months' imprisonment; or, I should rather say, detention; for it was
expressly directed that they were to be used as gentlemen and not as
prisoners, that the door was to stand open, and that all their wishes
should be gratified.  This extraordinary sentence fell upon the accused
like a thunderbolt.  There is no need to suppose perfidy, where a
careless interpreter suffices to explain all; but the six chiefs claim to
have understood their coming to Apia as an act of submission merely
formal, that they came in fact under an implied indemnity, and that the
president stood pledged to see them scatheless.  Already, on their way
from the court-house, they were tumultuously surrounded by friends and
clansmen, who pressed and cried upon them to escape; Lieutenant Ulfsparre
must order his men to load; and with that the momentary effervescence
died away.  Next day, Saturday, 5th, the chief justice took his departure
from the islands--a step never yet explained and (in view of the doings
of the day before and the remonstrances of other officials) hard to
justify.  The president, an amiable and brave young man of singular
inexperience, was thus left to face the growing difficulty by himself.
The clansmen of the prisoners, to the number of near upon a hundred, lay
in Vaiusu, a village half way between Apia and Malie; there they talked
big, thence sent menacing messages; the gaol should be broken in the
night, they said, and the six martyrs rescued.  Allowance is to be made
for the character of the people of Manono, turbulent fellows, boastful of
tongue, but of late days not thought to be answerably bold in person.  Yet
the moment was anxious.  The government of Mulinuu had gained an
important moral victory by the surrender and condemnation of the chiefs;
and it was needful the victory should be maintained.  The guard upon the
gaol was accordingly strengthened; a war-party was sent to watch the
Vaiusu road under Asi; and the chiefs of the Vaimaunga were notified to
arm and assemble their men.  It must be supposed the president was
doubtful of the loyalty of these assistants.  He turned at least to the
war-ships, where it seems he was rebuffed; thence he fled into the arms
of the wrecker gang, where he was unhappily more successful.  The
government of Washington had presented to the Samoan king the wrecks of
the _Trenton_ and the _Vandalia_; an American syndicate had been formed
to break them up; an experienced gang was in consequence settled in Apia
and the report of submarine explosions had long grown familiar in the
ears of residents.  From these artificers the president obtained a supply
of dynamite, the needful mechanism, and the loan of a mechanic; the gaol
was mined, and the Manono people in Vaiusu were advertised of the fact in
a letter signed by Laupepa.  Partly by the indiscretion of the mechanic,
who had sought to embolden himself (like Lady Macbeth) with liquor for
his somewhat dreadful task, the story leaked immediately out and raised a
very general, or I might say almost universal, reprobation.  Some blamed
the proposed deed because it was barbarous and a foul example to set
before a race half barbarous itself; others because it was illegal;
others again because, in the face of so weak an enemy, it appeared
pitifully pusillanimous; almost all because it tended to precipitate and
embitter war.  In the midst of the turmoil he had raised, and under the
immediate pressure of certain indignant white residents, the baron fell
back upon a new expedient, certainly less barbarous, perhaps no more
legal; and on Monday afternoon, September 7th, packed his six prisoners
on board the cutter _Lancashire Lass_, and deported them to the
neighbouring low-island group of the Tokelaus.  We watched her put to sea
with mingled feelings.  Anything were better than dynamite, but this was
not good.  The men had been summoned in the name of law; they had
surrendered; the law had uttered its voice; they were under one sentence
duly delivered; and now the president, by no right with which we were
acquainted, had exchanged it for another.  It was perhaps no less
fortunate, though it was more pardonable in a stranger, that he had
increased the punishment to that which, in the eyes of Samoans, ranks
next to death,--exile from their native land and friends.  And the
_Lancashire Lass_ appeared to carry away with her into the uttermost
parts of the sea the honour of the administration and the prestige of the
supreme court.

The policy of the government towards Mataafa has thus been of a piece
throughout; always would-be violent, it has been almost always defaced
with some appearance of perfidy or unfairness.  The policy of Mataafa
(though extremely bewildering to any white) appears everywhere consistent
with itself, and the man's bearing has always been calm.  But to
represent the fulness of the contrast, it is necessary that I should give
some description of the two capitals, or the two camps, and the ways and
means of the regular and irregular government.

_Mulinuu_.  Mulinuu, the reader may remember, is a narrow finger of land
planted in cocoa-palms, which runs forth into the lagoon perhaps three
quarters of a mile.  To the east is the bay of Apia.  To the west, there
is, first of all, a mangrove swamp, the mangroves excellently green, the
mud ink-black, and its face crawled upon by countless insects and black
and scarlet crabs.  Beyond the swamp is a wide and shallow bay of the
lagoon, bounded to the west by Faleula Point.  Faleula is the next
village to Malie; so that from the top of some tall palm in Malie it
should be possible to descry against the eastern heavens the palms of
Mulinuu.  The trade wind sweeps over the low peninsula and cleanses it
from the contagion of the swamp.  Samoans have a quaint phrase in their
language; when out of health, they seek exposed places on the shore "to
eat the wind," say they; and there can be few better places for such a
diet than the point of Mulinuu.

Two European houses stand conspicuous on the harbour side; in Europe they
would seem poor enough, but they are fine houses for Samoa.  One is new;
it was built the other day under the apologetic title of a Government
House, to be the residence of Baron Senfft.  The other is historical; it
was built by Brandeis on a mortgage, and is now occupied by the chief
justice on conditions never understood, the rumour going uncontradicted
that he sits rent free.  I do not say it is true, I say it goes
uncontradicted; and there is one peculiarity of our officials in a
nutshell,--their remarkable indifference to their own character.  From
the one house to the other extends a scattering village for the Faipule
or native parliament men.  In the days of Tamasese this was a brave
place, both his own house and those of the Faipule good, and the whole
excellently ordered and approached by a sanded way.  It is now like a
neglected bush-town, and speaks of apathy in all concerned.  But the
chief scandal of Mulinuu is elsewhere.  The house of the president stands
just to seaward of the isthmus, where the watch is set nightly, and armed
men guard the uneasy slumbers of the government.  On the landward side
there stands a monument to the poor German lads who fell at Fangalii,
just beyond which the passer-by may chance to observe a little house
standing back-ward from the road.  It is such a house as a commoner might
use in a bush village; none could dream that it gave shelter even to a
family chief; yet this is the palace of Malietoa-Natoaitele-Tamasoalii
Laupepa, king of Samoa.  As you sit in his company under this humble
shelter, you shall see, between the posts, the new house of the
president.  His Majesty himself beholds it daily, and the tenor of his
thoughts may be divined.  The fine house of a Samoan chief is his
appropriate attribute; yet, after seventeen months, the government (well
housed themselves) have not yet found--have not yet sought--a roof-tree
for their sovereign.  And the lodging is typical.  I take up the
president's financial statement of September 8, 1891.  I find the king's
allowance to figure at seventy-five dollars a month; and I find that he
is further (though somewhat obscurely) debited with the salaries of
either two or three clerks.  Take the outside figure, and the sum
expended on or for His Majesty amounts to ninety-five dollars in the
month.  Lieutenant Ulfsparre and Dr. Hagberg (the chief justice's Swedish
friends) drew in the same period one hundred and forty and one hundred
dollars respectively on account of salary alone.  And it should be
observed that Dr. Hagberg was employed, or at least paid, from government
funds, in the face of His Majesty's express and reiterated protest.  In
another column of the statement, one hundred and seventy-five dollars and
seventy-five cents are debited for the chief justice's travelling
expenses.  I am of the opinion that if His Majesty desired (or dared) to
take an outing, he would be asked to bear the charge from his allowance.
But although I think the chief justice had done more nobly to pay for
himself, I am far from denying that his excursions were well meant; he
should indeed be praised for having made them; and I leave the charge out
of consideration in the following statement.

   ON THE ONE HAND

   Salary of Chief Justice Cedarkrantz $500
   Salary of President Baron Senfft von Pilsach (about) 415
   Salary of Lieutenant Ulfsparre, Chief of Police 140
   Salary of Dr. Hagberg, Private Secretary to the Chief Justice 100

   Total monthly salary to four whites, one of them paid against His
   Majesty's protest $1155

   ON THE OTHER HAND

   Total monthly payments to and for His Majesty the King, including
   allowance and hire of three clerks, one of these placed under the
   rubric of extraordinary expenses $95

This looks strange enough and mean enough already.  But we have ground of
comparison in the practice of Brandeis.

   Brandeis, white prime minister $200
   Tamasese (about) 160
   White Chief of Police 100

Under Brandeis, in other words, the king received the second highest
allowance on the sheet; and it was a good second, and the third was a bad
third.  And it must be borne in mind that Tamasese himself was pointed
and laughed at among natives.  Judge, then, what is muttered of Laupepa,
housed in his shanty before the president's doors like Lazarus before the
doors of Dives; receiving not so much of his own taxes as the private
secretary of the law officer; and (in actual salary) little more than
half as much as his own chief of police.  It is known besides that he has
protested in vain against the charge for Dr. Hagberg; it is known that he
has himself applied for an advance and been refused.  Money is certainly
a grave subject on Mulinuu; but respect costs nothing, and thrifty
officials might have judged it wise to make up in extra politeness for
what they curtailed of pomp or comfort.  One instance may suffice.
Laupepa appeared last summer on a public occasion; the president was
there and not even the president rose to greet the entrance of the
sovereign.  Since about the same period, besides, the monarch must be
described as in a state of sequestration.  A white man, an Irishman, the
true type of all that is most gallant, humorous, and reckless in his
country, chose to visit His Majesty and give him some excellent advice
(to make up his difference with Mataafa) couched unhappily in vivid and
figurative language.  The adviser now sleeps in the Pacific, but the evil
that he chanced to do lives after him.  His Majesty was greatly (and I
must say justly) offended by the freedom of the expressions used; he
appealed to his white advisers; and these, whether from want of thought
or by design, issued an ignominious proclamation.  Intending visitors to
the palace must appear before their consuls and justify their business.
The majesty of buried Samoa was henceforth only to be viewed (like a
private collection) under special permit; and was thus at once cut off
from the company and opinions of the self respecting.  To retain any
dignity in such an abject state would require a man of very different
virtues from those claimed by the not unvirtuous Laupepa.  He is not
designed to ride the whirlwind or direct the storm, rather to be the
ornament of private life.  He is kind, gentle, patient as Job,
conspicuously well-intentioned, of charming manners; and when he pleases,
he has one accomplishment in which he now begins to be alone--I mean that
he can pronounce correctly his own beautiful language.

The government of Brandeis accomplished a good deal and was continually
and heroically attempting more.  The government of our two whites has
confined itself almost wholly to paying and receiving salaries.  They
have built, indeed, a house for the president; they are believed (if that
be a merit) to have bought the local newspaper with government funds; and
their rule has been enlivened by a number of scandals, into which I feel
with relief that it is unnecessary I should enter.  Even if the three
Powers do not remove these gentlemen, their absurd and disastrous
government must perish by itself of inanition.  Native taxes (except
perhaps from Mataafa, true to his own private policy) have long been
beyond hope.  And only the other day (May 6th, 1892), on the expressed
ground that there was no guarantee as to how the funds would be expended,
and that the president consistently refused to allow the verification of
his cash balances, the municipal council has negatived the proposal to
call up further taxes from the whites.  All is well that ends even ill,
so that it end; and we believe that with the last dollar we shall see the
last of the last functionary.  Now when it is so nearly over, we can
afford to smile at this extraordinary passage, though we must still sigh
over the occasion lost.

* * * * *

_Malie_.  The way to Malie lies round the shores of Faleula bay and
through a succession of pleasant groves and villages.  The road, one of
the works of Brandeis, is now cut up by pig fences.  Eight times you must
leap a barrier of cocoa posts; the take-off and the landing both in a
patch of mire planted with big stones, and the stones sometimes reddened
with the blood of horses that have gone before.  To make these obstacles
more annoying, you have sometimes to wait while a black boar clambers
sedately over the so-called pig fence.  Nothing can more thoroughly
depict the worst side of the Samoan character than these useless barriers
which deface their only road.  It was one of the first orders issued by
the government of Mulinuu after the coming of the chief justice, to have
the passage cleared.  It is the disgrace of Mataafa that the thing is not
yet done.

The village of Malie is the scene of prosperity and peace.  In a very
good account of a visit there, published in the _Australasian_, the
writer describes it to be fortified; she must have been deceived by the
appearance of some pig walls on the shore.  There is no fortification, no
parade of war.  I understand that from one to five hundred fighting men
are always within reach; but I have never seen more than five together
under arms, and these were the king's guard of honour.  A Sabbath quiet
broods over the well-weeded green, the picketed horses, the troops of
pigs, the round or oval native dwellings.  Of these there are a
surprising number, very fine of their sort: yet more are in the building;
and in the midst a tall house of assembly, by far the greatest Samoan
structure now in these islands, stands about half finished and already
makes a figure in the landscape.  No bustle is to be observed, but the
work accomplished testifies to a still activity.

The centre-piece of all is the high chief himself,
Malietoa-Tuiatua-Tuiaana Mataafa, king--or not king--or king-claimant--of
Samoa.  All goes to him, all comes from him.  Native deputations bring
him gifts and are feasted in return.  White travellers, to their
indescribable irritation, are (on his approach) waved from his path by
his armed guards.  He summons his dancers by the note of a bugle.  He
sits nightly at home before a semicircle of talking-men from many
quarters of the islands, delivering and hearing those ornate and elegant
orations in which the Samoan heart delights.  About himself and all his
surroundings there breathes a striking sense of order, tranquillity, and
native plenty.  He is of a tall and powerful person, sixty years of age,
white-haired and with a white moustache; his eyes bright and quiet; his
jaw perceptibly underhung, which gives him something of the expression of
a benevolent mastiff; his manners dignified and a thought insinuating,
with an air of a Catholic prelate.  He was never married, and a natural
daughter attends upon his guests.  Long since he made a vow of
chastity,--"to live as our Lord lived on this earth" and Polynesians
report with bated breath that he has kept it.  On all such points, true
to his Catholic training, he is inclined to be even rigid.  Lauati, the
pivot of Savaii, has recently repudiated his wife and taken a fairer; and
when I was last in Malie, Mataafa (with a strange superiority to his own
interests) had but just despatched a reprimand.  In his immediate circle,
in spite of the smoothness of his ways, he is said to be more respected
than beloved; and his influence is the child rather of authority than
popularity.  No Samoan grandee now living need have attempted that which
he has accomplished during the last twelve months with unimpaired
prestige, not only to withhold his followers from war, but to send them
to be judged in the camp of their enemies on Mulinuu.  And it is a matter
of debate whether such a triumph of authority were ever possible before.
Speaking for myself, I have visited and dwelt in almost every seat of the
Polynesian race, and have met but one man who gave me a stronger
impression of character and parts.

About the situation, Mataafa expresses himself with unshaken peace.  To
the chief justice he refers with some bitterness; to Laupepa, with a
smile, as "my poor brother."  For himself, he stands upon the treaty, and
expects sooner or later an election in which he shall be raised to the
chief power.  In the meanwhile, or for an alternative, he would willingly
embrace a compromise with Laupepa; to which he would probably add one
condition, that the joint government should remain seated at Malie, a
sensible but not inconvenient distance from white intrigues and white
officials.  One circumstance in my last interview particularly pleased
me.  The king's chief scribe, Esela, is an old employe under Tamasese,
and the talk ran some while upon the character of Brandeis.  Loyalty in
this world is after all not thrown away; Brandeis was guilty, in Samoan
eyes, of many irritating errors, but he stood true to Tamasese; in the
course of time a sense of this virtue and of his general uprightness has
obliterated the memory of his mistakes; and it would have done his heart
good if he could have heard his old scribe and his old adversary join in
praising him.  "Yes," concluded Mataafa, "I wish we had Planteisa back
again."  _A quelque chose malheur est bon_.  So strong is the impression
produced by the defects of Cedarcrantz and Baron Senfft, that I believe
Mataafa far from singular in this opinion, and that the return of the
upright Brandeis might be even welcome to many.

I must add a last touch to the picture of Malie and the pretender's life.
About four in the morning, the visitor in his house will be awakened by
the note of a pipe, blown without, very softly and to a soothing melody.
This is Mataafa's private luxury to lead on pleasant dreams.  We have a
bird here in Samoa that about the same hour of darkness sings in the
bush.  The father of Mataafa, while he lived, was a great friend and
protector to all living creatures, and passed under the by-name of _the
King of Birds_.  It may be it was among the woodland clients of the sire
that the son acquired his fancy for this morning music.

* * * * *

I have now sought to render without extenuation the impressions received:
of dignity, plenty, and peace at Malie, of bankruptcy and distraction at
Mulinuu.  And I wish I might here bring to an end ungrateful labours.  But
I am sensible that there remain two points on which it would be improper
to be silent.  I should be blamed if I did not indicate a practical
conclusion; and I should blame myself if I did not do a little justice to
that tried company of the Land Commissioners.

The Land Commission has been in many senses unfortunate.  The original
German member, a gentleman of the name of Eggert, fell early into
precarious health; his work was from the first interrupted, he was at
last (to the regret of all that knew him) invalided home; and his
successor had but just arrived.  In like manner, the first American
commissioner, Henry C. Ide, a man of character and intelligence, was
recalled (I believe by private affairs) when he was but just settling
into the spirit of the work; and though his place was promptly filled by
ex-Governor Ormsbee, a worthy successor, distinguished by strong and
vivacious common sense, the break was again sensible.  The English
commissioner, my friend Bazett Michael Haggard, is thus the only one who
has continued at his post since the beginning.  And yet, in spite of
these unusual changes, the Commission has a record perhaps unrivalled
among international commissions.  It has been unanimous practically from
the first until the last; and out of some four hundred cases disposed of,
there is but one on which the members were divided.  It was the more
unfortunate they should have early fallen in a difficulty with the chief
justice.  The original ground of this is supposed to be a difference of
opinion as to the import of the Berlin Act, on which, as a layman, it
would be unbecoming if I were to offer an opinion.  But it must always
seem as if the chief justice had suffered himself to be irritated beyond
the bounds of discretion.  It must always seem as if his original attempt
to deprive the commissioners of the services of a secretary and the use
of a safe were even senseless; and his step in printing and posting a
proclamation denying their jurisdiction were equally impolitic and
undignified.  The dispute had a secondary result worse than itself.  The
gentleman appointed to be Natives' Advocate shared the chief justice's
opinion, was his close intimate, advised with him almost daily, and
drifted at last into an attitude of opposition to his colleagues.  He
suffered himself besides (being a layman in law) to embrace the interest
of his clients with something of the warmth of a partisan.  Disagreeable
scenes occurred in court; the advocate was more than once reproved, he
was warned that his consultations with the judge of appeal tended to
damage his own character and to lower the credit of the appellate court.
Having lost some cases on which he set importance, it should seem that he
spoke unwisely among natives.  A sudden cry of colour prejudice went up;
and Samoans were heard to assure each other that it was useless to appear
before the Land Commission, which was sworn to support the whites.

This deplorable state of affairs was brought to an end by the departure
from Samoa of the Natives' Advocate.  He was succeeded _pro tempore_ by a
young New Zealander, E. W. Gurr, not much more versed in law than
himself, and very much less so in Samoan.  Whether by more skill or
better fortune, Gurr has been able in the course of a few weeks to
recover for the natives several important tracts of land; and the
prejudice against the Commission seems to be abating as fast as it arose.
I should not omit to say that, in the eagerness of the original advocate,
there was much that was amiable; nor must I fail to point out how much
there was of blindness.  Fired by the ardour of pursuit, he seems to have
regarded his immediate clients as the only natives extant and the epitome
and emblem of the Samoan race.  Thus, in the case that was the most
exclaimed against as "an injustice to natives," his client, Puaauli, was
certainly nonsuited.  But in that intricate affair who lost the money?
The German firm.  And who got the land?  Other natives.  To twist such a
decision into evidence, either of a prejudice against Samoans or a
partiality to whites, is to keep one eye shut and have the other
bandaged.

And lastly, one word as to the future.  Laupepa and Mataafa stand over
against each other, rivals with no third competitor.  They may be said to
hold the great name of Malietoa in commission; each has borne the style,
each exercised the authority, of a Samoan king; one is secure of the
small but compact and fervent following of the Catholics, the other has
the sympathies of a large part of the Protestant majority, and upon any
sign of Catholic aggression would have more.  With men so nearly
balanced, it may be asked whether a prolonged successful exercise of
power be possible for either.  In the case of the feeble Laupepa, it is
certainly not; we have the proof before us.  Nor do I think we should
judge, from what we see to-day, that it would be possible, or would
continue to be possible, even for the kingly Mataafa.  It is always the
easier game to be in opposition.  The tale of David and Saul would
infallibly be re-enacted; once more we shall have two kings in the
land,--the latent and the patent; and the house of the first will become
once more the resort of "every one that is in distress, and every one
that is in debt, and every one that is discontented."  Against such odds
it is my fear that Mataafa might contend in vain; it is beyond the bounds
of my imagination that Laupepa should contend at all.  Foreign ships and
bayonets is the cure proposed in Mulinuu.  And certainly, if people at
home desire that money should be thrown away and blood shed in Samoa, an
effect of a kind, and for the time, may be produced.  Its nature and
prospective durability I will ask readers of this volume to forecast for
themselves.  There is one way to peace and unity: that Laupepa and
Mataafa should be again conjoined on the best terms procurable.  There
may be other ways, although I cannot see them; but not even malevolence,
not even stupidity, can deny that this is one.  It seems, indeed, so
obvious, and sure, and easy, that men look about with amazement and
suspicion, seeking some hidden motive why it should not be adopted.

To Laupepa's opposition, as shown in the case of the Lauati scheme, no
dweller in Samoa will give weight, for they know him to be as putty in
the hands of his advisers.  It may be right, it may be wrong, but we are
many of us driven to the conclusion that the stumbling-block is Fangalii,
and that the memorial of that affair shadows appropriately the house of a
king who reigns in right of it.  If this be all, it should not trouble us
long.  Germany has shown she can be generous; it now remains for her only
to forget a natural but certainly ill-grounded prejudice, and allow to
him, who was sole king before the plenipotentiaries assembled, and who
would be sole king to-morrow if the Berlin Act could be rescinded, a
fitting share of rule.  The future of Samoa should lie thus in the hands
of a single man, on whom the eyes of Europe are already fixed.  Great
concerns press on his attention; the Samoan group, in his view, is but as
a grain of dust; and the country where he reigns has bled on too many
august scenes of victory to remember for ever a blundering skirmish in
the plantation of Vailele.  It is to him--to the sovereign of the wise
Stuebel and the loyal Brandeis,--that I make my appeal.

_May_ 25, 1892.






ANTWERP TO BOOM



We made a great stir in Antwerp Docks.  A stevedore and a lot of
dock porters took up the two canoes, and ran with them for the
slip.  A crowd of children followed cheering.  The Cigarette went
off in a splash and a bubble of small breaking water.  Next moment
the Arethusa was after her.  A steamer was coming down, men on the
paddle-box shouted hoarse warnings, the stevedore and his porters
were bawling from the quay.  But in a stroke or two the canoes were
away out in the middle of the Scheldt, and all steamers, and
stevedores, and other 'long-shore vanities were left behind.

The sun shone brightly; the tide was making--four jolly miles an
hour; the wind blew steadily, with occasional squalls.  For my
part, I had never been in a canoe under sail in my life; and my
first experiment out in the middle of this big river was not made
without some trepidation.  What would happen when the wind first
caught my little canvas?  I suppose it was almost as trying a
venture into the regions of the unknown as to publish a first book,
or to marry.  But my doubts were not of long duration; and in five
minutes you will not be surprised to learn that I had tied my
sheet.

I own I was a little struck by this circumstance myself; of course,
in company with the rest of my fellow-men, I had always tied the
sheet in a sailing-boat; but in so little and crank a concern as a
canoe, and with these charging squalls, I was not prepared to find
myself follow the same principle; and it inspired me with some
contemptuous views of our regard for life.  It is certainly easier
to smoke with the sheet fastened; but I had never before weighed a
comfortable pipe of tobacco against an obvious risk, and gravely
elected for the comfortable pipe.  It is a commonplace, that we
cannot answer for ourselves before we have been tried.  But it is
not so common a reflection, and surely more consoling, that we
usually find ourselves a great deal braver and better than we
thought.  I believe this is every one's experience:  but an
apprehension that they may belie themselves in the future prevents
mankind from trumpeting this cheerful sentiment abroad.  I wish
sincerely, for it would have saved me much trouble, there had been
some one to put me in a good heart about life when I was younger;
to tell me how dangers are most portentous on a distant sight; and
how the good in a man's spirit will not suffer itself to be
overlaid, and rarely or never deserts him in the hour of need.  But
we are all for tootling on the sentimental flute in literature; and
not a man among us will go to the head of the march to sound the
heady drums.

It was agreeable upon the river.  A barge or two went past laden
with hay.  Reeds and willows bordered the stream; and cattle and
grey venerable horses came and hung their mild heads over the
embankment.  Here and there was a pleasant village among trees,
with a noisy shipping-yard; here and there a villa in a lawn.  The
wind served us well up the Scheldt and thereafter up the Rupel; and
we were running pretty free when we began to sight the brickyards
of Boom, lying for a long way on the right bank of the river.  The
left bank was still green and pastoral, with alleys of trees along
the embankment, and here and there a flight of steps to serve a
ferry, where perhaps there sat a woman with her elbows on her
knees, or an old gentleman with a staff and silver spectacles.  But
Boom and its brickyards grew smokier and shabbier with every
minute; until a great church with a clock, and a wooden bridge over
the river, indicated the central quarters of the town.

Boom is not a nice place, and is only remarkable for one thing:
that the majority of the inhabitants have a private opinion that
they can speak English, which is not justified by fact.  This gave
a kind of haziness to our intercourse.  As for the Hotel de la
Navigation, I think it is the worst feature of the place.  It
boasts of a sanded parlour, with a bar at one end, looking on the
street; and another sanded parlour, darker and colder, with an
empty bird-cage and a tricolour subscription box by way of sole
adornment, where we made shift to dine in the company of three
uncommunicative engineer apprentices and a silent bagman.  The
food, as usual in Belgium, was of a nondescript occasional
character; indeed I have never been able to detect anything in the
nature of a meal among this pleasing people; they seem to peck and
trifle with viands all day long in an amateur spirit:  tentatively
French, truly German, and somehow falling between the two.

The empty bird-cage, swept and garnished, and with no trace of the
old piping favourite, save where two wires had been pushed apart to
hold its lump of sugar, carried with it a sort of graveyard cheer.
The engineer apprentices would have nothing to say to us, nor
indeed to the bagman; but talked low and sparingly to one another,
or raked us in the gaslight with a gleam of spectacles.  For though
handsome lads, they were all (in the Scots phrase) barnacled.

There was an English maid in the hotel, who had been long enough
out of England to pick up all sorts of funny foreign idioms, and
all sorts of curious foreign ways, which need not here be
specified.  She spoke to us very fluently in her jargon, asked us
information as to the manners of the present day in England, and
obligingly corrected us when we attempted to answer.  But as we
were dealing with a woman, perhaps our information was not so much
thrown away as it appeared.  The sex likes to pick up knowledge and
yet preserve its superiority.  It is good policy, and almost
necessary in the circumstances.  If a man finds a woman admire him,
were it only for his acquaintance with geography, he will begin at
once to build upon the admiration.  It is only by unintermittent
snubbing that the pretty ones can keep us in our place.  Men, as
Miss Howe or Miss Harlowe would have said, 'are such ENCROACHERS.'
For my part, I am body and soul with the women; and after a well-
married couple, there is nothing so beautiful in the world as the
myth of the divine huntress.  It is no use for a man to take to the
woods; we know him; St. Anthony tried the same thing long ago, and
had a pitiful time of it by all accounts.  But there is this about
some women, which overtops the best gymnosophist among men, that
they suffice to themselves, and can walk in a high and cold zone
without the countenance of any trousered being.  I declare,
although the reverse of a professed ascetic, I am more obliged to
women for this ideal than I should be to the majority of them, or
indeed to any but one, for a spontaneous kiss.  There is nothing so
encouraging as the spectacle of self-sufficiency.  And when I think
of the slim and lovely maidens, running the woods all night to the
note of Diana's horn; moving among the old oaks, as fancy-free as
they; things of the forest and the starlight, not touched by the
commotion of man's hot and turbid life--although there are plenty
other ideals that I should prefer--I find my heart beat at the
thought of this one.  'Tis to fail in life, but to fail with what a
grace!  That is not lost which is not regretted.  And where--here
slips out the male--where would be much of the glory of inspiring
love, if there were no contempt to overcome?



ON THE WILLEBROEK CANAL



Next morning, when we set forth on the Willebroek Canal, the rain
began heavy and chill.  The water of the canal stood at about the
drinking temperature of tea; and under this cold aspersion, the
surface was covered with steam.  The exhilaration of departure, and
the easy motion of the boats under each stroke of the paddles,
supported us through this misfortune while it lasted; and when the
cloud passed and the sun came out again, our spirits went up above
the range of stay-at-home humours.  A good breeze rustled and
shivered in the rows of trees that bordered the canal.  The leaves
flickered in and out of the light in tumultuous masses.  It seemed
sailing weather to eye and ear; but down between the banks, the
wind reached us only in faint and desultory puffs.  There was
hardly enough to steer by.  Progress was intermittent and
unsatisfactory.  A jocular person, of marine antecedents, hailed us
from the tow-path with a 'C'est vite, mais c'est long.'

The canal was busy enough.  Every now and then we met or overtook a
long string of boats, with great green tillers; high sterns with a
window on either side of the rudder, and perhaps a jug or a flower-
pot in one of the windows; a dinghy following behind; a woman
busied about the day's dinner, and a handful of children.  These
barges were all tied one behind the other with tow ropes, to the
number of twenty-five or thirty; and the line was headed and kept
in motion by a steamer of strange construction.  It had neither
paddle-wheel nor screw; but by some gear not rightly comprehensible
to the unmechanical mind, it fetched up over its bow a small bright
chain which lay along the bottom of the canal, and paying it out
again over the stern, dragged itself forward, link by link, with
its whole retinue of loaded skows.  Until one had found out the key
to the enigma, there was something solemn and uncomfortable in the
progress of one of these trains, as it moved gently along the water
with nothing to mark its advance but an eddy alongside dying away
into the wake.

Of all the creatures of commercial enterprise, a canal barge is by
far the most delightful to consider.  It may spread its sails, and
then you see it sailing high above the tree-tops and the windmill,
sailing on the aqueduct, sailing through the green corn-lands:  the
most picturesque of things amphibious.  Or the horse plods along at
a foot-pace as if there were no such thing as business in the
world; and the man dreaming at the tiller sees the same spire on
the horizon all day long.  It is a mystery how things ever get to
their destination at this rate; and to see the barges waiting their
turn at a lock, affords a fine lesson of how easily the world may
be taken.  There should be many contented spirits on board, for
such a life is both to travel and to stay at home.

The chimney smokes for dinner as you go along; the banks of the
canal slowly unroll their scenery to contemplative eyes; the barge
floats by great forests and through great cities with their public
buildings and their lamps at night; and for the bargee, in his
floating home, 'travelling abed,' it is merely as if he were
listening to another man's story or turning the leaves of a
picture-book in which he had no concern.  He may take his afternoon
walk in some foreign country on the banks of the canal, and then
come home to dinner at his own fireside.

There is not enough exercise in such a life for any high measure of
health; but a high measure of health is only necessary for
unhealthy people.  The slug of a fellow, who is never ill nor well,
has a quiet time of it in life, and dies all the easier.

I am sure I would rather be a bargee than occupy any position under
heaven that required attendance at an office.  There are few
callings, I should say, where a man gives up less of his liberty in
return for regular meals.  The bargee is on shipboard--he is master
in his own ship--he can land whenever he will--he can never be kept
beating off a lee-shore a whole frosty night when the sheets are as
hard as iron; and so far as I can make out, time stands as nearly
still with him as is compatible with the return of bed-time or the
dinner-hour.  It is not easy to see why a bargee should ever die.

Half-way between Willebroek and Villevorde, in a beautiful reach of
canal like a squire's avenue, we went ashore to lunch.  There were
two eggs, a junk of bread, and a bottle of wine on board the
Arethusa; and two eggs and an Etna cooking apparatus on board the
Cigarette.  The master of the latter boat smashed one of the eggs
in the course of disembarkation; but observing pleasantly that it
might still be cooked a la papier, he dropped it into the Etna, in
its covering of Flemish newspaper.  We landed in a blink of fine
weather; but we had not been two minutes ashore before the wind
freshened into half a gale, and the rain began to patter on our
shoulders.  We sat as close about the Etna as we could.  The
spirits burned with great ostentation; the grass caught flame every
minute or two, and had to be trodden out; and before long, there
were several burnt fingers of the party.  But the solid quantity of
cookery accomplished was out of proportion with so much display;
and when we desisted, after two applications of the fire, the sound
egg was little more than loo-warm; and as for a la papier, it was a
cold and sordid fricassee of printer's ink and broken egg-shell.
We made shift to roast the other two, by putting them close to the
burning spirits; and that with better success.  And then we
uncorked the bottle of wine, and sat down in a ditch with our canoe
aprons over our knees.  It rained smartly.  Discomfort, when it is
honestly uncomfortable and makes no nauseous pretensions to the
contrary, is a vastly humorous business; and people well steeped
and stupefied in the open air are in a good vein for laughter.
From this point of view, even egg a la papier offered by way of
food may pass muster as a sort of accessory to the fun.  But this
manner of jest, although it may be taken in good part, does not
invite repetition; and from that time forward, the Etna voyaged
like a gentleman in the locker of the Cigarette.

It is almost unnecessary to mention that when lunch was over and we
got aboard again and made sail, the wind promptly died away.  The
rest of the journey to Villevorde, we still spread our canvas to
the unfavouring air; and with now and then a puff, and now and then
a spell of paddling, drifted along from lock to lock, between the
orderly trees.

It was a fine, green, fat landscape; or rather a mere green water-
lane, going on from village to village.  Things had a settled look,
as in places long lived in.  Crop-headed children spat upon us from
the bridges as we went below, with a true conservative feeling.
But even more conservative were the fishermen, intent upon their
floats, who let us go by without one glance.  They perched upon
sterlings and buttresses and along the slope of the embankment,
gently occupied.  They were indifferent, like pieces of dead
nature.  They did not move any more than if they had been fishing
in an old Dutch print.  The leaves fluttered, the water lapped, but
they continued in one stay like so many churches established by
law.  You might have trepanned every one of their innocent heads,
and found no more than so much coiled fishing-line below their
skulls.  I do not care for your stalwart fellows in india-rubber
stockings breasting up mountain torrents with a salmon rod; but I
do dearly love the class of man who plies his unfruitful art, for
ever and a day, by still and depopulated waters.

At the last lock, just beyond Villevorde, there was a lock-mistress
who spoke French comprehensibly, and told us we were still a couple
of leagues from Brussels.  At the same place, the rain began again.
It fell in straight, parallel lines; and the surface of the canal
was thrown up into an infinity of little crystal fountains.  There
were no beds to be had in the neighbourhood.  Nothing for it but to
lay the sails aside and address ourselves to steady paddling in the
rain.

Beautiful country houses, with clocks and long lines of shuttered
windows, and fine old trees standing in groves and avenues, gave a
rich and sombre aspect in the rain and the deepening dusk to the
shores of the canal.  I seem to have seen something of the same
effect in engravings:  opulent landscapes, deserted and overhung
with the passage of storm.  And throughout we had the escort of a
hooded cart, which trotted shabbily along the tow-path, and kept at
an almost uniform distance in our wake.



THE ROYAL SPORT NAUTIQUE



The rain took off near Laeken.  But the sun was already down; the
air was chill; and we had scarcely a dry stitch between the pair of
us.  Nay, now we found ourselves near the end of the Allee Verte,
and on the very threshold of Brussels, we were confronted by a
serious difficulty.  The shores were closely lined by canal boats
waiting their turn at the lock.  Nowhere was there any convenient
landing-place; nowhere so much as a stable-yard to leave the canoes
in for the night.  We scrambled ashore and entered an estaminet
where some sorry fellows were drinking with the landlord.  The
landlord was pretty round with us; he knew of no coach-house or
stable-yard, nothing of the sort; and seeing we had come with no
mind to drink, he did not conceal his impatience to be rid of us.
One of the sorry fellows came to the rescue.  Somewhere in the
corner of the basin there was a slip, he informed us, and something
else besides, not very clearly defined by him, but hopefully
construed by his hearers.

Sure enough there was the slip in the corner of the basin; and at
the top of it two nice-looking lads in boating clothes.  The
Arethusa addressed himself to these.  One of them said there would
be no difficulty about a night's lodging for our boats; and the
other, taking a cigarette from his lips, inquired if they were made
by Searle and Son.  The name was quite an introduction.  Half-a-
dozen other young men came out of a boat-house bearing the
superscription ROYAL SPORT NAUTIQUE, and joined in the talk.  They
were all very polite, voluble, and enthusiastic; and their
discourse was interlarded with English boating terms, and the names
of English boat-builders and English clubs.  I do not know, to my
shame, any spot in my native land where I should have been so
warmly received by the same number of people.  We were English
boating-men, and the Belgian boating-men fell upon our necks.  I
wonder if French Huguenots were as cordially greeted by English
Protestants when they came across the Channel out of great
tribulation.  But after all, what religion knits people so closely
as a common sport?

The canoes were carried into the boat-house; they were washed down
for us by the Club servants, the sails were hung out to dry, and
everything made as snug and tidy as a picture.  And in the
meanwhile we were led upstairs by our new-found brethren, for so
more than one of them stated the relationship, and made free of
their lavatory.  This one lent us soap, that one a towel, a third
and fourth helped us to undo our bags.  And all the time such
questions, such assurances of respect and sympathy!  I declare I
never knew what glory was before.

'Yes, yes, the Royal Sport Nautique is the oldest club in Belgium.'

'We number two hundred.'

'We'--this is not a substantive speech, but an abstract of many
speeches, the impression left upon my mind after a great deal of
talk; and very youthful, pleasant, natural, and patriotic it seems
to me to be--'We have gained all races, except those where we were
cheated by the French.'

'You must leave all your wet things to be dried.'

'O! entre freres!  In any boat-house in England we should find the
same.'  (I cordially hope they might.)

'En Angleterre, vous employez des sliding-seats, n'est-ce pas?'

'We are all employed in commerce during the day; but in the
evening, voyez-vous, nous sommes serieux.'

These were the words.  They were all employed over the frivolous
mercantile concerns of Belgium during the day; but in the evening
they found some hours for the serious concerns of life.  I may have
a wrong idea of wisdom, but I think that was a very wise remark.
People connected with literature and philosophy are busy all their
days in getting rid of second-hand notions and false standards.  It
is their profession, in the sweat of their brows, by dogged
thinking, to recover their old fresh view of life, and distinguish
what they really and originally like, from what they have only
learned to tolerate perforce.  And these Royal Nautical Sportsmen
had the distinction still quite legible in their hearts.  They had
still those clean perceptions of what is nice and nasty, what is
interesting and what is dull, which envious old gentlemen refer to
as illusions.  The nightmare illusion of middle age, the bear's hug
of custom gradually squeezing the life out of a man's soul, had not
yet begun for these happy-starred young Belgians.  They still knew
that the interest they took in their business was a trifling affair
compared to their spontaneous, long-suffering affection for
nautical sports.  To know what you prefer, instead of humbly saying
Amen to what the world tells you you ought to prefer, is to have
kept your soul alive.  Such a man may be generous; he may be honest
in something more than the commercial sense; he may love his
friends with an elective, personal sympathy, and not accept them as
an adjunct of the station to which he has been called.  He may be a
man, in short, acting on his own instincts, keeping in his own
shape that God made him in; and not a mere crank in the social
engine-house, welded on principles that he does not understand, and
for purposes that he does not care for.

For will any one dare to tell me that business is more entertaining
than fooling among boats?  He must have never seen a boat, or never
seen an office, who says so.  And for certain the one is a great
deal better for the health.  There should be nothing so much a
man's business as his amusements.  Nothing but money-grubbing can
be put forward to the contrary; no one but

Mammon, the least erected spirit that fell
From Heaven,


durst risk a word in answer.  It is but a lying cant that would
represent the merchant and the banker as people disinterestedly
toiling for mankind, and then most useful when they are most
absorbed in their transactions; for the man is more important than
his services.  And when my Royal Nautical Sportsman shall have so
far fallen from his hopeful youth that he cannot pluck up an
enthusiasm over anything but his ledger, I venture to doubt whether
he will be near so nice a fellow, and whether he would welcome,
with so good a grace, a couple of drenched Englishmen paddling into
Brussels in the dusk.

When we had changed our wet clothes and drunk a glass of pale ale
to the Club's prosperity, one of their number escorted us to an
hotel.  He would not join us at our dinner, but he had no objection
to a glass of wine.  Enthusiasm is very wearing; and I begin to
understand why prophets were unpopular in Judaea, where they were
best known.  For three stricken hours did this excellent young man
sit beside us to dilate on boats and boat-races; and before he
left, he was kind enough to order our bedroom candles.

We endeavoured now and again to change the subject; but the
diversion did not last a moment:  the Royal Nautical Sportsman
bridled, shied, answered the question, and then breasted once more
into the swelling tide of his subject.  I call it his subject; but
I think it was he who was subjected.  The Arethusa, who holds all
racing as a creature of the devil, found himself in a pitiful
dilemma.  He durst not own his ignorance for the honour of Old
England, and spoke away about English clubs and English oarsmen
whose fame had never before come to his ears.  Several times, and,
once above all, on the question of sliding-seats, he was within an
ace of exposure.  As for the Cigarette, who has rowed races in the
heat of his blood, but now disowns these slips of his wanton youth,
his case was still more desperate; for the Royal Nautical proposed
that he should take an oar in one of their eights on the morrow, to
compare the English with the Belgian stroke.  I could see my friend
perspiring in his chair whenever that particular topic came up.
And there was yet another proposal which had the same effect on
both of us.  It appeared that the champion canoeist of Europe (as
well as most other champions) was a Royal Nautical Sportsman.  And
if we would only wait until the Sunday, this infernal paddler would
be so condescending as to accompany us on our next stage.  Neither
of us had the least desire to drive the coursers of the sun against
Apollo.

When the young man was gone, we countermanded our candles, and
ordered some brandy and water.  The great billows had gone over our
head.  The Royal Nautical Sportsmen were as nice young fellows as a
man would wish to see, but they were a trifle too young and a
thought too nautical for us.  We began to see that we were old and
cynical; we liked ease and the agreeable rambling of the human mind
about this and the other subject; we did not want to disgrace our
native land by messing an eight, or toiling pitifully in the wake
of the champion canoeist.  In short, we had recourse to flight.  It
seemed ungrateful, but we tried to make that good on a card loaded
with sincere compliments.  And indeed it was no time for scruples;
we seemed to feel the hot breath of the champion on our necks.



AT MAUBEUGE



Partly from the terror we had of our good friends the Royal
Nauticals, partly from the fact that there were no fewer than
fifty-five locks between Brussels and Charleroi, we concluded that
we should travel by train across the frontier, boats and all.
Fifty-five locks in a day's journey was pretty well tantamount to
trudging the whole distance on foot, with the canoes upon our
shoulders, an object of astonishment to the trees on the canal
side, and of honest derision to all right-thinking children.

To pass the frontier, even in a train, is a difficult matter for
the Arethusa.  He is somehow or other a marked man for the official
eye.  Wherever he journeys, there are the officers gathered
together.  Treaties are solemnly signed, foreign ministers,
ambassadors, and consuls sit throned in state from China to Peru,
and the Union Jack flutters on all the winds of heaven.  Under
these safeguards, portly clergymen, school-mistresses, gentlemen in
grey tweed suits, and all the ruck and rabble of British touristry
pour unhindered, Murray in hand, over the railways of the
Continent, and yet the slim person of the Arethusa is taken in the
meshes, while these great fish go on their way rejoicing.  If he
travels without a passport, he is cast, without any figure about
the matter, into noisome dungeons:  if his papers are in order, he
is suffered to go his way indeed, but not until he has been
humiliated by a general incredulity.  He is a born British subject,
yet he has never succeeded in persuading a single official of his
nationality.  He flatters himself he is indifferent honest; yet he
is rarely taken for anything better than a spy, and there is no
absurd and disreputable means of livelihood but has been attributed
to him in some heat of official or popular distrust. . . .

For the life of me I cannot understand it.  I too have been knolled
to church, and sat at good men's feasts; but I bear no mark of it.
I am as strange as a Jack Indian to their official spectacles.  I
might come from any part of the globe, it seems, except from where
I do.  My ancestors have laboured in vain, and the glorious
Constitution cannot protect me in my walks abroad.  It is a great
thing, believe me, to present a good normal type of the nation you
belong to.

Nobody else was asked for his papers on the way to Maubeuge; but I
was; and although I clung to my rights, I had to choose at last
between accepting the humiliation and being left behind by the
train.  I was sorry to give way; but I wanted to get to Maubeuge.

Maubeuge is a fortified town, with a very good inn, the Grand Cerf.
It seemed to be inhabited principally by soldiers and bagmen; at
least, these were all that we saw, except the hotel servants.  We
had to stay there some time, for the canoes were in no hurry to
follow us, and at last stuck hopelessly in the custom-house until
we went back to liberate them.  There was nothing to do, nothing to
see.  We had good meals, which was a great matter; but that was
all.

The Cigarette was nearly taken up upon a charge of drawing the
fortifications:  a feat of which he was hopelessly incapable.  And
besides, as I suppose each belligerent nation has a plan of the
other's fortified places already, these precautions are of the
nature of shutting the stable door after the steed is away.  But I
have no doubt they help to keep up a good spirit at home.  It is a
great thing if you can persuade people that they are somehow or
other partakers in a mystery.  It makes them feel bigger.  Even the
Freemasons, who have been shown up to satiety, preserve a kind of
pride; and not a grocer among them, however honest, harmless, and
empty-headed he may feel himself to be at bottom, but comes home
from one of their coenacula with a portentous significance for
himself.

It is an odd thing, how happily two people, if there are two, can
live in a place where they have no acquaintance.  I think the
spectacle of a whole life in which you have no part paralyses
personal desire.  You are content to become a mere spectator.  The
baker stands in his door; the colonel with his three medals goes by
to the cafe at night; the troops drum and trumpet and man the
ramparts, as bold as so many lions.  It would task language to say
how placidly you behold all this.  In a place where you have taken
some root, you are provoked out of your indifference; you have a
hand in the game; your friends are fighting with the army.  But in
a strange town, not small enough to grow too soon familiar, nor so
large as to have laid itself out for travellers, you stand so far
apart from the business, that you positively forget it would be
possible to go nearer; you have so little human interest around
you, that you do not remember yourself to be a man.  Perhaps, in a
very short time, you would be one no longer.  Gymnosophists go into
a wood, with all nature seething around them, with romance on every
side; it would be much more to the purpose if they took up their
abode in a dull country town, where they should see just so much of
humanity as to keep them from desiring more, and only the stale
externals of man's life.  These externals are as dead to us as so
many formalities, and speak a dead language in our eyes and ears.
They have no more meaning than an oath or a salutation.  We are so
much accustomed to see married couples going to church of a Sunday
that we have clean forgotten what they represent; and novelists are
driven to rehabilitate adultery, no less, when they wish to show us
what a beautiful thing it is for a man and a woman to live for each
other.

One person in Maubeuge, however, showed me something more than his
outside.  That was the driver of the hotel omnibus:  a mean enough
looking little man, as well as I can remember; but with a spark of
something human in his soul.  He had heard of our little journey,
and came to me at once in envious sympathy.  How he longed to
travel! he told me.  How he longed to be somewhere else, and see
the round world before he went into the grave!  'Here I am,' said
he.  'I drive to the station.  Well.  And then I drive back again
to the hotel.  And so on every day and all the week round.  My God,
is that life?'  I could not say I thought it was--for him.  He
pressed me to tell him where I had been, and where I hoped to go;
and as he listened, I declare the fellow sighed.  Might not this
have been a brave African traveller, or gone to the Indies after
Drake?  But it is an evil age for the gypsily inclined among men.
He who can sit squarest on a three-legged stool, he it is who has
the wealth and glory.

I wonder if my friend is still driving the omnibus for the Grand
Cerf?  Not very likely, I believe; for I think he was on the eve of
mutiny when we passed through, and perhaps our passage determined
him for good.  Better a thousand times that he should be a tramp,
and mend pots and pans by the wayside, and sleep under trees, and
see the dawn and the sunset every day above a new horizon.  I think
I hear you say that it is a respectable position to drive an
omnibus?  Very well.  What right has he who likes it not, to keep
those who would like it dearly out of this respectable position?
Suppose a dish were not to my taste, and you told me that it was a
favourite amongst the rest of the company, what should I conclude
from that?  Not to finish the dish against my stomach, I suppose.

Respectability is a very good thing in its way, but it does not
rise superior to all considerations.  I would not for a moment
venture to hint that it was a matter of taste; but I think I will
go as far as this:  that if a position is admittedly unkind,
uncomfortable, unnecessary, and superfluously useless, although it
were as respectable as the Church of England, the sooner a man is
out of it, the better for himself, and all concerned.



ON THE SAMBRE CANALISED



TO QUARTES


About three in the afternoon the whole establishment of the Grand
Cerf accompanied us to the water's edge.  The man of the omnibus
was there with haggard eyes.  Poor cage-bird!  Do I not remember
the time when I myself haunted the station, to watch train after
train carry its complement of freemen into the night, and read the
names of distant places on the time-bills with indescribable
longings?

We were not clear of the fortifications before the rain began.  The
wind was contrary, and blew in furious gusts; nor were the aspects
of nature any more clement than the doings of the sky.  For we
passed through a stretch of blighted country, sparsely covered with
brush, but handsomely enough diversified with factory chimneys.  We
landed in a soiled meadow among some pollards, and there smoked a
pipe in a flaw of fair weather.  But the wind blew so hard, we
could get little else to smoke.  There were no natural objects in
the neighbourhood, but some sordid workshops.  A group of children
headed by a tall girl stood and watched us from a little distance
all the time we stayed.  I heartily wonder what they thought of us.

At Hautmont, the lock was almost impassable; the landing-place
being steep and high, and the launch at a long distance.  Near a
dozen grimy workmen lent us a hand.  They refused any reward; and,
what is much better, refused it handsomely, without conveying any
sense of insult.  'It is a way we have in our countryside,' said
they.  And a very becoming way it is.  In Scotland, where also you
will get services for nothing, the good people reject your money as
if you had been trying to corrupt a voter.  When people take the
trouble to do dignified acts, it is worth while to take a little
more, and allow the dignity to be common to all concerned.  But in
our brave Saxon countries, where we plod threescore years and ten
in the mud, and the wind keeps singing in our ears from birth to
burial, we do our good and bad with a high hand and almost
offensively; and make even our alms a witness-bearing and an act of
war against the wrong.

After Hautmont, the sun came forth again and the wind went down;
and a little paddling took us beyond the ironworks and through a
delectable land.  The river wound among low hills, so that
sometimes the sun was at our backs, and sometimes it stood right
ahead, and the river before us was one sheet of intolerable glory.
On either hand, meadows and orchards bordered, with a margin of
sedge and water flowers, upon the river.  The hedges were of great
height, woven about the trunks of hedgerow elms; and the fields, as
they were often very small, looked like a series of bowers along
the stream.  There was never any prospect; sometimes a hill-top
with its trees would look over the nearest hedgerow, just to make a
middle distance for the sky; but that was all.  The heaven was bare
of clouds.  The atmosphere, after the rain, was of enchanting
purity.  The river doubled among the hillocks, a shining strip of
mirror glass; and the dip of the paddles set the flowers shaking
along the brink.

In the meadows wandered black and white cattle fantastically
marked.  One beast, with a white head and the rest of the body
glossy black, came to the edge to drink, and stood gravely
twitching his ears at me as I went by, like some sort of
preposterous clergyman in a play.  A moment after I heard a loud
plunge, and, turning my head, saw the clergyman struggling to
shore.  The bank had given way under his feet.

Besides the cattle, we saw no living things except a few birds and
a great many fishermen.  These sat along the edges of the meadows,
sometimes with one rod, sometimes with as many as half a score.
They seemed stupefied with contentment; and when we induced them to
exchange a few words with us about the weather, their voices
sounded quiet and far away.  There was a strange diversity of
opinion among them as to the kind of fish for which they set their
lures; although they were all agreed in this, that the river was
abundantly supplied.  Where it was plain that no two of them had
ever caught the same kind of fish, we could not help suspecting
that perhaps not any one of them had ever caught a fish at all.  I
hope, since the afternoon was so lovely, that they were one and all
rewarded; and that a silver booty went home in every basket for the
pot.  Some of my friends would cry shame on me for this; but I
prefer a man, were he only an angler, to the bravest pair of gills
in all God's waters.  I do not affect fishes unless when cooked in
sauce; whereas an angler is an important piece of river scenery,
and hence deserves some recognition among canoeists.  He can always
tell you where you are after a mild fashion; and his quiet presence
serves to accentuate the solitude and stillness, and remind you of
the glittering citizens below your boat.

The Sambre turned so industriously to and fro among his little
hills, that it was past six before we drew near the lock at
Quartes.  There were some children on the tow-path, with whom the
Cigarette fell into a chaffing talk as they ran along beside us.
It was in vain that I warned him.  In vain I told him, in English,
that boys were the most dangerous creatures; and if once you began
with them, it was safe to end in a shower of stones.  For my own
part, whenever anything was addressed to me, I smiled gently and
shook my head as though I were an inoffensive person inadequately
acquainted with French.  For indeed I have had such experience at
home, that I would sooner meet many wild animals than a troop of
healthy urchins.

But I was doing injustice to these peaceable young Hainaulters.
When the Cigarette went off to make inquiries, I got out upon the
bank to smoke a pipe and superintend the boats, and became at once
the centre of much amiable curiosity.  The children had been joined
by this time by a young woman and a mild lad who had lost an arm;
and this gave me more security.  When I let slip my first word or
so in French, a little girl nodded her head with a comical grown-up
air.  'Ah, you see,' she said, 'he understands well enough now; he
was just making believe.'  And the little group laughed together
very good-naturedly.

They were much impressed when they heard we came from England; and
the little girl proffered the information that England was an
island 'and a far way from here--bien loin d'ici.'

'Ay, you may say that, a far way from here,' said the lad with one
arm.

I was as nearly home-sick as ever I was in my life; they seemed to
make it such an incalculable distance to the place where I first
saw the day.  They admired the canoes very much.  And I observed
one piece of delicacy in these children, which is worthy of record.
They had been deafening us for the last hundred yards with
petitions for a sail; ay, and they deafened us to the same tune
next morning when we came to start; but then, when the canoes were
lying empty, there was no word of any such petition.  Delicacy? or
perhaps a bit of fear for the water in so crank a vessel?  I hate
cynicism a great deal worse than I do the devil; unless perhaps the
two were the same thing?  And yet 'tis a good tonic; the cold tub
and bath-towel of the sentiments; and positively necessary to life
in cases of advanced sensibility.

From the boats they turned to my costume.  They could not make
enough of my red sash; and my knife filled them with awe.

'They make them like that in England,' said the boy with one arm.
I was glad he did not know how badly we make them in England now-a-
days.  'They are for people who go away to sea,' he added, 'and to
defend one's life against great fish.'

I felt I was becoming a more and more romantic figure to the little
group at every word.  And so I suppose I was.  Even my pipe,
although it was an ordinary French clay pretty well 'trousered,' as
they call it, would have a rarity in their eyes, as a thing coming
from so far away.  And if my feathers were not very fine in
themselves, they were all from over seas.  One thing in my outfit,
however, tickled them out of all politeness; and that was the
bemired condition of my canvas shoes.  I suppose they were sure the
mud at any rate was a home product.  The little girl (who was the
genius of the party) displayed her own sabots in competition; and I
wish you could have seen how gracefully and merrily she did it.

The young woman's milk-can, a great amphora of hammered brass,
stood some way off upon the sward.  I was glad of an opportunity to
divert public attention from myself, and return some of the
compliments I had received.  So I admired it cordially both for
form and colour, telling them, and very truly, that it was as
beautiful as gold.  They were not surprised.  The things were
plainly the boast of the countryside.  And the children expatiated
on the costliness of these amphorae, which sell sometimes as high
as thirty francs apiece; told me how they were carried on donkeys,
one on either side of the saddle, a brave caparison in themselves;
and how they were to be seen all over the district, and at the
larger farms in great number and of great size.



PONT-SUR-SAMBRE



WE ARE PEDLARS


The Cigarette returned with good news.  There were beds to be had
some ten minutes' walk from where we were, at a place called Pont.
We stowed the canoes in a granary, and asked among the children for
a guide.  The circle at once widened round us, and our offers of
reward were received in dispiriting silence.  We were plainly a
pair of Bluebeards to the children; they might speak to us in
public places, and where they had the advantage of numbers; but it
was another thing to venture off alone with two uncouth and
legendary characters, who had dropped from the clouds upon their
hamlet this quiet afternoon, sashed and be-knived, and with a
flavour of great voyages.  The owner of the granary came to our
assistance, singled out one little fellow and threatened him with
corporalities; or I suspect we should have had to find the way for
ourselves.  As it was, he was more frightened at the granary man
than the strangers, having perhaps had some experience of the
former.  But I fancy his little heart must have been going at a
fine rate; for he kept trotting at a respectful distance in front,
and looking back at us with scared eyes.  Not otherwise may the
children of the young world have guided Jove or one of his Olympian
compeers on an adventure.

A miry lane led us up from Quartes with its church and bickering
windmill.  The hinds were trudging homewards from the fields.  A
brisk little woman passed us by.  She was seated across a donkey
between a pair of glittering milk-cans; and, as she went, she
kicked jauntily with her heels upon the donkey's side, and
scattered shrill remarks among the wayfarers.  It was notable that
none of the tired men took the trouble to reply.  Our conductor
soon led us out of the lane and across country.  The sun had gone
down, but the west in front of us was one lake of level gold.  The
path wandered a while in the open, and then passed under a trellis
like a bower indefinitely prolonged.  On either hand were shadowy
orchards; cottages lay low among the leaves, and sent their smoke
to heaven; every here and there, in an opening, appeared the great
gold face of the west.

I never saw the Cigarette in such an idyllic frame of mind.  He
waxed positively lyrical in praise of country scenes.  I was little
less exhilarated myself; the mild air of the evening, the shadows,
the rich lights and the silence, made a symphonious accompaniment
about our walk; and we both determined to avoid towns for the
future and sleep in hamlets.

At last the path went between two houses, and turned the party out
into a wide muddy high-road, bordered, as far as the eye could
reach on either hand, by an unsightly village.  The houses stood
well back, leaving a ribbon of waste land on either side of the
road, where there were stacks of firewood, carts, barrows, rubbish-
heaps, and a little doubtful grass.  Away on the left, a gaunt
tower stood in the middle of the street.  What it had been in past
ages, I know not:  probably a hold in time of war; but now-a-days
it bore an illegible dial-plate in its upper parts, and near the
bottom an iron letter-box.

The inn to which we had been recommended at Quartes was full, or
else the landlady did not like our looks.  I ought to say, that
with our long, damp india-rubber bags, we presented rather a
doubtful type of civilisation:  like rag-and-bone men, the
Cigarette imagined.  'These gentlemen are pedlars?--Ces messieurs
sont des marchands?'--asked the landlady.  And then, without
waiting for an answer, which I suppose she thought superfluous in
so plain a case, recommended us to a butcher who lived hard by the
tower, and took in travellers to lodge.

Thither went we.  But the butcher was flitting, and all his beds
were taken down.  Or else he didn't like our look.  As a parting
shot, we had 'These gentlemen are pedlars?'

It began to grow dark in earnest.  We could no longer distinguish
the faces of the people who passed us by with an inarticulate good-
evening.  And the householders of Pont seemed very economical with
their oil; for we saw not a single window lighted in all that long
village.  I believe it is the longest village in the world; but I
daresay in our predicament every pace counted three times over.  We
were much cast down when we came to the last auberge; and looking
in at the dark door, asked timidly if we could sleep there for the
night.  A female voice assented in no very friendly tones.  We
clapped the bags down and found our way to chairs.

The place was in total darkness, save a red glow in the chinks and
ventilators of the stove.  But now the landlady lit a lamp to see
her new guests; I suppose the darkness was what saved us another
expulsion; for I cannot say she looked gratified at our appearance.
We were in a large bare apartment, adorned with two allegorical
prints of Music and Painting, and a copy of the law against public
drunkenness.  On one side, there was a bit of a bar, with some
half-a-dozen bottles.  Two labourers sat waiting supper, in
attitudes of extreme weariness; a plain-looking lass bustled about
with a sleepy child of two; and the landlady began to derange the
pots upon the stove, and set some beefsteak to grill.

'These gentlemen are pedlars?' she asked sharply.  And that was all
the conversation forthcoming.  We began to think we might be
pedlars after all.  I never knew a population with so narrow a
range of conjecture as the innkeepers of Pont-sur-Sambre.  But
manners and bearing have not a wider currency than bank-notes.  You
have only to get far enough out of your beat, and all your
accomplished airs will go for nothing.  These Hainaulters could see
no difference between us and the average pedlar.  Indeed we had
some grounds for reflection while the steak was getting ready, to
see how perfectly they accepted us at their own valuation, and how
our best politeness and best efforts at entertainment seemed to fit
quite suitably with the character of packmen.  At least it seemed a
good account of the profession in France, that even before such
judges we could not beat them at our own weapons.

At last we were called to table.  The two hinds (and one of them
looked sadly worn and white in the face, as though sick with over-
work and under-feeding) supped off a single plate of some sort of
bread-berry, some potatoes in their jackets, a small cup of coffee
sweetened with sugar-candy, and one tumbler of swipes.  The
landlady, her son, and the lass aforesaid, took the same.  Our meal
was quite a banquet by comparison.  We had some beefsteak, not so
tender as it might have been, some of the potatoes, some cheese, an
extra glass of the swipes, and white sugar in our coffee.

You see what it is to be a gentleman--I beg your pardon, what it is
to be a pedlar.  It had not before occurred to me that a pedlar was
a great man in a labourer's ale-house; but now that I had to enact
the part for an evening, I found that so it was.  He has in his
hedge quarters somewhat the same pre-eminency as the man who takes
a private parlour in an hotel.  The more you look into it, the more
infinite are the class distinctions among men; and possibly, by a
happy dispensation, there is no one at all at the bottom of the
scale; no one but can find some superiority over somebody else, to
keep up his pride withal.

We were displeased enough with our fare.  Particularly the
Cigarette, for I tried to make believe that I was amused with the
adventure, tough beefsteak and all.  According to the Lucretian
maxim, our steak should have been flavoured by the look of the
other people's bread-berry.  But we did not find it so in practice.
You may have a head-knowledge that other people live more poorly
than yourself, but it is not agreeable--I was going to say, it is
against the etiquette of the universe--to sit at the same table and
pick your own superior diet from among their crusts.  I had not
seen such a thing done since the greedy boy at school with his
birthday cake.  It was odious enough to witness, I could remember;
and I had never thought to play the part myself.  But there again
you see what it is to be a pedlar.

There is no doubt that the poorer classes in our country are much
more charitably disposed than their superiors in wealth.  And I
fancy it must arise a great deal from the comparative indistinction
of the easy and the not so easy in these ranks.  A workman or a
pedlar cannot shutter himself off from his less comfortable
neighbours.  If he treats himself to a luxury, he must do it in the
face of a dozen who cannot.  And what should more directly lead to
charitable thoughts? . . . Thus the poor man, camping out in life,
sees it as it is, and knows that every mouthful he puts in his
belly has been wrenched out of the fingers of the hungry.

But at a certain stage of prosperity, as in a balloon ascent, the
fortunate person passes through a zone of clouds, and sublunary
matters are thenceforward hidden from his view.  He sees nothing
but the heavenly bodies, all in admirable order, and positively as
good as new.  He finds himself surrounded in the most touching
manner by the attentions of Providence, and compares himself
involuntarily with the lilies and the skylarks.  He does not
precisely sing, of course; but then he looks so unassuming in his
open landau!  If all the world dined at one table, this philosophy
would meet with some rude knocks.



PONT-SUR-SAMBRE



THE TRAVELLING MERCHANT


Like the lackeys in Moliere's farce, when the true nobleman broke
in on their high life below stairs, we were destined to be
confronted with a real pedlar.  To make the lesson still more
poignant for fallen gentlemen like us, he was a pedlar of
infinitely more consideration than the sort of scurvy fellows we
were taken for:  like a lion among mice, or a ship of war bearing
down upon two cock-boats.  Indeed, he did not deserve the name of
pedlar at all:  he was a travelling merchant.

I suppose it was about half-past eight when this worthy, Monsieur
Hector Gilliard of Maubeuge, turned up at the ale-house door in a
tilt cart drawn by a donkey, and cried cheerily on the inhabitants.
He was a lean, nervous flibbertigibbet of a man, with something the
look of an actor, and something the look of a horse-jockey.  He had
evidently prospered without any of the favours of education; for he
adhered with stern simplicity to the masculine gender, and in the
course of the evening passed off some fancy futures in a very
florid style of architecture.  With him came his wife, a comely
young woman with her hair tied in a yellow kerchief, and their son,
a little fellow of four, in a blouse and military kepi.  It was
notable that the child was many degrees better dressed than either
of the parents.  We were informed he was already at a boarding-
school; but the holidays having just commenced, he was off to spend
them with his parents on a cruise.  An enchanting holiday
occupation, was it not? to travel all day with father and mother in
the tilt cart full of countless treasures; the green country
rattling by on either side, and the children in all the villages
contemplating him with envy and wonder?  It is better fun, during
the holidays, to be the son of a travelling merchant, than son and
heir to the greatest cotton-spinner in creation.  And as for being
a reigning prince--indeed I never saw one if it was not Master
Gilliard!

While M. Hector and the son of the house were putting up the
donkey, and getting all the valuables under lock and key, the
landlady warmed up the remains of our beefsteak, and fried the cold
potatoes in slices, and Madame Gilliard set herself to waken the
boy, who had come far that day, and was peevish and dazzled by the
light.  He was no sooner awake than he began to prepare himself for
supper by eating galette, unripe pears, and cold potatoes--with, so
far as I could judge, positive benefit to his appetite.

The landlady, fired with motherly emulation, awoke her own little
girl; and the two children were confronted.  Master Gilliard looked
at her for a moment, very much as a dog looks at his own reflection
in a mirror before he turns away.  He was at that time absorbed in
the galette.  His mother seemed crestfallen that he should display
so little inclination towards the other sex; and expressed her
disappointment with some candour and a very proper reference to the
influence of years.

Sure enough a time will come when he will pay more attention to the
girls, and think a great deal less of his mother:  let us hope she
will like it as well as she seemed to fancy.  But it is odd enough;
the very women who profess most contempt for mankind as a sex, seem
to find even its ugliest particulars rather lively and high-minded
in their own sons.

The little girl looked longer and with more interest, probably
because she was in her own house, while he was a traveller and
accustomed to strange sights.  And besides there was no galette in
the case with her.

All the time of supper, there was nothing spoken of but my young
lord.  The two parents were both absurdly fond of their child.
Monsieur kept insisting on his sagacity:  how he knew all the
children at school by name; and when this utterly failed on trial,
how he was cautious and exact to a strange degree, and if asked
anything, he would sit and think--and think, and if he did not know
it, 'my faith, he wouldn't tell you at all--foi, il ne vous le dira
pas':  which is certainly a very high degree of caution.  At
intervals, M. Hector would appeal to his wife, with his mouth full
of beefsteak, as to the little fellow's age at such or such a time
when he had said or done something memorable; and I noticed that
Madame usually pooh-poohed these inquiries.  She herself was not
boastful in her vein; but she never had her fill of caressing the
child; and she seemed to take a gentle pleasure in recalling all
that was fortunate in his little existence.  No schoolboy could
have talked more of the holidays which were just beginning and less
of the black school-time which must inevitably follow after.  She
showed, with a pride perhaps partly mercantile in origin, his
pockets preposterously swollen with tops and whistles and string.
When she called at a house in the way of business, it appeared he
kept her company; and whenever a sale was made, received a sou out
of the profit.  Indeed they spoiled him vastly, these two good
people.  But they had an eye to his manners for all that, and
reproved him for some little faults in breeding, which occurred
from time to time during supper.

On the whole, I was not much hurt at being taken for a pedlar.  I
might think that I ate with greater delicacy, or that my mistakes
in French belonged to a different order; but it was plain that
these distinctions would be thrown away upon the landlady and the
two labourers.  In all essential things we and the Gilliards cut
very much the same figure in the ale-house kitchen.  M. Hector was
more at home, indeed, and took a higher tone with the world; but
that was explicable on the ground of his driving a donkey-cart,
while we poor bodies tramped afoot.  I daresay, the rest of the
company thought us dying with envy, though in no ill sense, to be
as far up in the profession as the new arrival.

And of one thing I am sure:  that every one thawed and became more
humanised and conversible as soon as these innocent people appeared
upon the scene.  I would not very readily trust the travelling
merchant with any extravagant sum of money; but I am sure his heart
was in the right place.  In this mixed world, if you can find one
or two sensible places in a man--above all, if you should find a
whole family living together on such pleasant terms--you may surely
be satisfied, and take the rest for granted; or, what is a great
deal better, boldly make up your mind that you can do perfectly
well without the rest; and that ten thousand bad traits cannot make
a single good one any the less good.

It was getting late.  M. Hector lit a stable lantern and went off
to his cart for some arrangements; and my young gentleman proceeded
to divest himself of the better part of his raiment, and play
gymnastics on his mother's lap, and thence on to the floor, with
accompaniment of laughter.

'Are you going to sleep alone?' asked the servant lass.

'There's little fear of that,' says Master Gilliard.

'You sleep alone at school,' objected his mother.  'Come, come, you
must be a man.'

But he protested that school was a different matter from the
holidays; that there were dormitories at school; and silenced the
discussion with kisses:  his mother smiling, no one better pleased
than she.

There certainly was, as he phrased it, very little fear that he
should sleep alone; for there was but one bed for the trio.  We, on
our part, had firmly protested against one man's accommodation for
two; and we had a double-bedded pen in the loft of the house,
furnished, beside the beds, with exactly three hat-pegs and one
table.  There was not so much as a glass of water.  But the window
would open, by good fortune.

Some time before I fell asleep the loft was full of the sound of
mighty snoring:  the Gilliards, and the labourers, and the people
of the inn, all at it, I suppose, with one consent.  The young moon
outside shone very clearly over Pont-sur-Sambre, and down upon the
ale-house where all we pedlars were abed.



ON THE SAMBRE CANALISED



TO LANDRECIES


In the morning, when we came downstairs, the landlady pointed out
to us two pails of water behind the street-door.  'Voila de l'eau
pour vous debarbouiller,' says she.  And so there we made a shift
to wash ourselves, while Madame Gilliard brushed the family boots
on the outer doorstep, and M. Hector, whistling cheerily, arranged
some small goods for the day's campaign in a portable chest of
drawers, which formed a part of his baggage.  Meanwhile the child
was letting off Waterloo crackers all over the floor.

I wonder, by-the-bye, what they call Waterloo crackers in France;
perhaps Austerlitz crackers.  There is a great deal in the point of
view.  Do you remember the Frenchman who, travelling by way of
Southampton, was put down in Waterloo Station, and had to drive
across Waterloo Bridge?  He had a mind to go home again, it seems.

Pont itself is on the river, but whereas it is ten minutes' walk
from Quartes by dry land, it is six weary kilometres by water.  We
left our bags at the inn, and walked to our canoes through the wet
orchards unencumbered.  Some of the children were there to see us
off, but we were no longer the mysterious beings of the night
before.  A departure is much less romantic than an unexplained
arrival in the golden evening.  Although we might be greatly taken
at a ghost's first appearance, we should behold him vanish with
comparative equanimity.

The good folk of the inn at Pont, when we called there for the
bags, were overcome with marvelling.  At sight of these two dainty
little boats, with a fluttering Union Jack on each, and all the
varnish shining from the sponge, they began to perceive that they
had entertained angels unawares.  The landlady stood upon the
bridge, probably lamenting she had charged so little; the son ran
to and fro, and called out the neighbours to enjoy the sight; and
we paddled away from quite a crowd of wrapt observers.  These
gentlemen pedlars, indeed!  Now you see their quality too late.

The whole day was showery, with occasional drenching plumps.  We
were soaked to the skin, then partially dried in the sun, then
soaked once more.  But there were some calm intervals, and one
notably, when we were skirting the forest of Mormal, a sinister
name to the ear, but a place most gratifying to sight and smell.
It looked solemn along the river-side, drooping its boughs into the
water, and piling them up aloft into a wall of leaves.  What is a
forest but a city of nature's own, full of hardy and innocuous
living things, where there is nothing dead and nothing made with
the hands, but the citizens themselves are the houses and public
monuments?  There is nothing so much alive, and yet so quiet, as a
woodland; and a pair of people, swinging past in canoes, feel very
small and bustling by comparison.

And surely of all smells in the world, the smell of many trees is
the sweetest and most fortifying.  The sea has a rude, pistolling
sort of odour, that takes you in the nostrils like snuff, and
carries with it a fine sentiment of open water and tall ships; but
the smell of a forest, which comes nearest to this in tonic
quality, surpasses it by many degrees in the quality of softness.
Again, the smell of the sea has little variety, but the smell of a
forest is infinitely changeful; it varies with the hour of the day,
not in strength merely, but in character; and the different sorts
of trees, as you go from one zone of the wood to another, seem to
live among different kinds of atmosphere.  Usually the resin of the
fir predominates.  But some woods are more coquettish in their
habits; and the breath of the forest of Mormal, as it came aboard
upon us that showery afternoon, was perfumed with nothing less
delicate than sweetbrier.

I wish our way had always lain among woods.  Trees are the most
civil society.  An old oak that has been growing where he stands
since before the Reformation, taller than many spires, more stately
than the greater part of mountains, and yet a living thing, liable
to sicknesses and death, like you and me:  is not that in itself a
speaking lesson in history?  But acres on acres full of such
patriarchs contiguously rooted, their green tops billowing in the
wind, their stalwart younglings pushing up about their knees:  a
whole forest, healthy and beautiful, giving colour to the light,
giving perfume to the air:  what is this but the most imposing
piece in nature's repertory?  Heine wished to lie like Merlin under
the oaks of Broceliande.  I should not be satisfied with one tree;
but if the wood grew together like a banyan grove, I would be
buried under the tap-root of the whole; my parts should circulate
from oak to oak; and my consciousness should be diffused abroad in
all the forest, and give a common heart to that assembly of green
spires, so that it also might rejoice in its own loveliness and
dignity.  I think I feel a thousand squirrels leaping from bough to
bough in my vast mausoleum; and the birds and the winds merrily
coursing over its uneven, leafy surface.

Alas! the forest of Mormal is only a little bit of a wood, and it
was but for a little way that we skirted by its boundaries.  And
the rest of the time the rain kept coming in squirts and the wind
in squalls, until one's heart grew weary of such fitful, scolding
weather.  It was odd how the showers began when we had to carry the
boats over a lock, and must expose our legs.  They always did.
This is a sort of thing that readily begets a personal feeling
against nature.  There seems no reason why the shower should not
come five minutes before or five minutes after, unless you suppose
an intention to affront you.  The Cigarette had a mackintosh which
put him more or less above these contrarieties.  But I had to bear
the brunt uncovered.  I began to remember that nature was a woman.
My companion, in a rosier temper, listened with great satisfaction
to my Jeremiads, and ironically concurred.  He instanced, as a
cognate matter, the action of the tides, 'which,' said he, 'was
altogether designed for the confusion of canoeists, except in so
far as it was calculated to minister to a barren vanity on the part
of the moon.'

At the last lock, some little way out of Landrecies, I refused to
go any farther; and sat in a drift of rain by the side of the bank,
to have a reviving pipe.  A vivacious old man, whom I take to have
been the devil, drew near and questioned me about our journey.  In
the fulness of my heart, I laid bare our plans before him.  He said
it was the silliest enterprise that ever he heard of.  Why, did I
not know, he asked me, that it was nothing but locks, locks, locks,
the whole way? not to mention that, at this season of the year, we
should find the Oise quite dry?  'Get into a train, my little young
man,' said he, I and go you away home to your parents.'  I was so
astounded at the man's malice, that I could only stare at him in
silence.  A tree would never have spoken to me like this.  At last
I got out with some words.  We had come from Antwerp already, I
told him, which was a good long way; and we should do the rest in
spite of him.  Yes, I said, if there were no other reason, I would
do it now, just because he had dared to say we could not.  The
pleasant old gentleman looked at me sneeringly, made an allusion to
my canoe, and marched of, waggling his head.

I was still inwardly fuming, when up came a pair of young fellows,
who imagined I was the Cigarette's servant, on a comparison, I
suppose, of my bare jersey with the other's mackintosh, and asked
me many questions about my place and my master's character.  I said
he was a good enough fellow, but had this absurd voyage on the
head.  'O no, no,' said one, 'you must not say that; it is not
absurd; it is very courageous of him.'  I believe these were a
couple of angels sent to give me heart again.  It was truly
fortifying to reproduce all the old man's insinuations, as if they
were original to me in my character of a malcontent footman, and
have them brushed away like so many flies by these admirable young
men.

When I recounted this affair to the Cigarette, 'They must have a
curious idea of how English servants behave,' says he dryly, 'for
you treated me like a brute beast at the lock.'

I was a good deal mortified; but my temper had suffered, it is a
fact.



AT LANDRECIES



At Landrecies the rain still fell and the wind still blew; but we
found a double-bedded room with plenty of furniture, real water-
jugs with real water in them, and dinner:  a real dinner, not
innocent of real wine.  After having been a pedlar for one night,
and a butt for the elements during the whole of the next day, these
comfortable circumstances fell on my heart like sunshine.  There
was an English fruiterer at dinner, travelling with a Belgian
fruiterer; in the evening at the cafe, we watched our compatriot
drop a good deal of money at corks; and I don't know why, but this
pleased us.

It turned out we were to see more of Landrecies than we expected;
for the weather next day was simply bedlamite.  It is not the place
one would have chosen for a day's rest; for it consists almost
entirely of fortifications.  Within the ramparts, a few blocks of
houses, a long row of barracks, and a church, figure, with what
countenance they may, as the town.  There seems to be no trade; and
a shopkeeper from whom I bought a sixpenny flint-and-steel, was so
much affected that he filled my pockets with spare flints into the
bargain.  The only public buildings that had any interest for us
were the hotel and the cafe.  But we visited the church.  There
lies Marshal Clarke.  But as neither of us had ever heard of that
military hero, we bore the associations of the spot with fortitude.

In all garrison towns, guard-calls, and reveilles, and such like,
make a fine romantic interlude in civic business.  Bugles, and
drums, and fifes, are of themselves most excellent things in
nature; and when they carry the mind to marching armies, and the
picturesque vicissitudes of war, they stir up something proud in
the heart.  But in a shadow of a town like Landrecies, with little
else moving, these points of war made a proportionate commotion.
Indeed, they were the only things to remember.  It was just the
place to hear the round going by at night in the darkness, with the
solid tramp of men marching, and the startling reverberations of
the drum.  It reminded you, that even this place was a point in the
great warfaring system of Europe, and might on some future day be
ringed about with cannon smoke and thunder, and make itself a name
among strong towns.

The drum, at any rate, from its martial voice and notable
physiological effect, nay, even from its cumbrous and comical
shape, stands alone among the instruments of noise.  And if it be
true, as I have heard it said, that drums are covered with asses'
skin, what a picturesque irony is there in that!  As if this long-
suffering animal's hide had not been sufficiently belaboured during
life, now by Lyonnese costermongers, now by presumptuous Hebrew
prophets, it must be stripped from his poor hinder quarters after
death, stretched on a drum, and beaten night after night round the
streets of every garrison town in Europe.  And up the heights of
Alma and Spicheren, and wherever death has his red flag a-flying,
and sounds his own potent tuck upon the cannons, there also must
the drummer-boy, hurrying with white face over fallen comrades,
batter and bemaul this slip of skin from the loins of peaceable
donkeys.

Generally a man is never more uselessly employed than when he is at
this trick of bastinadoing asses' hide.  We know what effect it has
in life, and how your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating.
But in this state of mummy and melancholy survival of itself, when
the hollow skin reverberates to the drummer's wrist, and each dub-
a-dub goes direct to a man's heart, and puts madness there, and
that disposition of the pulses which we, in our big way of talking,
nickname Heroism:- is there not something in the nature of a
revenge upon the donkey's persecutors?  Of old, he might say, you
drubbed me up hill and down dale, and I must endure; but now that I
am dead, those dull thwacks that were scarcely audible in country
lanes, have become stirring music in front of the brigade; and for
every blow that you lay on my old greatcoat, you will see a comrade
stumble and fall.

Not long after the drums had passed the cafe, the Cigarette and the
Arethusa began to grow sleepy, and set out for the hotel, which was
only a door or two away.  But although we had been somewhat
indifferent to Landrecies, Landrecies had not been indifferent to
us.  All day, we learned, people had been running out between the
squalls to visit our two boats.  Hundreds of persons, so said
report, although it fitted ill with our idea of the town--hundreds
of persons had inspected them where they lay in a coal-shed.  We
were becoming lions in Landrecies, who had been only pedlars the
night before in Pont.

And now, when we left the cafe, we were pursued and overtaken at
the hotel door by no less a person than the Juge de Paix:  a
functionary, as far as I can make out, of the character of a Scots
Sheriff-Substitute.  He gave us his card and invited us to sup with
him on the spot, very neatly, very gracefully, as Frenchmen can do
these things.  It was for the credit of Landrecies, said he; and
although we knew very well how little credit we could do the place,
we must have been churlish fellows to refuse an invitation so
politely introduced.

The house of the Judge was close by; it was a well-appointed
bachelor's establishment, with a curious collection of old brass
warming-pans upon the walls.  Some of these were most elaborately
carved.  It seemed a picturesque idea for a collector.  You could
not help thinking how many night-caps had wagged over these
warming-pans in past generations; what jests may have been made,
and kisses taken, while they were in service; and how often they
had been uselessly paraded in the bed of death.  If they could only
speak, at what absurd, indecorous, and tragical scenes had they not
been present!

The wine was excellent.  When we made the Judge our compliments
upon a bottle, 'I do not give it you as my worst,' said he.  I
wonder when Englishmen will learn these hospitable graces.  They
are worth learning; they set off life, and make ordinary moments
ornamental.

There were two other Landrecienses present.  One was the collector
of something or other, I forget what; the other, we were told, was
the principal notary of the place.  So it happened that we all five
more or less followed the law.  At this rate, the talk was pretty
certain to become technical.  The Cigarette expounded the Poor Laws
very magisterially.  And a little later I found myself laying down
the Scots Law of Illegitimacy, of which I am glad to say I know
nothing.  The collector and the notary, who were both married men,
accused the Judge, who was a bachelor, of having started the
subject.  He deprecated the charge, with a conscious, pleased air,
just like all the men I have ever seen, be they French or English.
How strange that we should all, in our unguarded moments, rather
like to be thought a bit of a rogue with the women!

As the evening went on, the wine grew more to my taste; the spirits
proved better than the wine; the company was genial.  This was the
highest water mark of popular favour on the whole cruise.  After
all, being in a Judge's house, was there not something semi-
official in the tribute?  And so, remembering what a great country
France is, we did full justice to our entertainment.  Landrecies
had been a long while asleep before we returned to the hotel; and
the sentries on the ramparts were already looking for daybreak.



SAMBRE AND OISE CANAL



CANAL BOATS


Next day we made a late start in the rain.  The Judge politely
escorted us to the end of the lock under an umbrella.  We had now
brought ourselves to a pitch of humility in the matter of weather,
not often attained except in the Scottish Highlands.  A rag of blue
sky or a glimpse of sunshine set our hearts singing; and when the
rain was not heavy, we counted the day almost fair.

Long lines of barges lay one after another along the canal; many of
them looking mighty spruce and shipshape in their jerkin of
Archangel tar picked out with white and green.  Some carried gay
iron railings, and quite a parterre of flower-pots.  Children
played on the decks, as heedless of the rain as if they had been
brought up on Loch Carron side; men fished over the gunwale, some
of them under umbrellas; women did their washing; and every barge
boasted its mongrel cur by way of watch-dog.  Each one barked
furiously at the canoes, running alongside until he had got to the
end of his own ship, and so passing on the word to the dog aboard
the next.  We must have seen something like a hundred of these
embarkations in the course of that day's paddle, ranged one after
another like the houses in a street; and from not one of them were
we disappointed of this accompaniment.  It was like visiting a
menagerie, the Cigarette remarked.

These little cities by the canal side had a very odd effect upon
the mind.  They seemed, with their flower-pots and smoking
chimneys, their washings and dinners, a rooted piece of nature in
the scene; and yet if only the canal below were to open, one junk
after another would hoist sail or harness horses and swim away into
all parts of France; and the impromptu hamlet would separate, house
by house, to the four winds.  The children who played together to-
day by the Sambre and Oise Canal, each at his own father's
threshold, when and where might they next meet?

For some time past the subject of barges had occupied a great deal
of our talk, and we had projected an old age on the canals of
Europe.  It was to be the most leisurely of progresses, now on a
swift river at the tail of a steam-boat, now waiting horses for
days together on some inconsiderable junction.  We should be seen
pottering on deck in all the dignity of years, our white beards
falling into our laps.  We were ever to be busied among paint-pots;
so that there should be no white fresher, and no green more emerald
than ours, in all the navy of the canals.  There should be books in
the cabin, and tobacco-jars, and some old Burgundy as red as a
November sunset and as odorous as a violet in April.  There should
be a flageolet, whence the Cigarette, with cunning touch, should
draw melting music under the stars; or perhaps, laying that aside,
upraise his voice--somewhat thinner than of yore, and with here and
there a quaver, or call it a natural grace-note--in rich and solemn
psalmody.

All this, simmering in my mind, set me wishing to go aboard one of
these ideal houses of lounging.  I had plenty to choose from, as I
coasted one after another, and the dogs bayed at me for a vagrant.
At last I saw a nice old man and his wife looking at me with some
interest, so I gave them good-day and pulled up alongside.  I began
with a remark upon their dog, which had somewhat the look of a
pointer; thence I slid into a compliment on Madame's flowers, and
thence into a word in praise of their way of life.

If you ventured on such an experiment in England you would get a
slap in the face at once.  The life would be shown to be a vile
one, not without a side shot at your better fortune.  Now, what I
like so much in France is the clear unflinching recognition by
everybody of his own luck.  They all know on which side their bread
is buttered, and take a pleasure in showing it to others, which is
surely the better part of religion.  And they scorn to make a poor
mouth over their poverty, which I take to be the better part of
manliness.  I have heard a woman in quite a better position at
home, with a good bit of money in hand, refer to her own child with
a horrid whine as 'a poor man's child.'  I would not say such a
thing to the Duke of Westminster.  And the French are full of this
spirit of independence.  Perhaps it is the result of republican
institutions, as they call them.  Much more likely it is because
there are so few people really poor, that the whiners are not
enough to keep each other in countenance.

The people on the barge were delighted to hear that I admired their
state.  They understood perfectly well, they told me, how Monsieur
envied them.  Without doubt Monsieur was rich; and in that case he
might make a canal boat as pretty as a villa--joli comme un
chateau.  And with that they invited me on board their own water
villa.  They apologised for their cabin; they had not been rich
enough to make it as it ought to be.

'The fire should have been here, at this side.' explained the
husband.  'Then one might have a writing-table in the middle--
books--and' (comprehensively) 'all.  It would be quite coquettish--
ca serait tout-a-fait coquet.'  And he looked about him as though
the improvements were already made.  It was plainly not the first
time that he had thus beautified his cabin in imagination; and when
next he makes a bit, I should expect to see the writing-table in
the middle.

Madame had three birds in a cage.  They were no great thing, she
explained.  Fine birds were so dear.  They had sought to get a
Hollandais last winter in Rouen (Rouen? thought I; and is this
whole mansion, with its dogs and birds and smoking chimneys, so far
a traveller as that? and as homely an object among the cliffs and
orchards of the Seine as on the green plains of Sambre?)--they had
sought to get a Hollandais last winter in Rouen; but these cost
fifteen francs apiece--picture it--fifteen francs!

'Pour un tout petit oiseau--For quite a little bird,' added the
husband.

As I continued to admire, the apologetics died away, and the good
people began to brag of their barge, and their happy condition in
life, as if they had been Emperor and Empress of the Indies.  It
was, in the Scots phrase, a good hearing, and put me in good humour
with the world.  If people knew what an inspiriting thing it is to
hear a man boasting, so long as he boasts of what he really has, I
believe they would do it more freely and with a better grace.

They began to ask about our voyage.  You should have seen how they
sympathised.  They seemed half ready to give up their barge and
follow us.  But these canaletti are only gypsies semi-domesticated.
The semi-domestication came out in rather a pretty form.  Suddenly
Madam's brow darkened.  'Cependant,' she began, and then stopped;
and then began again by asking me if I were single?

'Yes,' said I.

'And your friend who went by just now?'

He also was unmarried.

O then--all was well.  She could not have wives left alone at home;
but since there were no wives in the question, we were doing the
best we could.

'To see about one in the world,' said the husband, 'il n'y a que
ca--there is nothing else worth while.  A man, look you, who sticks
in his own village like a bear,' he went on, '--very well, he sees
nothing.  And then death is the end of all.  And he has seen
nothing.'

Madame reminded her husband of an Englishman who had come up this
canal in a steamer.

'Perhaps Mr. Moens in the Ytene,' I suggested.

'That's it,' assented the husband.  'He had his wife and family
with him, and servants.  He came ashore at all the locks and asked
the name of the villages, whether from boatmen or lock-keepers; and
then he wrote, wrote them down.  Oh, he wrote enormously!  I
suppose it was a wager.'

A wager was a common enough explanation for our own exploits, but
it seemed an original reason for taking notes.



THE OISE IN FLOOD



Before nine next morning the two canoes were installed on a light
country cart at Etreux:  and we were soon following them along the
side of a pleasant valley full of hop-gardens and poplars.
Agreeable villages lay here and there on the slope of the hill;
notably, Tupigny, with the hop-poles hanging their garlands in the
very street, and the houses clustered with grapes.  There was a
faint enthusiasm on our passage; weavers put their heads to the
windows; children cried out in ecstasy at sight of the two
'boaties'--barguettes:  and bloused pedestrians, who were
acquainted with our charioteer, jested with him on the nature of
his freight.

We had a shower or two, but light and flying.  The air was clean
and sweet among all these green fields and green things growing.
There was not a touch of autumn in the weather.  And when, at
Vadencourt, we launched from a little lawn opposite a mill, the sun
broke forth and set all the leaves shining in the valley of the
Oise.

The river was swollen with the long rains.  From Vadencourt all the
way to Origny, it ran with ever-quickening speed, taking fresh
heart at each mile, and racing as though it already smelt the sea.
The water was yellow and turbulent, swung with an angry eddy among
half-submerged willows, and made an angry clatter along stony
shores.  The course kept turning and turning in a narrow and well-
timbered valley.  Now the river would approach the side, and run
griding along the chalky base of the hill, and show us a few open
colza-fields among the trees.  Now it would skirt the garden-walls
of houses, where we might catch a glimpse through a doorway, and
see a priest pacing in the chequered sunlight.  Again, the foliage
closed so thickly in front, that there seemed to be no issue; only
a thicket of willows, overtopped by elms and poplars, under which
the river ran flush and fleet, and where a kingfisher flew past
like a piece of the blue sky.  On these different manifestations
the sun poured its clear and catholic looks.  The shadows lay as
solid on the swift surface of the stream as on the stable meadows.
The light sparkled golden in the dancing poplar leaves, and brought
the hills into communion with our eyes.  And all the while the
river never stopped running or took breath; and the reeds along the
whole valley stood shivering from top to toe.

There should be some myth (but if there is, I know it not) founded
on the shivering of the reeds.  There are not many things in nature
more striking to man's eye.  It is such an eloquent pantomime of
terror; and to see such a number of terrified creatures taking
sanctuary in every nook along the shore, is enough to infect a
silly human with alarm.  Perhaps they are only a-cold, and no
wonder, standing waist-deep in the stream.  Or perhaps they have
never got accustomed to the speed and fury of the river's flux, or
the miracle of its continuous body.  Pan once played upon their
forefathers; and so, by the hands of his river, he still plays upon
these later generations down all the valley of the Oise; and plays
the same air, both sweet and shrill, to tell us of the beauty and
the terror of the world.

The canoe was like a leaf in the current.  It took it up and shook
it, and carried it masterfully away, like a Centaur carrying off a
nymph.  To keep some command on our direction required hard and
diligent plying of the paddle.  The river was in such a hurry for
the sea!  Every drop of water ran in a panic, like as many people
in a frightened crowd.  But what crowd was ever so numerous, or so
single-minded?  All the objects of sight went by at a dance
measure; the eyesight raced with the racing river; the exigencies
of every moment kept the pegs screwed so tight, that our being
quivered like a well-tuned instrument; and the blood shook off its
lethargy, and trotted through all the highways and byways of the
veins and arteries, and in and out of the heart, as if circulation
were but a holiday journey, and not the daily moil of threescore
years and ten.  The reeds might nod their heads in warning, and
with tremulous gestures tell how the river was as cruel as it was
strong and cold, and how death lurked in the eddy underneath the
willows.  But the reeds had to stand where they were; and those who
stand still are always timid advisers.  As for us, we could have
shouted aloud.  If this lively and beautiful river were, indeed, a
thing of death's contrivance, the old ashen rogue had famously
outwitted himself with us.  I was living three to the minute.  I
was scoring points against him every stroke of my paddle, every
turn of the stream.  I have rarely had better profit of my life.

For I think we may look upon our little private war with death
somewhat in this light.  If a man knows he will sooner or later be
robbed upon a journey, he will have a bottle of the best in every
inn, and look upon all his extravagances as so much gained upon the
thieves.  And above all, where instead of simply spending, he makes
a profitable investment for some of his money, when it will be out
of risk of loss.  So every bit of brisk living, and above all when
it is healthful, is just so much gained upon the wholesale filcher,
death.  We shall have the less in our pockets, the more in our
stomach, when he cries stand and deliver.  A swift stream is a
favourite artifice of his, and one that brings him in a comfortable
thing per annum; but when he and I come to settle our accounts, I
shall whistle in his face for these hours upon the upper Oise.

Towards afternoon we got fairly drunken with the sunshine and the
exhilaration of the pace.  We could no longer contain ourselves and
our content.  The canoes were too small for us; we must be out and
stretch ourselves on shore.  And so in a green meadow we bestowed
our limbs on the grass, and smoked deifying tobacco and proclaimed
the world excellent.  It was the last good hour of the day, and I
dwell upon it with extreme complacency.

On one side of the valley, high up on the chalky summit of the
hill, a ploughman with his team appeared and disappeared at regular
intervals.  At each revelation he stood still for a few seconds
against the sky:  for all the world (as the Cigarette declared)
like a toy Burns who should have just ploughed up the Mountain
Daisy.  He was the only living thing within view, unless we are to
count the river.

On the other side of the valley a group of red roofs and a belfry
showed among the foliage.  Thence some inspired bell-ringer made
the afternoon musical on a chime of bells.  There was something
very sweet and taking in the air he played; and we thought we had
never heard bells speak so intelligibly, or sing so melodiously, as
these.  It must have been to some such measure that the spinners
and the young maids sang, 'Come away, Death,' in the Shakespearian
Illyria.  There is so often a threatening note, something blatant
and metallic, in the voice of bells, that I believe we have fully
more pain than pleasure from hearing them; but these, as they
sounded abroad, now high, now low, now with a plaintive cadence
that caught the ear like the burthen of a popular song, were always
moderate and tunable, and seemed to fall in with the spirit of
still, rustic places, like the noise of a waterfall or the babble
of a rookery in spring.  I could have asked the bell-ringer for his
blessing, good, sedate old man, who swung the rope so gently to the
time of his meditations.  I could have blessed the priest or the
heritors, or whoever may be concerned with such affairs in France,
who had left these sweet old bells to gladden the afternoon, and
not held meetings, and made collections, and had their names
repeatedly printed in the local paper, to rig up a peal of brand-
new, brazen, Birmingham-hearted substitutes, who should bombard
their sides to the provocation of a brand-new bell-ringer, and fill
the echoes of the valley with terror and riot.

At last the bells ceased, and with their note the sun withdrew.
The piece was at an end; shadow and silence possessed the valley of
the Oise.  We took to the paddle with glad hearts, like people who
have sat out a noble performance and returned to work.  The river
was more dangerous here; it ran swifter, the eddies were more
sudden and violent.  All the way down we had had our fill of
difficulties.  Sometimes it was a weir which could be shot,
sometimes one so shallow and full of stakes that we must withdraw
the boats from the water and carry them round.  But the chief sort
of obstacle was a consequence of the late high winds.  Every two or
three hundred yards a tree had fallen across the river, and usually
involved more than another in its fall.

Often there was free water at the end, and we could steer round the
leafy promontory and hear the water sucking and bubbling among the
twigs.  Often, again, when the tree reached from bank to bank,
there was room, by lying close, to shoot through underneath, canoe
and all.  Sometimes it was necessary to get out upon the trunk
itself and pull the boats across; and sometimes, when the stream
was too impetuous for this, there was nothing for it but to land
and 'carry over.'  This made a fine series of accidents in the
day's career, and kept us aware of ourselves.

Shortly after our re-embarkation, while I was leading by a long
way, and still full of a noble, exulting spirit in honour of the
sun, the swift pace, and the church bells, the river made one of
its leonine pounces round a corner, and I was aware of another
fallen tree within a stone-cast.  I had my backboard down in a
trice, and aimed for a place where the trunk seemed high enough
above the water, and the branches not too thick to let me slip
below.  When a man has just vowed eternal brotherhood with the
universe, he is not in a temper to take great determinations
coolly, and this, which might have been a very important
determination for me, had not been taken under a happy star.  The
tree caught me about the chest, and while I was yet struggling to
make less of myself and get through, the river took the matter out
of my hands, and bereaved me of my boat.  The Arethusa swung round
broadside on, leaned over, ejected so much of me as still remained
on board, and thus disencumbered, whipped under the tree, righted,
and went merrily away down stream.

I do not know how long it was before I scrambled on to the tree to
which I was left clinging, but it was longer than I cared about.
My thoughts were of a grave and almost sombre character, but I
still clung to my paddle.  The stream ran away with my heels as
fast as I could pull up my shoulders, and I seemed, by the weight,
to have all the water of the Oise in my trousers-pockets.  You can
never know, till you try it, what a dead pull a river makes against
a man.  Death himself had me by the heels, for this was his last
ambuscado, and he must now join personally in the fray.  And still
I held to my paddle.  At last I dragged myself on to my stomach on
the trunk, and lay there a breathless sop, with a mingled sense of
humour and injustice.  A poor figure I must have presented to Burns
upon the hill-top with his team.  But there was the paddle in my
hand.  On my tomb, if ever I have one, I mean to get these words
inscribed:  'He clung to his paddle.'

The Cigarette had gone past a while before; for, as I might have
observed, if I had been a little less pleased with the universe at
the moment, there was a clear way round the tree-top at the farther
side.  He had offered his services to haul me out, but as I was
then already on my elbows, I had declined, and sent him down stream
after the truant Arethusa.  The stream was too rapid for a man to
mount with one canoe, let alone two, upon his hands.  So I crawled
along the trunk to shore, and proceeded down the meadows by the
river-side.  I was so cold that my heart was sore.  I had now an
idea of my own why the reeds so bitterly shivered.  I could have
given any of them a lesson.  The Cigarette remarked facetiously
that he thought I was 'taking exercise' as I drew near, until he
made out for certain that I was only twittering with cold.  I had a
rub down with a towel, and donned a dry suit from the india-rubber
bag.  But I was not my own man again for the rest of the voyage.  I
had a queasy sense that I wore my last dry clothes upon my body.
The struggle had tired me; and perhaps, whether I knew it or not, I
was a little dashed in spirit.  The devouring element in the
universe had leaped out against me, in this green valley quickened
by a running stream.  The bells were all very pretty in their way,
but I had heard some of the hollow notes of Pan's music.  Would the
wicked river drag me down by the heels, indeed? and look so
beautiful all the time?  Nature's good-humour was only skin-deep
after all.

There was still a long way to go by the winding course of the
stream, and darkness had fallen, and a late bell was ringing in
Origny Sainte-Benoite, when we arrived.



ORIGNY SAINTE-BENOITE



A BY-DAY


The next day was Sunday, and the church bells had little rest;
indeed, I do not think I remember anywhere else so great a choice
of services as were here offered to the devout.  And while the
bells made merry in the sunshine, all the world with his dog was
out shooting among the beets and colza.

In the morning a hawker and his wife went down the street at a
foot-pace, singing to a very slow, lamentable music 'O France, mes
amours.'  It brought everybody to the door; and when our landlady
called in the man to buy the words, he had not a copy of them left.
She was not the first nor the second who had been taken with the
song.  There is something very pathetic in the love of the French
people, since the war, for dismal patriotic music-making.  I have
watched a forester from Alsace while some one was singing 'Les
malheurs de la France,' at a baptismal party in the neighbourhood
of Fontainebleau.  He arose from the table and took his son aside,
close by where I was standing.  'Listen, listen,' he said, bearing
on the boy's shoulder, 'and remember this, my son.'  A little after
he went out into the garden suddenly, and I could hear him sobbing
in the darkness.

The humiliation of their arms and the loss of Alsace and Lorraine
made a sore pull on the endurance of this sensitive people; and
their hearts are still hot, not so much against Germany as against
the Empire.  In what other country will you find a patriotic ditty
bring all the world into the street?  But affliction heightens
love; and we shall never know we are Englishmen until we have lost
India.  Independent America is still the cross of my existence; I
cannot think of Farmer George without abhorrence; and I never feel
more warmly to my own land than when I see the Stars and Stripes,
and remember what our empire might have been.

The hawker's little book, which I purchased, was a curious mixture.
Side by side with the flippant, rowdy nonsense of the Paris music-
halls, there were many pastoral pieces, not without a touch of
poetry, I thought, and instinct with the brave independence of the
poorer class in France.  There you might read how the wood-cutter
gloried in his axe, and the gardener scorned to be ashamed of his
spade.  It was not very well written, this poetry of labour, but
the pluck of the sentiment redeemed what was weak or wordy in the
expression.  The martial and the patriotic pieces, on the other
hand, were tearful, womanish productions one and all.  The poet had
passed under the Caudine Forks; he sang for an army visiting the
tomb of its old renown, with arms reversed; and sang not of
victory, but of death.  There was a number in the hawker's
collection called 'Conscrits Francais,' which may rank among the
most dissuasive war-lyrics on record.  It would not be possible to
fight at all in such a spirit.  The bravest conscript would turn
pale if such a ditty were struck up beside him on the morning of
battle; and whole regiments would pile their arms to its tune.

If Fletcher of Saltoun is in the right about the influence of
national songs, you would say France was come to a poor pass.  But
the thing will work its own cure, and a sound-hearted and
courageous people weary at length of snivelling over their
disasters.  Already Paul Deroulede has written some manly military
verses.  There is not much of the trumpet note in them, perhaps, to
stir a man's heart in his bosom; they lack the lyrical elation, and
move slowly; but they are written in a grave, honourable, stoical
spirit, which should carry soldiers far in a good cause.  One feels
as if one would like to trust Deroulede with something.  It will be
happy if he can so far inoculate his fellow-countrymen that they
may be trusted with their own future.  And in the meantime, here is
an antidote to 'French Conscripts' and much other doleful
versification.

We had left the boats over-night in the custody of one whom we
shall call Carnival.  I did not properly catch his name, and
perhaps that was not unfortunate for him, as I am not in a position
to hand him down with honour to posterity.  To this person's
premises we strolled in the course of the day, and found quite a
little deputation inspecting the canoes.  There was a stout
gentleman with a knowledge of the river, which he seemed eager to
impart.  There was a very elegant young gentleman in a black coat,
with a smattering of English, who led the talk at once to the
Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race.  And then there were three handsome
girls from fifteen to twenty; and an old gentleman in a blouse,
with no teeth to speak of, and a strong country accent.  Quite the
pick of Origny, I should suppose.

The Cigarette had some mysteries to perform with his rigging in the
coach-house; so I was left to do the parade single-handed.  I found
myself very much of a hero whether I would or not.  The girls were
full of little shudderings over the dangers of our journey.  And I
thought it would be ungallant not to take my cue from the ladies.
My mishap of yesterday, told in an off-hand way, produced a deep
sensation.  It was Othello over again, with no less than three
Desdemonas and a sprinkling of sympathetic senators in the
background.  Never were the canoes more flattered, or flattered
more adroitly.

'It is like a violin,' cried one of the girls in an ecstasy.

'I thank you for the word, mademoiselle,' said I.  'All the more
since there are people who call out to me that it is like a
coffin.'

'Oh! but it is really like a violin.  It is finished like a
violin,' she went on.

'And polished like a violin,' added a senator.

'One has only to stretch the cords,' concluded another, 'and then
tum-tumty-tum'--he imitated the result with spirit.

Was not this a graceful little ovation?  Where this people finds
the secret of its pretty speeches, I cannot imagine; unless the
secret should be no other than a sincere desire to please? But then
no disgrace is attached in France to saying a thing neatly; whereas
in England, to talk like a book is to give in one's resignation to
society.

The old gentleman in the blouse stole into the coach-house, and
somewhat irrelevantly informed the Cigarette that he was the father
of the three girls and four more:  quite an exploit for a
Frenchman.

'You are very fortunate,' answered the Cigarette politely.

And the old gentleman, having apparently gained his point, stole
away again.

We all got very friendly together.  The girls proposed to start
with us on the morrow, if you please!  And, jesting apart, every
one was anxious to know the hour of our departure.  Now, when you
are going to crawl into your canoe from a bad launch, a crowd,
however friendly, is undesirable; and so we told them not before
twelve, and mentally determined to be off by ten at latest.

Towards evening, we went abroad again to post some letters.  It was
cool and pleasant; the long village was quite empty, except for one
or two urchins who followed us as they might have followed a
menagerie; the hills and the tree-tops looked in from all sides
through the clear air; and the bells were chiming for yet another
service.

Suddenly we sighted the three girls standing, with a fourth sister,
in front of a shop on the wide selvage of the roadway.  We had been
very merry with them a little while ago, to be sure.  But what was
the etiquette of Origny?  Had it been a country road, of course we
should have spoken to them; but here, under the eyes of all the
gossips, ought we to do even as much as bow?  I consulted the
Cigarette.

'Look,' said he.

I looked.  There were the four girls on the same spot; but now four
backs were turned to us, very upright and conscious.  Corporal
Modesty had given the word of command, and the well-disciplined
picket had gone right-about-face like a single person.  They
maintained this formation all the while we were in sight; but we
heard them tittering among themselves, and the girl whom we had not
met laughed with open mouth, and even looked over her shoulder at
the enemy.  I wonder was it altogether modesty after all? or in
part a sort of country provocation?

As we were returning to the inn, we beheld something floating in
the ample field of golden evening sky, above the chalk cliffs and
the trees that grow along their summit.  It was too high up, too
large, and too steady for a kite; and as it was dark, it could not
be a star.  For although a star were as black as ink and as rugged
as a walnut, so amply does the sun bathe heaven with radiance, that
it would sparkle like a point of light for us.  The village was
dotted with people with their heads in air; and the children were
in a bustle all along the street and far up the straight road that
climbs the hill, where we could still see them running in loose
knots.  It was a balloon, we learned, which had left Saint Quentin
at half-past five that evening.  Mighty composedly the majority of
the grown people took it.  But we were English, and were soon
running up the hill with the best.  Being travellers ourselves in a
small way, we would fain have seen these other travellers alight.

The spectacle was over by the time we gained the top of the hill.
All the gold had withered out of the sky, and the balloon had
disappeared.  Whither? I ask myself; caught up into the seventh
heaven? or come safely to land somewhere in that blue uneven
distance, into which the roadway dipped and melted before our eyes?
Probably the aeronauts were already warming themselves at a farm
chimney, for they say it is cold in these unhomely regions of the
air.  The night fell swiftly.  Roadside trees and disappointed
sightseers, returning through the meadows, stood out in black
against a margin of low red sunset.  It was cheerfuller to face the
other way, and so down the hill we went, with a full moon, the
colour of a melon, swinging high above the wooded valley, and the
white cliffs behind us faintly reddened by the fire of the chalk
kilns.

The lamps were lighted, and the salads were being made in Origny
Sainte-Benoite by the river.



ORIGNY SAINTE-BENOITE



THE COMPANY AT TABLE


Although we came late for dinner, the company at table treated us
to sparkling wine.  'That is how we are in France,' said one.
'Those who sit down with us are our friends.' And the rest
applauded.

They were three altogether, and an odd trio to pass the Sunday
with.

Two of them were guests like ourselves, both men of the north.  One
ruddy, and of a full habit of body, with copious black hair and
beard, the intrepid hunter of France, who thought nothing so small,
not even a lark or a minnow, but he might vindicate his prowess by
its capture.  For such a great, healthy man, his hair flourishing
like Samson's, his arteries running buckets of red blood, to boast
of these infinitesimal exploits, produced a feeling of
disproportion in the world, as when a steam-hammer is set to
cracking nuts.  The other was a quiet, subdued person, blond and
lymphatic and sad, with something the look of a Dane:  'Tristes
tetes de Danois!' as Gaston Lafenestre used to say.

I must not let that name go by without a word for the best of all
good fellows now gone down into the dust.  We shall never again see
Gaston in his forest costume--he was Gaston with all the world, in
affection, not in disrespect--nor hear him wake the echoes of
Fontainebleau with the woodland horn.  Never again shall his kind
smile put peace among all races of artistic men, and make the
Englishman at home in France.  Never more shall the sheep, who were
not more innocent at heart than he, sit all unconsciously for his
industrious pencil.  He died too early, at the very moment when he
was beginning to put forth fresh sprouts, and blossom into
something worthy of himself; and yet none who knew him will think
he lived in vain.  I never knew a man so little, for whom yet I had
so much affection; and I find it a good test of others, how much
they had learned to understand and value him.  His was indeed a
good influence in life while he was still among us; he had a fresh
laugh, it did you good to see him; and however sad he may have been
at heart, he always bore a bold and cheerful countenance, and took
fortune's worst as it were the showers of spring.  But now his
mother sits alone by the side of Fontainebleau woods, where he
gathered mushrooms in his hardy and penurious youth.

Many of his pictures found their way across the Channel:  besides
those which were stolen, when a dastardly Yankee left him alone in
London with two English pence, and perhaps twice as many words of
English.  If any one who reads these lines should have a scene of
sheep, in the manner of Jacques, with this fine creature's
signature, let him tell himself that one of the kindest and bravest
of men has lent a hand to decorate his lodging.  There may be
better pictures in the National Gallery; but not a painter among
the generations had a better heart.  Precious in the sight of the
Lord of humanity, the Psalms tell us, is the death of his saints.
It had need to be precious; for it is very costly, when by the
stroke, a mother is left desolate, and the peace-maker, and peace-
looker, of a whole society is laid in the ground with Caesar and
the Twelve Apostles.

There is something lacking among the oaks of Fontainebleau; and
when the dessert comes in at Barbizon, people look to the door for
a figure that is gone.

The third of our companions at Origny was no less a person than the
landlady's husband:  not properly the landlord, since he worked
himself in a factory during the day, and came to his own house at
evening as a guest:  a man worn to skin and bone by perpetual
excitement, with baldish head, sharp features, and swift, shining
eyes.  On Saturday, describing some paltry adventure at a duck-
hunt, he broke a plate into a score of fragments.  Whenever he made
a remark, he would look all round the table with his chin raised,
and a spark of green light in either eye, seeking approval.  His
wife appeared now and again in the doorway of the room, where she
was superintending dinner, with a 'Henri, you forget yourself,' or
a 'Henri, you can surely talk without making such a noise.'
Indeed, that was what the honest fellow could not do.  On the most
trifling matter his eyes kindled, his fist visited the table, and
his voice rolled abroad in changeful thunder.  I never saw such a
petard of a man; I think the devil was in him.  He had two
favourite expressions:  'it is logical,' or illogical, as the case
might be:  and this other, thrown out with a certain bravado, as a
man might unfurl a banner, at the beginning of many a long and
sonorous story:  'I am a proletarian, you see.'  Indeed, we saw it
very well.  God forbid that ever I should find him handling a gun
in Paris streets!  That will not be a good moment for the general
public.

I thought his two phrases very much represented the good and evil
of his class, and to some extent of his country.  It is a strong
thing to say what one is, and not be ashamed of it; even although
it be in doubtful taste to repeat the statement too often in one
evening.  I should not admire it in a duke, of course; but as times
go, the trait is honourable in a workman.  On the other hand, it is
not at all a strong thing to put one's reliance upon logic; and our
own logic particularly, for it is generally wrong.  We never know
where we are to end, if once we begin following words or doctors.
There is an upright stock in a man's own heart, that is trustier
than any syllogism; and the eyes, and the sympathies and appetites,
know a thing or two that have never yet been stated in controversy.
Reasons are as plentiful as blackberries; and, like fisticuffs,
they serve impartially with all sides.  Doctrines do not stand or
fall by their proofs, and are only logical in so far as they are
cleverly put.  An able controversialist no more than an able
general demonstrates the justice of his cause.  But France is all
gone wandering after one or two big words; it will take some time
before they can be satisfied that they are no more than words,
however big; and when once that is done, they will perhaps find
logic less diverting.

The conversation opened with details of the day's shooting.  When
all the sportsmen of a village shoot over the village territory pro
indiviso, it is plain that many questions of etiquette and priority
must arise.

'Here now,' cried the landlord, brandishing a plate, 'here is a
field of beet-root.  Well.  Here am I then.  I advance, do I not?
Eh bien! sacristi,' and the statement, waxing louder, rolls off
into a reverberation of oaths, the speaker glaring about for
sympathy, and everybody nodding his head to him in the name of
peace.

The ruddy Northman told some tales of his own prowess in keeping
order:  notably one of a Marquis.

'Marquis,' I said, 'if you take another step I fire upon you.  You
have committed a dirtiness, Marquis.'

Whereupon, it appeared, the Marquis touched his cap and withdrew.

The landlord applauded noisily.  'It was well done,' he said.  'He
did all that he could.  He admitted he was wrong.'  And then oath
upon oath.  He was no marquis-lover either, but he had a sense of
justice in him, this proletarian host of ours.

From the matter of hunting, the talk veered into a general
comparison of Paris and the country.  The proletarian beat the
table like a drum in praise of Paris.  'What is Paris?  Paris is
the cream of France.  There are no Parisians:  it is you and I and
everybody who are Parisians.  A man has eighty chances per cent. to
get on in the world in Paris.'  And he drew a vivid sketch of the
workman in a den no bigger than a dog-hutch, making articles that
were to go all over the world.  'Eh bien, quoi, c'est magnifique,
ca!' cried he.

The sad Northman interfered in praise of a peasant's life; he
thought Paris bad for men and women; 'centralisation,' said he -

But the landlord was at his throat in a moment.  It was all
logical, he showed him; and all magnificent.  'What a spectacle!
What a glance for an eye!'  And the dishes reeled upon the table
under a cannonade of blows.

Seeking to make peace, I threw in a word in praise of the liberty
of opinion in France.  I could hardly have shot more amiss.  There
was an instant silence, and a great wagging of significant heads.
They did not fancy the subject, it was plain; but they gave me to
understand that the sad Northman was a martyr on account of his
views.  'Ask him a bit,' said they.  'Just ask him.'

'Yes, sir,' said he in his quiet way, answering me, although I had
not spoken, 'I am afraid there is less liberty of opinion in France
than you may imagine.'  And with that he dropped his eyes, and
seemed to consider the subject at an end.

Our curiosity was mightily excited at this.  How, or why, or when,
was this lymphatic bagman martyred?  We concluded at once it was on
some religious question, and brushed up our memories of the
Inquisition, which were principally drawn from Poe's horrid story,
and the sermon in Tristram Shandy, I believe.

On the morrow we had an opportunity of going further into the
question; for when we rose very early to avoid a sympathising
deputation at our departure, we found the hero up before us.  He
was breaking his fast on white wine and raw onions, in order to
keep up the character of martyr, I conclude.  We had a long
conversation, and made out what we wanted in spite of his reserve.
But here was a truly curious circumstance.  It seems possible for
two Scotsmen and a Frenchman to discuss during a long half-hour,
and each nationality have a different idea in view throughout.  It
was not till the very end that we discovered his heresy had been
political, or that he suspected our mistake.  The terms and spirit
in which he spoke of his political beliefs were, in our eyes,
suited to religious beliefs.  And vice versa.

Nothing could be more characteristic of the two countries.
Politics are the religion of France; as Nanty Ewart would have
said, 'A d-d bad religion'; while we, at home, keep most of our
bitterness for little differences about a hymn-book, or a Hebrew
word which perhaps neither of the parties can translate.  And
perhaps the misconception is typical of many others that may never
be cleared up:  not only between people of different race, but
between those of different sex.

As for our friend's martyrdom, he was a Communist, or perhaps only
a Communard, which is a very different thing; and had lost one or
more situations in consequence.  I think he had also been rejected
in marriage; but perhaps he had a sentimental way of considering
business which deceived me.  He was a mild, gentle creature,
anyway; and I hope he has got a better situation, and married a
more suitable wife since then.



DOWN THE OISE



TO MOY


Carnival notoriously cheated us at first.  Finding us easy in our
ways, he regretted having let us off so cheaply; and taking me
aside, told me a cock-and-bull story with the moral of another five
francs for the narrator.  The thing was palpably absurd; but I paid
up, and at once dropped all friendliness of manner, and kept him in
his place as an inferior with freezing British dignity.  He saw in
a moment that he had gone too far, and killed a willing horse; his
face fell; I am sure he would have refunded if he could only have
thought of a decent pretext.  He wished me to drink with him, but I
would none of his drinks.  He grew pathetically tender in his
professions; but I walked beside him in silence or answered him in
stately courtesies; and when we got to the landing-place, passed
the word in English slang to the Cigarette.

In spite of the false scent we had thrown out the day before, there
must have been fifty people about the bridge.  We were as pleasant
as we could be with all but Carnival.  We said good-bye, shaking
hands with the old gentleman who knew the river and the young
gentleman who had a smattering of English; but never a word for
Carnival.  Poor Carnival! here was a humiliation.  He who had been
so much identified with the canoes, who had given orders in our
name, who had shown off the boats and even the boatmen like a
private exhibition of his own, to be now so publicly shamed by the
lions of his caravan!  I never saw anybody look more crestfallen
than he.  He hung in the background, coming timidly forward ever
and again as he thought he saw some symptom of a relenting humour,
and falling hurriedly back when he encountered a cold stare.  Let
us hope it will be a lesson to him.

I would not have mentioned Carnival's peccadillo had not the thing
been so uncommon in France.  This, for instance, was the only case
of dishonesty or even sharp practice in our whole voyage.  We talk
very much about our honesty in England.  It is a good rule to be on
your guard wherever you hear great professions about a very little
piece of virtue.  If the English could only hear how they are
spoken of abroad, they might confine themselves for a while to
remedying the fact; and perhaps even when that was done, give us
fewer of their airs.

The young ladies, the graces of Origny, were not present at our
start, but when we got round to the second bridge, behold, it was
black with sightseers!  We were loudly cheered, and for a good way
below, young lads and lasses ran along the bank still cheering.
What with current and paddling, we were flashing along like
swallows.  It was no joke to keep up with us upon the woody shore.
But the girls picked up their skirts, as if they were sure they had
good ankles, and followed until their breath was out.  The last to
weary were the three graces and a couple of companions; and just as
they too had had enough, the foremost of the three leaped upon a
tree-stump and kissed her hand to the canoeists.  Not Diana
herself, although this was more of a Venus after all, could have
done a graceful thing more gracefully.  'Come back again!' she
cried; and all the others echoed her; and the hills about Origny
repeated the words, 'Come back.'  But the river had us round an
angle in a twinkling, and we were alone with the green trees and
running water.

Come back?  There is no coming back, young ladies, on the impetuous
stream of life.


'The merchant bows unto the seaman's star,
The ploughman from the sun his season takes.'


And we must all set our pocket-watches by the clock of fate.  There
is a headlong, forthright tide, that bears away man with his
fancies like a straw, and runs fast in time and space.  It is full
of curves like this, your winding river of the Oise; and lingers
and returns in pleasant pastorals; and yet, rightly thought upon,
never returns at all.  For though it should revisit the same acre
of meadow in the same hour, it will have made an ample sweep
between-whiles; many little streams will have fallen in; many
exhalations risen towards the sun; and even although it were the
same acre, it will no more be the same river of Oise.  And thus, O
graces of Origny, although the wandering fortune of my life should
carry me back again to where you await death's whistle by the
river, that will not be the old I who walks the street; and those
wives and mothers, say, will those be you?

There was never any mistake about the Oise, as a matter of fact.
In these upper reaches it was still in a prodigious hurry for the
sea.  It ran so fast and merrily, through all the windings of its
channel, that I strained my thumb, fighting with the rapids, and
had to paddle all the rest of the way with one hand turned up.
Sometimes it had to serve mills; and being still a little river,
ran very dry and shallow in the meanwhile.  We had to put our legs
out of the boat, and shove ourselves off the sand of the bottom
with our feet.  And still it went on its way singing among the
poplars, and making a green valley in the world.  After a good
woman, and a good book, and tobacco, there is nothing so agreeable
on earth as a river.  I forgave it its attempt on my life; which
was after all one part owing to the unruly winds of heaven that had
blown down the tree, one part to my own mismanagement, and only a
third part to the river itself, and that not out of malice, but
from its great preoccupation over its business of getting to the
sea.  A difficult business, too; for the detours it had to make are
not to be counted.  The geographers seem to have given up the
attempt; for I found no map represent the infinite contortion of
its course.  A fact will say more than any of them.  After we had
been some hours, three if I mistake not, flitting by the trees at
this smooth, break-neck gallop, when we came upon a hamlet and
asked where we were, we had got no farther than four kilometres
(say two miles and a half) from Origny.  If it were not for the
honour of the thing (in the Scots saying), we might almost as well
have been standing still.

We lunched on a meadow inside a parallelogram of poplars.  The
leaves danced and prattled in the wind all round about us.  The
river hurried on meanwhile, and seemed to chide at our delay.
Little we cared.  The river knew where it was going; not so we:
the less our hurry, where we found good quarters and a pleasant
theatre for a pipe.  At that hour, stockbrokers were shouting in
Paris Bourse for two or three per cent.; but we minded them as
little as the sliding stream, and sacrificed a hecatomb of minutes
to the gods of tobacco and digestion.  Hurry is the resource of the
faithless.  Where a man can trust his own heart, and those of his
friends, to-morrow is as good as to-day.  And if he die in the
meanwhile, why then, there he dies, and the question is solved.

We had to take to the canal in the course of the afternoon;
because, where it crossed the river, there was, not a bridge, but a
siphon.  If it had not been for an excited fellow on the bank, we
should have paddled right into the siphon, and thenceforward not
paddled any more.  We met a man, a gentleman, on the tow-path, who
was much interested in our cruise.  And I was witness to a strange
seizure of lying suffered by the Cigarette:  who, because his knife
came from Norway, narrated all sorts of adventures in that country,
where he has never been.  He was quite feverish at the end, and
pleaded demoniacal possession.

Moy (pronounce Moy) was a pleasant little village, gathered round a
chateau in a moat.  The air was perfumed with hemp from
neighbouring fields.  At the Golden Sheep we found excellent
entertainment.  German shells from the siege of La Fere, Nurnberg
figures, gold-fish in a bowl, and all manner of knick-knacks,
embellished the public room.  The landlady was a stout, plain,
short-sighted, motherly body, with something not far short of a
genius for cookery.  She had a guess of her excellence herself.
After every dish was sent in, she would come and look on at the
dinner for a while, with puckered, blinking eyes.  'C'est bon,
n'est-ce pas?' she would say; and when she had received a proper
answer, she disappeared into the kitchen.  That common French dish,
partridge and cabbages, became a new thing in my eyes at the Golden
Sheep; and many subsequent dinners have bitterly disappointed me in
consequence.  Sweet was our rest in the Golden Sheep at Moy.



LA FERE OF CURSED MEMORY



We lingered in Moy a good part of the day, for we were fond of
being philosophical, and scorned long journeys and early starts on
principle.  The place, moreover, invited to repose.  People in
elaborate shooting costumes sallied from the chateau with guns and
game-bags; and this was a pleasure in itself, to remain behind
while these elegant pleasure-seekers took the first of the morning.
In this way, all the world may be an aristocrat, and play the duke
among marquises, and the reigning monarch among dukes, if he will
only outvie them in tranquillity.  An imperturbable demeanour comes
from perfect patience.  Quiet minds cannot be perplexed or
frightened, but go on in fortune or misfortune at their own private
pace, like a clock during a thunderstorm.

We made a very short day of it to La Fere; but the dusk was
falling, and a small rain had begun before we stowed the boats.  La
Fere is a fortified town in a plain, and has two belts of rampart.
Between the first and the second extends a region of waste land and
cultivated patches.  Here and there along the wayside were posters
forbidding trespass in the name of military engineering.  At last,
a second gateway admitted us to the town itself.  Lighted windows
looked gladsome, whiffs of comfortable cookery came abroad upon the
air.  The town was full of the military reserve, out for the French
Autumn Manoeuvres, and the reservists walked speedily and wore
their formidable great-coats.  It was a fine night to be within
doors over dinner, and hear the rain upon the windows.

The Cigarette and I could not sufficiently congratulate each other
on the prospect, for we had been told there was a capital inn at La
Fere.  Such a dinner as we were going to eat! such beds as we were
to sleep in!--and all the while the rain raining on houseless folk
over all the poplared countryside!  It made our mouths water.  The
inn bore the name of some woodland animal, stag, or hart, or hind,
I forget which.  But I shall never forget how spacious and how
eminently habitable it looked as we drew near.  The carriage entry
was lighted up, not by intention, but from the mere superfluity of
fire and candle in the house.  A rattle of many dishes came to our
ears; we sighted a great field of table-cloth; the kitchen glowed
like a forge and smelt like a garden of things to eat.

Into this, the inmost shrine and physiological heart of a hostelry,
with all its furnaces in action, and all its dressers charged with
viands, you are now to suppose us making our triumphal entry, a
pair of damp rag-and-bone men, each with a limp india-rubber bag
upon his arm.  I do not believe I have a sound view of that
kitchen; I saw it through a sort of glory:  but it seemed to me
crowded with the snowy caps of cookmen, who all turned round from
their saucepans and looked at us with surprise.  There was no doubt
about the landlady, however:  there she was, heading her army, a
flushed, angry woman, full of affairs.  Her I asked politely--too
politely, thinks the Cigarette--if we could have beds:  she
surveying us coldly from head to foot.

'You will find beds in the suburb,' she remarked.  'We are too busy
for the like of you.'

If we could make an entrance, change our clothes, and order a
bottle of wine, I felt sure we could put things right; so said I:
'If we cannot sleep, we may at least dine,'--and was for depositing
my bag.

What a terrible convulsion of nature was that which followed in the
landlady's face!  She made a run at us, and stamped her foot.

'Out with you--out of the door!' she screeched.  'Sortez! sortez!
sortez par la porte!'

I do not know how it happened, but next moment we were out in the
rain and darkness, and I was cursing before the carriage entry like
a disappointed mendicant.  Where were the boating men of Belgium?
where the Judge and his good wines? and where the graces of Origny?
Black, black was the night after the firelit kitchen; but what was
that to the blackness in our heart?  This was not the first time
that I have been refused a lodging.  Often and often have I planned
what I should do if such a misadventure happened to me again.  And
nothing is easier to plan.  But to put in execution, with the heart
boiling at the indignity?  Try it; try it only once; and tell me
what you did.

It is all very fine to talk about tramps and morality.  Six hours
of police surveillance (such as I have had), or one brutal
rejection from an inn-door, change your views upon the subject like
a course of lectures.  As long as you keep in the upper regions,
with all the world bowing to you as you go, social arrangements
have a very handsome air; but once get under the wheels, and you
wish society were at the devil.  I will give most respectable men a
fortnight of such a life, and then I will offer them twopence for
what remains of their morality.

For my part, when I was turned out of the Stag, or the Hind, or
whatever it was, I would have set the temple of Diana on fire, if
it had been handy.  There was no crime complete enough to express
my disapproval of human institutions.  As for the Cigarette, I
never knew a man so altered.  'We have been taken for pedlars
again,' said he.  'Good God, what it must be to be a pedlar in
reality!'  He particularised a complaint for every joint in the
landlady's body.  Timon was a philanthropist alongside of him.  And
then, when he was at the top of his maledictory bent, he would
suddenly break away and begin whimperingly to commiserate the poor.
'I hope to God,' he said,--and I trust the prayer was answered,--
'that I shall never be uncivil to a pedlar.'  Was this the
imperturbable Cigarette?  This, this was he.  O change beyond
report, thought, or belief!

Meantime the heaven wept upon our heads; and the windows grew
brighter as the night increased in darkness.  We trudged in and out
of La Fere streets; we saw shops, and private houses where people
were copiously dining; we saw stables where carters' nags had
plenty of fodder and clean straw; we saw no end of reservists, who
were very sorry for themselves this wet night, I doubt not, and
yearned for their country homes; but had they not each man his
place in La Fere barracks?  And we, what had we?

There seemed to be no other inn in the whole town.  People gave us
directions, which we followed as best we could, generally with the
effect of bringing us out again upon the scene of our disgrace.  We
were very sad people indeed by the time we had gone all over La
Fere; and the Cigarette had already made up his mind to lie under a
poplar and sup off a loaf of bread.  But right at the other end,
the house next the town-gate was full of light and bustle.  'Bazin,
aubergiste, loge a pied,' was the sign.  'A la Croix de Malte.'
There were we received.

The room was full of noisy reservists drinking and smoking; and we
were very glad indeed when the drums and bugles began to go about
the streets, and one and all had to snatch shakoes and be off for
the barracks.

Bazin was a tall man, running to fat:  soft-spoken, with a
delicate, gentle face.  We asked him to share our wine; but he
excused himself, having pledged reservists all day long.  This was
a very different type of the workman-innkeeper from the bawling
disputatious fellow at Origny.  He also loved Paris, where he had
worked as a decorative painter in his youth.  There were such
opportunities for self-instruction there, he said.  And if any one
has read Zola's description of the workman's marriage-party
visiting the Louvre, they would do well to have heard Bazin by way
of antidote.  He had delighted in the museums in his youth.  'One
sees there little miracles of work,' he said; 'that is what makes a
good workman; it kindles a spark.'  We asked him how he managed in
La Fere.  'I am married,' he said, 'and I have my pretty children.
But frankly, it is no life at all.  From morning to night I pledge
a pack of good enough fellows who know nothing.'

It faired as the night went on, and the moon came out of the
clouds.  We sat in front of the door, talking softly with Bazin.
At the guard-house opposite, the guard was being for ever turned
out, as trains of field artillery kept clanking in out of the
night, or patrols of horsemen trotted by in their cloaks.  Madame
Bazin came out after a while; she was tired with her day's work, I
suppose; and she nestled up to her husband and laid her head upon
his breast.  He had his arm about her, and kept gently patting her
on the shoulder.  I think Bazin was right, and he was really
married.  Of how few people can the same be said!

Little did the Bazins know how much they served us.  We were
charged for candles, for food and drink, and for the beds we slept
in.  But there was nothing in the bill for the husband's pleasant
talk; nor for the pretty spectacle of their married life.  And
there was yet another item unchanged.  For these people's
politeness really set us up again in our own esteem.  We had a
thirst for consideration; the sense of insult was still hot in our
spirits; and civil usage seemed to restore us to our position in
the world.

How little we pay our way in life!  Although we have our purses
continually in our hand, the better part of service goes still
unrewarded.  But I like to fancy that a grateful spirit gives as
good as it gets.  Perhaps the Bazins knew how much I liked them?
perhaps they also were healed of some slights by the thanks that I
gave them in my manner?




DOWN THE OISE



THROUGH THE GOLDEN VALLEY


Below La Fere the river runs through a piece of open pastoral
country; green, opulent, loved by breeders; called the Golden
Valley.  In wide sweeps, and with a swift and equable gallop, the
ceaseless stream of water visits and makes green the fields.  Kine,
and horses, and little humorous donkeys, browse together in the
meadows, and come down in troops to the river-side to drink.  They
make a strange feature in the landscape; above all when they are
startled, and you see them galloping to and fro with their
incongruous forms and faces.  It gives a feeling as of great,
unfenced pampas, and the herds of wandering nations.  There were
hills in the distance upon either hand; and on one side, the river
sometimes bordered on the wooded spurs of Coucy and St. Gobain.

The artillery were practising at La Fere; and soon the cannon of
heaven joined in that loud play.  Two continents of cloud met and
exchanged salvos overhead; while all round the horizon we could see
sunshine and clear air upon the hills.  What with the guns and the
thunder, the herds were all frightened in the Golden Valley.  We
could see them tossing their heads, and running to and fro in
timorous indecision; and when they had made up their minds, and the
donkey followed the horse, and the cow was after the donkey, we
could hear their hooves thundering abroad over the meadows.  It had
a martial sound, like cavalry charges.  And altogether, as far as
the ears are concerned, we had a very rousing battle-piece
performed for our amusement.

At last the guns and the thunder dropped off; the sun shone on the
wet meadows; the air was scented with the breath of rejoicing trees
and grass; and the river kept unweariedly carrying us on at its
best pace.  There was a manufacturing district about Chauny; and
after that the banks grew so high that they hid the adjacent
country, and we could see nothing but clay sides, and one willow
after another.  Only, here and there, we passed by a village or a
ferry, and some wondering child upon the bank would stare after us
until we turned the corner.  I daresay we continued to paddle in
that child's dreams for many a night after.

Sun and shower alternated like day and night, making the hours
longer by their variety.  When the showers were heavy, I could feel
each drop striking through my jersey to my warm skin; and the
accumulation of small shocks put me nearly beside myself.  I
decided I should buy a mackintosh at Noyon.  It is nothing to get
wet; but the misery of these individual pricks of cold all over my
body at the same instant of time made me flail the water with my
paddle like a madman.  The Cigarette was greatly amused by these
ebullitions.  It gave him something else to look at besides clay
banks and willows.

All the time, the river stole away like a thief in straight places,
or swung round corners with an eddy; the willows nodded, and were
undermined all day long; the clay banks tumbled in; the Oise, which
had been so many centuries making the Golden Valley, seemed to have
changed its fancy, and be bent upon undoing its performance.  What
a number of things a river does, by simply following Gravity in the
innocence of its heart!



NOYON CATHEDRAL



Noyon stands about a mile from the river, in a little plain
surrounded by wooded hills, and entirely covers an eminence with
its tile roofs, surmounted by a long, straight-backed cathedral
with two stiff towers.  As we got into the town, the tile roofs
seemed to tumble uphill one upon another, in the oddest disorder;
but for all their scrambling, they did not attain above the knees
of the cathedral, which stood, upright and solemn, over all.  As
the streets drew near to this presiding genius, through the market-
place under the Hotel de Ville, they grew emptier and more
composed.  Blank walls and shuttered windows were turned to the
great edifice, and grass grew on the white causeway.  'Put off thy
shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
holy ground.'  The Hotel du Nord, nevertheless, lights its secular
tapers within a stone-cast of the church; and we had the superb
east-end before our eyes all morning from the window of our
bedroom.  I have seldom looked on the east-end of a church with
more complete sympathy.  As it flanges out in three wide terraces
and settles down broadly on the earth, it looks like the poop of
some great old battle-ship.  Hollow-backed buttresses carry vases,
which figure for the stern lanterns.  There is a roll in the
ground, and the towers just appear above the pitch of the roof, as
though the good ship were bowing lazily over an Atlantic swell.  At
any moment it might be a hundred feet away from you, climbing the
next billow.  At any moment a window might open, and some old
admiral thrust forth a cocked hat, and proceed to take an
observation.  The old admirals sail the sea no longer; the old
ships of battle are all broken up, and live only in pictures; but
this, that was a church before ever they were thought upon, is
still a church, and makes as brave an appearance by the Oise.  The
cathedral and the river are probably the two oldest things for
miles around; and certainly they have both a grand old age.

The Sacristan took us to the top of one of the towers, and showed
us the five bells hanging in their loft.  From above, the town was
a tesselated pavement of roofs and gardens; the old line of rampart
was plainly traceable; and the Sacristan pointed out to us, far
across the plain, in a bit of gleaming sky between two clouds, the
towers of Chateau Coucy.

I find I never weary of great churches.  It is my favourite kind of
mountain scenery.  Mankind was never so happily inspired as when it
made a cathedral:  a thing as single and specious as a statue to
the first glance, and yet, on examination, as lively and
interesting as a forest in detail.  The height of spires cannot be
taken by trigonometry; they measure absurdly short, but how tall
they are to the admiring eye!  And where we have so many elegant
proportions, growing one out of the other, and all together into
one, it seems as if proportion transcended itself, and became
something different and more imposing.  I could never fathom how a
man dares to lift up his voice to preach in a cathedral.  What is
he to say that will not be an anti-climax?  For though I have heard
a considerable variety of sermons, I never yet heard one that was
so expressive as a cathedral.  'Tis the best preacher itself, and
preaches day and night; not only telling you of man's art and
aspirations in the past, but convicting your own soul of ardent
sympathies; or rather, like all good preachers, it sets you
preaching to yourself;--and every man is his own doctor of divinity
in the last resort.

As I sat outside of the hotel in the course of the afternoon, the
sweet groaning thunder of the organ floated out of the church like
a summons.  I was not averse, liking the theatre so well, to sit
out an act or two of the play, but I could never rightly make out
the nature of the service I beheld.  Four or five priests and as
many choristers were singing Miserere before the high altar when I
went in.  There was no congregation but a few old women on chairs
and old men kneeling on the pavement.  After a while a long train
of young girls, walking two and two, each with a lighted taper in
her hand, and all dressed in black with a white veil, came from
behind the altar, and began to descend the nave; the four first
carrying a Virgin and child upon a table.  The priests and
choristers arose from their knees and followed after, singing 'Ave
Mary' as they went.  In this order they made the circuit of the
cathedral, passing twice before me where I leaned against a pillar.
The priest who seemed of most consequence was a strange, down-
looking old man.  He kept mumbling prayers with his lips; but as he
looked upon me darkling, it did not seem as if prayer were
uppermost in his heart.  Two others, who bore the burthen of the
chaunt, were stout, brutal, military-looking men of forty, with
bold, over-fed eyes; they sang with some lustiness, and trolled
forth 'Ave Mary' like a garrison catch.  The little girls were
timid and grave.  As they footed slowly up the aisle, each one took
a moment's glance at the Englishman; and the big nun who played
marshal fairly stared him out of countenance.  As for the
choristers, from first to last they misbehaved as only boys can
misbehave; and cruelly marred the performance with their antics.

I understood a great deal of the spirit of what went on.  Indeed it
would be difficult not to understand the Miserere, which I take to
be the composition of an atheist.  If it ever be a good thing to
take such despondency to heart, the Miserere is the right music,
and a cathedral a fit scene.  So far I am at one with the
Catholics:- an odd name for them, after all?  But why, in God's
name, these holiday choristers? why these priests who steal
wandering looks about the congregation while they feign to be at
prayer? why this fat nun, who rudely arranges her procession and
shakes delinquent virgins by the elbow? why this spitting, and
snuffing, and forgetting of keys, and the thousand and one little
misadventures that disturb a frame of mind laboriously edified with
chaunts and organings?  In any play-house reverend fathers may see
what can be done with a little art, and how, to move high
sentiments, it is necessary to drill the supernumeraries and have
every stool in its proper place.

One other circumstance distressed me.  I could bear a Miserere
myself, having had a good deal of open-air exercise of late; but I
wished the old people somewhere else.  It was neither the right
sort of music nor the right sort of divinity for men and women who
have come through most accidents by this time, and probably have an
opinion of their own upon the tragic element in life.  A person up
in years can generally do his own Miserere for himself; although I
notice that such an one often prefers Jubilate Deo for his ordinary
singing.  On the whole, the most religious exercise for the aged is
probably to recall their own experience; so many friends dead, so
many hopes disappointed, so many slips and stumbles, and withal so
many bright days and smiling providences; there is surely the
matter of a very eloquent sermon in all this.

On the whole, I was greatly solemnised.  In the little pictorial
map of our whole Inland Voyage, which my fancy still preserves, and
sometimes unrolls for the amusement of odd moments, Noyon cathedral
figures on a most preposterous scale, and must be nearly as large
as a department.  I can still see the faces of the priests as if
they were at my elbow, and hear Ave Maria, ora pro nobis, sounding
through the church.  All Noyon is blotted out for me by these
superior memories; and I do not care to say more about the place.
It was but a stack of brown roofs at the best, where I believe
people live very reputably in a quiet way; but the shadow of the
church falls upon it when the sun is low, and the five bells are
heard in all quarters, telling that the organ has begun.  If ever I
join the Church of Rome, I shall stipulate to be Bishop of Noyon on
the Oise.



DOWN THE OISE



TO COMPIEGNE


The most patient people grow weary at last with being continually
wetted with rain; except of course in the Scottish Highlands, where
there are not enough fine intervals to point the difference.  That
was like to be our case, the day we left Noyon.  I remember nothing
of the voyage; it was nothing but clay banks and willows, and rain;
incessant, pitiless, beating rain; until we stopped to lunch at a
little inn at Pimprez, where the canal ran very near the river.  We
were so sadly drenched that the landlady lit a few sticks in the
chimney for our comfort; there we sat in a steam of vapour,
lamenting our concerns.  The husband donned a game-bag and strode
out to shoot; the wife sat in a far corner watching us.  I think we
were worth looking at.  We grumbled over the misfortune of La Fere;
we forecast other La Feres in the future;--although things went
better with the Cigarette for spokesman; he had more aplomb
altogether than I; and a dull, positive way of approaching a
landlady that carried off the india-rubber bags.  Talking of La
Fere put us talking of the reservists.

'Reservery,' said he, 'seems a pretty mean way to spend ones autumn
holiday.'

'About as mean,' returned I dejectedly, 'as canoeing.'

'These gentlemen travel for their pleasure?' asked the landlady,
with unconscious irony.

It was too much.  The scales fell from our eyes.  Another wet day,
it was determined, and we put the boats into the train.

The weather took the hint.  That was our last wetting.  The
afternoon faired up:  grand clouds still voyaged in the sky, but
now singly, and with a depth of blue around their path; and a
sunset in the daintiest rose and gold inaugurated a thick night of
stars and a month of unbroken weather.  At the same time, the river
began to give us a better outlook into the country.  The banks were
not so high, the willows disappeared from along the margin, and
pleasant hills stood all along its course and marked their profile
on the sky.

In a little while the canal, coming to its last lock, began to
discharge its water-houses on the Oise; so that we had no lack of
company to fear.  Here were all our old friends; the Deo Gratias of
Conde and the Four Sons of Aymon journeyed cheerily down stream
along with us; we exchanged waterside pleasantries with the
steersman perched among the lumber, or the driver hoarse with
bawling to his horses; and the children came and looked over the
side as we paddled by.  We had never known all this while how much
we missed them; but it gave us a fillip to see the smoke from their
chimneys.

A little below this junction we made another meeting of yet more
account.  For there we were joined by the Aisne, already a far-
travelled river and fresh out of Champagne.  Here ended the
adolescence of the Oise; this was his marriage day; thenceforward
he had a stately, brimming march, conscious of his own dignity and
sundry dams.  He became a tranquil feature in the scene.  The trees
and towns saw themselves in him, as in a mirror.  He carried the
canoes lightly on his broad breast; there was no need to work hard
against an eddy:  but idleness became the order of the day, and
mere straightforward dipping of the paddle, now on this side, now
on that, without intelligence or effort.  Truly we were coming into
halcyon weather upon all accounts, and were floated towards the sea
like gentlemen.

We made Compiegne as the sun was going down:  a fine profile of a
town above the river.  Over the bridge, a regiment was parading to
the drum.  People loitered on the quay, some fishing, some looking
idly at the stream.  And as the two boats shot in along the water,
we could see them pointing them out and speaking one to another.
We landed at a floating lavatory, where the washerwomen were still
beating the clothes.



AT COMPIEGNE



We put up at a big, bustling hotel in Compiegne, where nobody
observed our presence.

Reservery and general militarismus (as the Germans call it) were
rampant.  A camp of conical white tents without the town looked
like a leaf out of a picture Bible; sword-belts decorated the walls
of the cafes; and the streets kept sounding all day long with
military music.  It was not possible to be an Englishman and avoid
a feeling of elation; for the men who followed the drums were
small, and walked shabbily.  Each man inclined at his own angle,
and jolted to his own convenience, as he went.  There was nothing
of the superb gait with which a regiment of tall Highlanders moves
behind its music, solemn and inevitable, like a natural phenomenon.
Who that has seen it can forget the drum-major pacing in front, the
drummers' tiger-skins, the pipers' swinging plaids, the strange
elastic rhythm of the whole regiment footing it in time--and the
bang of the drum, when the brasses cease, and the shrill pipes take
up the martial story in their place?

A girl, at school in France, began to describe one of our regiments
on parade to her French schoolmates; and as she went on, she told
me, the recollection grew so vivid, she became so proud to be the
countrywoman of such soldiers, and so sorry to be in another
country, that her voice failed her and she burst into tears.  I
have never forgotten that girl; and I think she very nearly
deserves a statue.  To call her a young lady, with all its niminy
associations, would be to offer her an insult.  She may rest
assured of one thing:  although she never should marry a heroic
general, never see any great or immediate result of her life, she
will not have lived in vain for her native land.

But though French soldiers show to ill advantage on parade, on the
march they are gay, alert, and willing like a troop of fox-hunters.
I remember once seeing a company pass through the forest of
Fontainebleau, on the Chailly road, between the Bas Breau and the
Reine Blanche.  One fellow walked a little before the rest, and
sang a loud, audacious marching song.  The rest bestirred their
feet, and even swung their muskets in time.  A young officer on
horseback had hard ado to keep his countenance at the words.  You
never saw anything so cheerful and spontaneous as their gait;
schoolboys do not look more eagerly at hare and hounds; and you
would have thought it impossible to tire such willing marchers.

My great delight in Compiegne was the town-hall.  I doted upon the
town-hall.  It is a monument of Gothic insecurity, all turreted,
and gargoyled, and slashed, and bedizened with half a score of
architectural fancies.  Some of the niches are gilt and painted;
and in a great square panel in the centre, in black relief on a
gilt ground, Louis XII. rides upon a pacing horse, with hand on hip
and head thrown back.  There is royal arrogance in every line of
him; the stirruped foot projects insolently from the frame; the eye
is hard and proud; the very horse seems to be treading with
gratification over prostrate serfs, and to have the breath of the
trumpet in his nostrils.  So rides for ever, on the front of the
town-hall, the good king Louis XII., the father of his people.

Over the king's head, in the tall centre turret, appears the dial
of a clock; and high above that, three little mechanical figures,
each one with a hammer in his hand, whose business it is to chime
out the hours and halves and quarters for the burgesses of
Compiegne.  The centre figure has a gilt breast-plate; the two
others wear gilt trunk-hose; and they all three have elegant,
flapping hats like cavaliers.  As the quarter approaches, they turn
their heads and look knowingly one to the other; and then, kling go
the three hammers on three little bells below.  The hour follows,
deep and sonorous, from the interior of the tower; and the gilded
gentlemen rest from their labours with contentment.

I had a great deal of healthy pleasure from their manoeuvres, and
took good care to miss as few performances as possible; and I found
that even the Cigarette, while he pretended to despise my
enthusiasm, was more or less a devotee himself.  There is something
highly absurd in the exposition of such toys to the outrages of
winter on a housetop.  They would be more in keeping in a glass
case before a Nurnberg clock.  Above all, at night, when the
children are abed, and even grown people are snoring under quilts,
does it not seem impertinent to leave these ginger-bread figures
winking and tinkling to the stars and the rolling moon?  The
gargoyles may fitly enough twist their ape-like heads; fitly enough
may the potentate bestride his charger, like a centurion in an old
German print of the Via Dolorosa; but the toys should be put away
in a box among some cotton, until the sun rises, and the children
are abroad again to be amused.

In Compiegne post-office a great packet of letters awaited us; and
the authorities were, for this occasion only, so polite as to hand
them over upon application.

In some ways, our journey may be said to end with this letter-bag
at Compiegne.  The spell was broken.  We had partly come home from
that moment.

No one should have any correspondence on a journey; it is bad
enough to have to write; but the receipt of letters is the death of
all holiday feeling.

'Out of my country and myself I go.'  I wish to take a dive among
new conditions for a while, as into another element.  I have
nothing to do with my friends or my affections for the time; when I
came away, I left my heart at home in a desk, or sent it forward
with my portmanteau to await me at my destination.  After my
journey is over, I shall not fail to read your admirable letters
with the attention they deserve.  But I have paid all this money,
look you, and paddled all these strokes, for no other purpose than
to be abroad; and yet you keep me at home with your perpetual
communications.  You tug the string, and I feel that I am a
tethered bird.  You pursue me all over Europe with the little
vexations that I came away to avoid.  There is no discharge in the
war of life, I am well aware; but shall there not be so much as a
week's furlough?

We were up by six, the day we were to leave.  They had taken so
little note of us that I hardly thought they would have
condescended on a bill.  But they did, with some smart particulars
too; and we paid in a civilised manner to an uninterested clerk,
and went out of that hotel, with the india-rubber bags, unremarked.
No one cared to know about us.  It is not possible to rise before a
village; but Compiegne was so grown a town, that it took its ease
in the morning; and we were up and away while it was still in
dressing-gown and slippers.  The streets were left to people
washing door-steps; nobody was in full dress but the cavaliers upon
the town-hall; they were all washed with dew, spruce in their
gilding, and full of intelligence and a sense of professional
responsibility.  Kling went they on the bells for the half-past six
as we went by.  I took it kind of them to make me this parting
compliment; they never were in better form, not even at noon upon a
Sunday.

There was no one to see us off but the early washerwomen--early and
late--who were already beating the linen in their floating lavatory
on the river.  They were very merry and matutinal in their ways;
plunged their arms boldly in, and seemed not to feel the shock.  It
would be dispiriting to me, this early beginning and first cold
dabble of a most dispiriting day's work.  But I believe they would
have been as unwilling to change days with us as we could be to
change with them.  They crowded to the door to watch us paddle away
into the thin sunny mists upon the river; and shouted heartily
after us till we were through the bridge.



CHANGED TIMES



There is a sense in which those mists never rose from off our
journey; and from that time forth they lie very densely in my note-
book.  As long as the Oise was a small rural river, it took us near
by people's doors, and we could hold a conversation with natives in
the riparian fields.  But now that it had grown so wide, the life
along shore passed us by at a distance.  It was the same difference
as between a great public highway and a country by-path that
wanders in and out of cottage gardens.  We now lay in towns, where
nobody troubled us with questions; we had floated into civilised
life, where people pass without salutation.  In sparsely inhabited
places, we make all we can of each encounter; but when it comes to
a city, we keep to ourselves, and never speak unless we have
trodden on a man's toes.  In these waters we were no longer strange
birds, and nobody supposed we had travelled farther than from the
last town.  I remember, when we came into L'Isle Adam, for
instance, how we met dozens of pleasure-boats outing it for the
afternoon, and there was nothing to distinguish the true voyager
from the amateur, except, perhaps, the filthy condition of my sail.
The company in one boat actually thought they recognised me for a
neighbour.  Was there ever anything more wounding?  All the romance
had come down to that.  Now, on the upper Oise, where nothing
sailed as a general thing but fish, a pair of canoeists could not
be thus vulgarly explained away; we were strange and picturesque
intruders; and out of people's wonder sprang a sort of light and
passing intimacy all along our route.  There is nothing but tit-
for-tat in this world, though sometimes it be a little difficult to
trace:  for the scores are older than we ourselves, and there has
never yet been a settling-day since things were.  You get
entertainment pretty much in proportion as you give.  As long as we
were a sort of odd wanderers, to be stared at and followed like a
quack doctor or a caravan, we had no want of amusement in return;
but as soon as we sank into commonplace ourselves, all whom we met
were similarly disenchanted.  And here is one reason of a dozen,
why the world is dull to dull persons.

In our earlier adventures there was generally something to do, and
that quickened us.  Even the showers of rain had a revivifying
effect, and shook up the brain from torpor.  But now, when the
river no longer ran in a proper sense, only glided seaward with an
even, outright, but imperceptible speed, and when the sky smiled
upon us day after day without variety, we began to slip into that
golden doze of the mind which follows upon much exercise in the
open air.  I have stupefied myself in this way more than once;
indeed, I dearly love the feeling; but I never had it to the same
degree as when paddling down the Oise.  It was the apotheosis of
stupidity.

We ceased reading entirely.  Sometimes when I found a new paper, I
took a particular pleasure in reading a single number of the
current novel; but I never could bear more than three instalments;
and even the second was a disappointment.  As soon as the tale
became in any way perspicuous, it lost all merit in my eyes; only a
single scene, or, as is the way with these feuilletons, half a
scene, without antecedent or consequence, like a piece of a dream,
had the knack of fixing my interest.  The less I saw of the novel,
the better I liked it:  a pregnant reflection.  But for the most
part, as I said, we neither of us read anything in the world, and
employed the very little while we were awake between bed and dinner
in poring upon maps.  I have always been fond of maps, and can
voyage in an atlas with the greatest enjoyment.  The names of
places are singularly inviting; the contour of coasts and rivers is
enthralling to the eye; and to hit, in a map, upon some place you
have heard of before, makes history a new possession.  But we
thumbed our charts, on these evenings, with the blankest unconcern.
We cared not a fraction for this place or that.  We stared at the
sheet as children listen to their rattle; and read the names of
towns or villages to forget them again at once.  We had no romance
in the matter; there was nobody so fancy-free.  If you had taken
the maps away while we were studying them most intently, it is a
fair bet whether we might not have continued to study the table
with the same delight.

About one thing we were mightily taken up, and that was eating.  I
think I made a god of my belly.  I remember dwelling in imagination
upon this or that dish till my mouth watered; and long before we
got in for the night my appetite was a clamant, instant annoyance.
Sometimes we paddled alongside for a while and whetted each other
with gastronomical fancies as we went.  Cake and sherry, a homely
rejection, but not within reach upon the Oise, trotted through my
head for many a mile; and once, as we were approaching Verberie,
the Cigarette brought my heart into my mouth by the suggestion of
oyster-patties and Sauterne.

I suppose none of us recognise the great part that is played in
life by eating and drinking.  The appetite is so imperious that we
can stomach the least interesting viands, and pass off a dinner-
hour thankfully enough on bread and water; just as there are men
who must read something, if it were only Bradshaw's Guide.  But
there is a romance about the matter after all.  Probably the table
has more devotees than love; and I am sure that food is much more
generally entertaining than scenery.  Do you give in, as Walt
Whitman would say, that you are any the less immortal for that?
The true materialism is to be ashamed of what we are.  To detect
the flavour of an olive is no less a piece of human perfection than
to find beauty in the colours of the sunset.

Canoeing was easy work.  To dip the paddle at the proper
inclination, now right, now left; to keep the head down stream; to
empty the little pool that gathered in the lap of the apron; to
screw up the eyes against the glittering sparkles of sun upon the
water; or now and again to pass below the whistling tow-rope of the
Deo Gratias of Conde, or the Four Sons of Aymon--there was not much
art in that; certain silly muscles managed it between sleep and
waking; and meanwhile the brain had a whole holiday, and went to
sleep.  We took in, at a glance, the larger features of the scene;
and beheld, with half an eye, bloused fishers and dabbling
washerwomen on the bank.  Now and again we might be half-wakened by
some church spire, by a leaping fish, or by a trail of river grass
that clung about the paddle and had to be plucked off and thrown
away.  But these luminous intervals were only partially luminous.
A little more of us was called into action, but never the whole.
The central bureau of nerves, what in some moods we call Ourselves,
enjoyed its holiday without disturbance, like a Government Office.
The great wheels of intelligence turned idly in the head, like fly-
wheels, grinding no grist.  I have gone on for half an hour at a
time, counting my strokes and forgetting the hundreds.  I flatter
myself the beasts that perish could not underbid that, as a low
form of consciousness.  And what a pleasure it was!  What a hearty,
tolerant temper did it bring about!  There is nothing captious
about a man who has attained to this, the one possible apotheosis
in life, the Apotheosis of Stupidity; and he begins to feel
dignified and longaevous like a tree.

There was one odd piece of practical metaphysics which accompanied
what I may call the depth, if I must not call it the intensity, of
my abstraction.  What philosophers call ME and NOT-ME, EGO and NON
EGO, preoccupied me whether I would or no.  There was less ME and
more NOT-ME than I was accustomed to expect.  I looked on upon
somebody else, who managed the paddling; I was aware of somebody
else's feet against the stretcher; my own body seemed to have no
more intimate relation to me than the canoe, or the river, or the
river banks.  Nor this alone:  something inside my mind, a part of
my brain, a province of my proper being, had thrown off allegiance
and set up for itself, or perhaps for the somebody else who did the
paddling.  I had dwindled into quite a little thing in a corner of
myself.  I was isolated in my own skull.  Thoughts presented
themselves unbidden; they were not my thoughts, they were plainly
some one else's; and I considered them like a part of the
landscape.  I take it, in short, that I was about as near Nirvana
as would be convenient in practical life; and if this be so, I make
the Buddhists my sincere compliments; 'tis an agreeable state, not
very consistent with mental brilliancy, not exactly profitable in a
money point of view, but very calm, golden, and incurious, and one
that sets a man superior to alarms.  It may be best figured by
supposing yourself to get dead drunk, and yet keep sober to enjoy
it.  I have a notion that open-air labourers must spend a large
portion of their days in this ecstatic stupor, which explains their
high composure and endurance.  A pity to go to the expense of
laudanum, when here is a better paradise for nothing!

This frame of mind was the great exploit of our voyage, take it all
in all.  It was the farthest piece of travel accomplished.  Indeed,
it lies so far from beaten paths of language, that I despair of
getting the reader into sympathy with the smiling, complacent
idiocy of my condition; when ideas came and went like motes in a
sunbeam; when trees and church spires along the bank surged up,
from time to time into my notice, like solid objects through a
rolling cloudland; when the rhythmical swish of boat and paddle in
the water became a cradle-song to lull my thoughts asleep; when a
piece of mud on the deck was sometimes an intolerable eyesore, and
sometimes quite a companion for me, and the object of pleased
consideration;--and all the time, with the river running and the
shores changing upon either hand, I kept counting my strokes and
forgetting the hundreds, the happiest animal in France.



DOWN THE OISE:  CHURCH INTERIORS



We made our first stage below Compiegne to Pont Sainte Maxence.  I
was abroad a little after six the next morning.  The air was
biting, and smelt of frost.  In an open place a score of women
wrangled together over the day's market; and the noise of their
negotiation sounded thin and querulous like that of sparrows on a
winter's morning.  The rare passengers blew into their hands, and
shuffled in their wooden shoes to set the blood agog.  The streets
were full of icy shadow, although the chimneys were smoking
overhead in golden sunshine.  If you wake early enough at this
season of the year, you may get up in December to break your fast
in June.

I found my way to the church; for there is always something to see
about a church, whether living worshippers or dead men's tombs; you
find there the deadliest earnest, and the hollowest deceit; and
even where it is not a piece of history, it will be certain to leak
out some contemporary gossip.  It was scarcely so cold in the
church as it was without, but it looked colder.  The white nave was
positively arctic to the eye; and the tawdriness of a continental
altar looked more forlorn than usual in the solitude and the bleak
air.  Two priests sat in the chancel, reading and waiting
penitents; and out in the nave, one very old woman was engaged in
her devotions.  It was a wonder how she was able to pass her beads
when healthy young people were breathing in their palms and
slapping their chest; but though this concerned me, I was yet more
dispirited by the nature of her exercises.  She went from chair to
chair, from altar to altar, circumnavigating the church.  To each
shrine she dedicated an equal number of beads and an equal length
of time.  Like a prudent capitalist with a somewhat cynical view of
the commercial prospect, she desired to place her supplications in
a great variety of heavenly securities.  She would risk nothing on
the credit of any single intercessor.  Out of the whole company of
saints and angels, not one but was to suppose himself her champion
elect against the Great Assize!  I could only think of it as a
dull, transparent jugglery, based upon unconscious unbelief.

She was as dead an old woman as ever I saw; no more than bone and
parchment, curiously put together.  Her eyes, with which she
interrogated mine, were vacant of sense.  It depends on what you
call seeing, whether you might not call her blind.  Perhaps she had
known love:  perhaps borne children, suckled them and given them
pet names.  But now that was all gone by, and had left her neither
happier nor wiser; and the best she could do with her mornings was
to come up here into the cold church and juggle for a slice of
heaven.  It was not without a gulp that I escaped into the streets
and the keen morning air.  Morning? why, how tired of it she would
be before night! and if she did not sleep, how then?  It is
fortunate that not many of us are brought up publicly to justify
our lives at the bar of threescore years and ten; fortunate that
such a number are knocked opportunely on the head in what they call
the flower of their years, and go away to suffer for their follies
in private somewhere else.  Otherwise, between sick children and
discontented old folk, we might be put out of all conceit of life.

I had need of all my cerebral hygiene during that day's paddle:
the old devotee stuck in my throat sorely.  But I was soon in the
seventh heaven of stupidity; and knew nothing but that somebody was
paddling a canoe, while I was counting his strokes and forgetting
the hundreds.  I used sometimes to be afraid I should remember the
hundreds; which would have made a toil of a pleasure; but the
terror was chimerical, they went out of my mind by enchantment, and
I knew no more than the man in the moon about my only occupation.

At Creil, where we stopped to lunch, we left the canoes in another
floating lavatory, which, as it was high noon, was packed with
washerwomen, red-handed and loud-voiced; and they and their broad
jokes are about all I remember of the place.  I could look up my
history-books, if you were very anxious, and tell you a date or
two; for it figured rather largely in the English wars.  But I
prefer to mention a girls' boarding-school, which had an interest
for us because it was a girls' boarding-school, and because we
imagined we had rather an interest for it.  At least--there were
the girls about the garden; and here were we on the river; and
there was more than one handkerchief waved as we went by.  It
caused quite a stir in my heart; and yet how we should have wearied
and despised each other, these girls and I, if we had been
introduced at a croquet-party!  But this is a fashion I love:  to
kiss the hand or wave a handkerchief to people I shall never see
again, to play with possibility, and knock in a peg for fancy to
hang upon.  It gives the traveller a jog, reminds him that he is
not a traveller everywhere, and that his journey is no more than a
siesta by the way on the real march of life.

The church at Creil was a nondescript place in the inside, splashed
with gaudy lights from the windows, and picked out with medallions
of the Dolorous Way.  But there was one oddity, in the way of an ex
voto, which pleased me hugely:  a faithful model of a canal boat,
swung from the vault, with a written aspiration that God should
conduct the Saint Nicolas of Creil to a good haven.  The thing was
neatly executed, and would have made the delight of a party of boys
on the waterside.  But what tickled me was the gravity of the peril
to be conjured.  You might hang up the model of a sea-going ship,
and welcome:  one that is to plough a furrow round the world, and
visit the tropic or the frosty poles, runs dangers that are well
worth a candle and a mass.  But the Saint Nicolas of Creil, which
was to be tugged for some ten years by patient draught-horses, in a
weedy canal, with the poplars chattering overhead, and the skipper
whistling at the tiller; which was to do all its errands in green
inland places, and never get out of sight of a village belfry in
all its cruising; why, you would have thought if anything could be
done without the intervention of Providence, it would be that!  But
perhaps the skipper was a humorist:  or perhaps a prophet,
reminding people of the seriousness of life by this preposterous
token.

At Creil, as at Noyon, Saint Joseph seemed a favourite saint on the
score of punctuality.  Day and hour can be specified; and grateful
people do not fail to specify them on a votive tablet, when prayers
have been punctually and neatly answered.  Whenever time is a
consideration, Saint Joseph is the proper intermediary.  I took a
sort of pleasure in observing the vogue he had in France, for the
good man plays a very small part in my religion at home.  Yet I
could not help fearing that, where the Saint is so much commanded
for exactitude, he will be expected to be very grateful for his
tablet.

This is foolishness to us Protestants; and not of great importance
anyway.  Whether people's gratitude for the good gifts that come to
them be wisely conceived or dutifully expressed, is a secondary
matter, after all, so long as they feel gratitude.  The true
ignorance is when a man does not know that he has received a good
gift, or begins to imagine that he has got it for himself.  The
self-made man is the funniest windbag after all!  There is a marked
difference between decreeing light in chaos, and lighting the gas
in a metropolitan back-parlour with a box of patent matches; and do
what we will, there is always something made to our hand, if it
were only our fingers.

But there was something worse than foolishness placarded in Creil
Church.  The Association of the Living Rosary (of which I had never
previously heard) is responsible for that.  This Association was
founded, according to the printed advertisement, by a brief of Pope
Gregory Sixteenth, on the 17th of January 1832:  according to a
coloured bas-relief, it seems to have been founded, sometime other,
by the Virgin giving one rosary to Saint Dominic, and the Infant
Saviour giving another to Saint Catharine of Siena.  Pope Gregory
is not so imposing, but he is nearer hand.  I could not distinctly
make out whether the Association was entirely devotional, or had an
eye to good works; at least it is highly organised:  the names of
fourteen matrons and misses were filled in for each week of the
month as associates, with one other, generally a married woman, at
the top for zelatrice:  the leader of the band.  Indulgences,
plenary and partial, follow on the performance of the duties of the
Association.  'The partial indulgences are attached to the
recitation of the rosary.'  On 'the recitation of the required
dizaine,' a partial indulgence promptly follows.  When people serve
the kingdom of heaven with a pass-book in their hands, I should
always be afraid lest they should carry the same commercial spirit
into their dealings with their fellow-men, which would make a sad
and sordid business of this life.

There is one more article, however, of happier import.  'All these
indulgences,' it appeared, 'are applicable to souls in purgatory.'
For God's sake, ye ladies of Creil, apply them all to the souls in
purgatory without delay!  Burns would take no hire for his last
songs, preferring to serve his country out of unmixed love.
Suppose you were to imitate the exciseman, mesdames, and even if
the souls in purgatory were not greatly bettered, some souls in
Creil upon the Oise would find themselves none the worse either
here or hereafter.

I cannot help wondering, as I transcribe these notes, whether a
Protestant born and bred is in a fit state to understand these
signs, and do them what justice they deserve; and I cannot help
answering that he is not.  They cannot look so merely ugly and mean
to the faithful as they do to me.  I see that as clearly as a
proposition in Euclid.  For these believers are neither weak nor
wicked.  They can put up their tablet commanding Saint Joseph for
his despatch, as if he were still a village carpenter; they can
'recite the required dizaine,' and metaphorically pocket the
indulgence, as if they had done a job for Heaven; and then they can
go out and look down unabashed upon this wonderful river flowing
by, and up without confusion at the pin-point stars, which are
themselves great worlds full of flowing rivers greater than the
Oise.  I see it as plainly, I say, as a proposition in Euclid, that
my Protestant mind has missed the point, and that there goes with
these deformities some higher and more religious spirit than I
dream.

I wonder if other people would make the same allowances for me!
Like the ladies of Creil, having recited my rosary of toleration, I
look for my indulgence on the spot.



PRECY AND THE MARIONNETTES



We made Precy about sundown.  The plain is rich with tufts of
poplar.  In a wide, luminous curve, the Oise lay under the
hillside.  A faint mist began to rise and confound the different
distances together.  There was not a sound audible but that of the
sheep-bells in some meadows by the river, and the creaking of a
cart down the long road that descends the hill.  The villas in
their gardens, the shops along the street, all seemed to have been
deserted the day before; and I felt inclined to walk discreetly as
one feels in a silent forest.  All of a sudden, we came round a
corner, and there, in a little green round the church, was a bevy
of girls in Parisian costumes playing croquet.  Their laughter, and
the hollow sound of ball and mallet, made a cheery stir in the
neighbourhood; and the look of these slim figures, all corseted and
ribboned, produced an answerable disturbance in our hearts.  We
were within sniff of Paris, it seemed.  And here were females of
our own species playing croquet, just as if Precy had been a place
in real life, instead of a stage in the fairyland of travel.  For,
to be frank, the peasant woman is scarcely to be counted as a woman
at all, and after having passed by such a succession of people in
petticoats digging and hoeing and making dinner, this company of
coquettes under arms made quite a surprising feature in the
landscape, and convinced us at once of being fallible males.

The inn at Precy is the worst inn in France.  Not even in Scotland
have I found worse fare.  It was kept by a brother and sister,
neither of whom was out of their teens.  The sister, so to speak,
prepared a meal for us; and the brother, who had been tippling,
came in and brought with him a tipsy butcher, to entertain us as we
ate.  We found pieces of loo-warm pork among the salad, and pieces
of unknown yielding substance in the ragout.  The butcher
entertained us with pictures of Parisian life, with which he
professed himself well acquainted; the brother sitting the while on
the edge of the billiard-table, toppling precariously, and sucking
the stump of a cigar.  In the midst of these diversions, bang went
a drum past the house, and a hoarse voice began issuing a
proclamation.  It was a man with marionnettes announcing a
performance for that evening.

He had set up his caravan and lighted his candles on another part
of the girls' croquet-green, under one of those open sheds which
are so common in France to shelter markets; and he and his wife, by
the time we strolled up there, were trying to keep order with the
audience.

It was the most absurd contention.  The show-people had set out a
certain number of benches; and all who sat upon them were to pay a
couple of sous for the accommodation.  They were always quite full-
-a bumper house--as long as nothing was going forward; but let the
show-woman appear with an eye to a collection, and at the first
rattle of her tambourine the audience slipped off the seats, and
stood round on the outside with their hands in their pockets.  It
certainly would have tried an angel's temper.  The showman roared
from the proscenium; he had been all over France, and nowhere,
nowhere, 'not even on the borders of Germany,' had he met with such
misconduct.  Such thieves and rogues and rascals, as he called
them!  And every now and again, the wife issued on another round,
and added her shrill quota to the tirade.  I remarked here, as
elsewhere, how far more copious is the female mind in the material
of insult.  The audience laughed in high good-humour over the man's
declamations; but they bridled and cried aloud under the woman's
pungent sallies.  She picked out the sore points.  She had the
honour of the village at her mercy.  Voices answered her angrily
out of the crowd, and received a smarting retort for their trouble.
A couple of old ladies beside me, who had duly paid for their
seats, waxed very red and indignant, and discoursed to each other
audibly about the impudence of these mountebanks; but as soon as
the show-woman caught a whisper of this, she was down upon them
with a swoop:  if mesdames could persuade their neighbours to act
with common honesty, the mountebanks, she assured them, would be
polite enough:  mesdames had probably had their bowl of soup, and
perhaps a glass of wine that evening; the mountebanks also had a
taste for soup, and did not choose to have their little earnings
stolen from them before their eyes.  Once, things came as far as a
brief personal encounter between the showman and some lads, in
which the former went down as readily as one of his own
marionnettes to a peal of jeering laughter.

I was a good deal astonished at this scene, because I am pretty
well acquainted with the ways of French strollers, more or less
artistic; and have always found them singularly pleasing.  Any
stroller must be dear to the right-thinking heart; if it were only
as a living protest against offices and the mercantile spirit, and
as something to remind us that life is not by necessity the kind of
thing we generally make it.  Even a German band, if you see it
leaving town in the early morning for a campaign in country places,
among trees and meadows, has a romantic flavour for the
imagination.  There is nobody, under thirty, so dead but his heart
will stir a little at sight of a gypsies' camp.  'We are not
cotton-spinners all'; or, at least, not all through.  There is some
life in humanity yet:  and youth will now and again find a brave
word to say in dispraise of riches, and throw up a situation to go
strolling with a knapsack.

An Englishman has always special facilities for intercourse with
French gymnasts; for England is the natural home of gymnasts.  This
or that fellow, in his tights and spangles, is sure to know a word
or two of English, to have drunk English aff-'n-aff, and perhaps
performed in an English music-hall.  He is a countryman of mine by
profession.  He leaps, like the Belgian boating men, to the notion
that I must be an athlete myself.

But the gymnast is not my favourite; he has little or no tincture
of the artist in his composition; his soul is small and pedestrian,
for the most part, since his profession makes no call upon it, and
does not accustom him to high ideas.  But if a man is only so much
of an actor that he can stumble through a farce, he is made free of
a new order of thoughts.  He has something else to think about
beside the money-box.  He has a pride of his own, and, what is of
far more importance, he has an aim before him that he can never
quite attain.  He has gone upon a pilgrimage that will last him his
life long, because there is no end to it short of perfection.  He
will better upon himself a little day by day; or even if he has
given up the attempt, he will always remember that once upon a time
he had conceived this high ideal, that once upon a time he had
fallen in love with a star.  ''Tis better to have loved and lost.'
Although the moon should have nothing to say to Endymion, although
he should settle down with Audrey and feed pigs, do you not think
he would move with a better grace, and cherish higher thoughts to
the end?  The louts he meets at church never had a fancy above
Audrey's snood; but there is a reminiscence in Endymion's heart
that, like a spice, keeps it fresh and haughty.

To be even one of the outskirters of art, leaves a fine stamp on a
man's countenance.  I remember once dining with a party in the inn
at Chateau Landon.  Most of them were unmistakable bagmen; others
well-to-do peasantry; but there was one young fellow in a blouse,
whose face stood out from among the rest surprisingly.  It looked
more finished; more of the spirit looked out through it; it had a
living, expressive air, and you could see that his eyes took things
in.  My companion and I wondered greatly who and what he could be.
It was fair-time in Chateau Landon, and when we went along to the
booths, we had our question answered; for there was our friend
busily fiddling for the peasants to caper to.  He was a wandering
violinist.

A troop of strollers once came to the inn where I was staying, in
the department of Seine et Marne.  There was a father and mother;
two daughters, brazen, blowsy hussies, who sang and acted, without
an idea of how to set about either; and a dark young man, like a
tutor, a recalcitrant house-painter, who sang and acted not amiss.
The mother was the genius of the party, so far as genius can be
spoken of with regard to such a pack of incompetent humbugs; and
her husband could not find words to express his admiration for her
comic countryman.  'You should see my old woman,' said he, and
nodded his beery countenance.  One night they performed in the
stable-yard, with flaring lamps--a wretched exhibition, coldly
looked upon by a village audience.  Next night, as soon as the
lamps were lighted, there came a plump of rain, and they had to
sweep away their baggage as fast as possible, and make off to the
barn where they harboured, cold, wet, and supperless.  In the
morning, a dear friend of mine, who has as warm a heart for
strollers as I have myself, made a little collection, and sent it
by my hands to comfort them for their disappointment.  I gave it to
the father; he thanked me cordially, and we drank a cup together in
the kitchen, talking of roads, and audiences, and hard times.

When I was going, up got my old stroller, and off with his hat.  'I
am afraid,' said he, 'that Monsieur will think me altogether a
beggar; but I have another demand to make upon him.'  I began to
hate him on the spot.  'We play again to-night,' he went on.  'Of
course, I shall refuse to accept any more money from Monsieur and
his friends, who have been already so liberal.  But our programme
of to-night is something truly creditable; and I cling to the idea
that Monsieur will honour us with his presence.'  And then, with a
shrug and a smile:  'Monsieur understands--the vanity of an
artist!'  Save the mark!  The vanity of an artist!  That is the
kind of thing that reconciles me to life:  a ragged, tippling,
incompetent old rogue, with the manners of a gentleman, and the
vanity of an artist, to keep up his self-respect!

But the man after my own heart is M. de Vauversin.  It is nearly
two years since I saw him first, and indeed I hope I may see him
often again.  Here is his first programme, as I found it on the
breakfast-table, and have kept it ever since as a relic of bright
days:


'Mesdames et Messieurs,

'Mademoiselle Ferrario et M. de Vauversin auront l'honneur de
chanter ce soir les morceaux suivants.

'Madermoiselle Ferrario chantera--Mignon--Oiseaux Legers--France--
Des Francais dorment la--Le chateau bleu--Ou voulez-vous aller?

'M. de Vauversin--Madame Fontaine et M. Robinet--Les plongeurs a
cheval--Le Mari mecontent--Tais-toi, gamin--Mon voisin l'original--
Heureux comme ca--Comme on est trompe.'


They made a stage at one end of the salle-a-manger.  And what a
sight it was to see M. de Vauversin, with a cigarette in his mouth,
twanging a guitar, and following Mademoiselle Ferrario's eyes with
the obedient, kindly look of a dog!  The entertainment wound up
with a tombola, or auction of lottery tickets:  an admirable
amusement, with all the excitement of gambling, and no hope of gain
to make you ashamed of your eagerness; for there, all is loss; you
make haste to be out of pocket; it is a competition who shall lose
most money for the benefit of M. de Vauversin and Mademoiselle
Ferrario.

M. de Vauversin is a small man, with a great head of black hair, a
vivacious and engaging air, and a smile that would be delightful if
he had better teeth.  He was once an actor in the Chatelet; but he
contracted a nervous affection from the heat and glare of the
footlights, which unfitted him for the stage.  At this crisis
Mademoiselle Ferrario, otherwise Mademoiselle Rita of the Alcazar,
agreed to share his wandering fortunes.  'I could never forget the
generosity of that lady,' said he.  He wears trousers so tight that
it has long been a problem to all who knew him how he manages to
get in and out of them.  He sketches a little in water-colours; he
writes verses; he is the most patient of fishermen, and spent long
days at the bottom of the inn-garden fruitlessly dabbling a line in
the clear river.

You should hear him recounting his experiences over a bottle of
wine; such a pleasant vein of talk as he has, with a ready smile at
his own mishaps, and every now and then a sudden gravity, like a
man who should hear the surf roar while he was telling the perils
of the deep.  For it was no longer ago than last night, perhaps,
that the receipts only amounted to a franc and a half, to cover
three francs of railway fare and two of board and lodging.  The
Maire, a man worth a million of money, sat in the front seat,
repeatedly applauding Mlle. Ferrario, and yet gave no more than
three sous the whole evening.  Local authorities look with such an
evil eye upon the strolling artist.  Alas! I know it well, who have
been myself taken for one, and pitilessly incarcerated on the
strength of the misapprehension.  Once, M. de Vauversin visited a
commissary of police for permission to sing.  The commissary, who
was smoking at his ease, politely doffed his hat upon the singer's
entrance.  'Mr. Commissary,' he began, 'I am an artist.'  And on
went the commissary's hat again.  No courtesy for the companions of
Apollo!  'They are as degraded as that,' said M. de Vauversin with
a sweep of his cigarette.

But what pleased me most was one outbreak of his, when we had been
talking all the evening of the rubs, indignities, and pinchings of
his wandering life.  Some one said, it would be better to have a
million of money down, and Mlle. Ferrario admitted that she would
prefer that mightily.  'Eh bien, moi non;--not I,' cried De
Vauversin, striking the table with his hand.  'If any one is a
failure in the world, is it not I?  I had an art, in which I have
done things well--as well as some--better perhaps than others; and
now it is closed against me.  I must go about the country gathering
coppers and singing nonsense.  Do you think I regret my life?  Do
you think I would rather be a fat burgess, like a calf?  Not I!  I
have had moments when I have been applauded on the boards:  I think
nothing of that; but I have known in my own mind sometimes, when I
had not a clap from the whole house, that I had found a true
intonation, or an exact and speaking gesture; and then, messieurs,
I have known what pleasure was, what it was to do a thing well,
what it was to be an artist.  And to know what art is, is to have
an interest for ever, such as no burgess can find in his petty
concerns.  Tenez, messieurs, je vais vous le dire--it is like a
religion.'

Such, making some allowance for the tricks of memory and the
inaccuracies of translation, was the profession of faith of M. de
Vauversin.  I have given him his own name, lest any other wanderer
should come across him, with his guitar and cigarette, and
Mademoiselle Ferrario; for should not all the world delight to
honour this unfortunate and loyal follower of the Muses?  May
Apollo send him rimes hitherto undreamed of; may the river be no
longer scanty of her silver fishes to his lure; may the cold not
pinch him on long winter rides, nor the village jack-in-office
affront him with unseemly manners; and may he never miss
Mademoiselle Ferrario from his side, to follow with his dutiful
eyes and accompany on the guitar!

The marionnettes made a very dismal entertainment.  They performed
a piece, called Pyramus and Thisbe, in five mortal acts, and all
written in Alexandrines fully as long as the performers.  One
marionnette was the king; another the wicked counsellor; a third,
credited with exceptional beauty, represented Thisbe; and then
there were guards, and obdurate fathers, and walking gentlemen.
Nothing particular took place during the two or three acts that I
sat out; but you will he pleased to learn that the unities were
properly respected, and the whole piece, with one exception, moved
in harmony with classical rules.  That exception was the comic
countryman, a lean marionnette in wooden shoes, who spoke in prose
and in a broad patois much appreciated by the audience.  He took
unconstitutional liberties with the person of his sovereign; kicked
his fellow-marionnettes in the mouth with his wooden shoes, and
whenever none of the versifying suitors were about, made love to
Thisbe on his own account in comic prose.

This fellow's evolutions, and the little prologue, in which the
showman made a humorous eulogium of his troop, praising their
indifference to applause and hisses, and their single devotion to
their art, were the only circumstances in the whole affair that you
could fancy would so much as raise a smile.  But the villagers of
Precy seemed delighted.  Indeed, so long as a thing is an
exhibition, and you pay to see it, it is nearly certain to amuse.
If we were charged so much a head for sunsets, or if God sent round
a drum before the hawthorns came in flower, what a work should we
not make about their beauty!  But these things, like good
companions, stupid people early cease to observe:  and the Abstract
Bagman tittups past in his spring gig, and is positively not aware
of the flowers along the lane, or the scenery of the weather
overhead.



BACK TO THE WORLD



Of the next two days' sail little remains in my mind, and nothing
whatever in my note-book.  The river streamed on steadily through
pleasant river-side landscapes.  Washerwomen in blue dresses,
fishers in blue blouses, diversified the green banks; and the
relation of the two colours was like that of the flower and the
leaf in the forget-me-not.  A symphony in forget-me-not; I think
Theophile Gautier might thus have characterised that two days'
panorama.  The sky was blue and cloudless; and the sliding surface
of the river held up, in smooth places, a mirror to the heaven and
the shores.  The washerwomen hailed us laughingly; and the noise of
trees and water made an accompaniment to our dozing thoughts, as we
fleeted down the stream.

The great volume, the indefatigable purpose of the river, held the
mind in chain.  It seemed now so sure of its end, so strong and
easy in its gait, like a grown man full of determination.  The surf
was roaring for it on the sands of Havre.

For my own part, slipping along this moving thoroughfare in my
fiddle-case of a canoe, I also was beginning to grow aweary for my
ocean.  To the civilised man, there must come, sooner or later, a
desire for civilisation.  I was weary of dipping the paddle; I was
weary of living on the skirts of life; I wished to be in the thick
of it once more; I wished to get to work; I wished to meet people
who understood my own speech, and could meet with me on equal
terms, as a man, and no longer as a curiosity.

And so a letter at Pontoise decided us, and we drew up our keels
for the last time out of that river of Oise that had faithfully
piloted them, through rain and sunshine, for so long.  For so many
miles had this fleet and footless beast of burthen charioted our
fortunes, that we turned our back upon it with a sense of
separation.  We had made a long detour out of the world, but now we
were back in the familiar places, where life itself makes all the
running, and we are carried to meet adventure without a stroke of
the paddle.  Now we were to return, like the voyager in the play,
and see what rearrangements fortune had perfected the while in our
surroundings; what surprises stood ready made for us at home; and
whither and how far the world had voyaged in our absence.  You may
paddle all day long; but it is when you come back at nightfall, and
look in at the familiar room, that you find Love or Death awaiting
you beside the stove; and the most beautiful adventures are not
those we go to seek.





CHAPTER I--A BEGGAR ON HORSEBACKThe 25th day of August, 1751, about two in the afternoon, I, DavidBalfour, came forth of the British Linen Company, a porterattending me with a bag of money, and some of the chief of thesemerchants bowing me from their doors.  Two days before, and even solate as yestermorning, I was like a beggar-man by the wayside, cladin rags, brought down to my last shillings, my companion acondemned traitor, a price set on my own head for a crime with thenews of which the country rang.  To-day I was served heir to myposition in life, a landed laird, a bank porter by me carrying mygold, recommendations in my pocket, and (in the words of thesaying) the ball directly at my foot.There were two circumstances that served me as ballast to so muchsail.  The first was the very difficult and deadly business I hadstill to handle; the second, the place that I was in.  The tall,black city, and the numbers and movement and noise of so many folk,made a new world for me, after the moorland braes, the sea-sandsand the still country-sides that I had frequented up to then.  Thethrong of the citizens in particular abashed me.  Rankeillor's sonwas short and small in the girth; his clothes scarce held on me;and it was plain I was ill qualified to strut in the front of abank-porter.  It was plain, if I did so, I should but set folklaughing, and (what was worse in my case) set them askingquestions.  So that I behooved to come by some clothes of my own,and in the meanwhile to walk by the porter's side, and put my handon his arm as though we were a pair of friends.At a merchant's in the Luckenbooths I had myself fitted out:  nonetoo fine, for I had no idea to appear like a beggar on horseback;but comely and responsible, so that servants should respect me.Thence to an armourer's, where I got a plain sword, to suit with mydegree in life.  I felt safer with the weapon, though (for one soignorant of defence) it might be called an added danger.  Theporter, who was naturally a man of some experience, judged myaccoutrement to be well chosen."Naething kenspeckle," {1} said he; "plain, dacent claes.  As forthe rapier, nae doubt it sits wi' your degree; but an I had beenyou, I would has waired my siller better-gates than that."  And heproposed I should buy winter-hosen from a wife in the Cowgate-back,that was a cousin of his own, and made them "extraordinarendurable."But I had other matters on my hand more pressing.  Here I was inthis old, black city, which was for all the world like a rabbit-warren, not only by the number of its indwellers, but thecomplication of its passages and holes.  It was, indeed, a placewhere no stranger had a chance to find a friend, let be anotherstranger.  Suppose him even to hit on the right close, people dweltso thronged in these tall houses, he might very well seek a daybefore he chanced on the right door.  The ordinary course was tohire a lad they called a caddie, who was like a guide or pilot, ledyou where you had occasion, and (your errands being done) broughtyou again where you were lodging.  But these caddies, being alwaysemployed in the same sort of services, and having it for obligationto be well informed of every house and person in the city, hadgrown to form a brotherhood of spies; and I knew from tales of Mr.Campbell's how they communicated one with another, what a rage ofcuriosity they conceived as to their employer's business, and howthey were like eyes and fingers to the police.  It would be a pieceof little wisdom, the way I was now placed, to take such a ferretto my tails.  I had three visits to make, all immediately needful:to my kinsman Mr. Balfour of Pilrig, to Stewart the Writer that wasAppin's agent, and to William Grant Esquire of Prestongrange, LordAdvocate of Scotland.  Mr. Balfour's was a non-committal visit; andbesides (Pilrig being in the country) I made bold to find the wayto it myself, with the help of my two legs and a Scots tongue.  Butthe rest were in a different case.  Not only was the visit toAppin's agent, in the midst of the cry about the Appin murder,dangerous in itself, but it was highly inconsistent with the other.I was like to have a bad enough time of it with my Lord AdvocateGrant, the best of ways; but to go to him hot-foot from Appin'sagent, was little likely to mend my own affairs, and might provethe mere ruin of friend Alan's.  The whole thing, besides, gave mea look of running with the hare and hunting with the hounds thatwas little to my fancy.  I determined, therefore, to be done atonce with Mr. Stewart and the whole Jacobitical side of mybusiness, and to profit for that purpose by the guidance of theporter at my side.  But it chanced I had scarce given him theaddress, when there came a sprinkle of rain--nothing to hurt, onlyfor my new clothes--and we took shelter under a pend at the head ofa close or alley.Being strange to what I saw, I stepped a little farther in.  Thenarrow paved way descended swiftly.  Prodigious tall houses sprangupon each side and bulged out, one storey beyond another, as theyrose.  At the top only a ribbon of sky showed in.  By what I couldspy in the windows, and by the respectable persons that passed outand in, I saw the houses to be very well occupied; and the wholeappearance of the place interested me like a tale.I was still gazing, when there came a sudden brisk tramp of feet intime and clash of steel behind me.  Turning quickly, I was aware ofa party of armed soldiers, and, in their midst, a tall man in agreat coat.  He walked with a stoop that was like a piece ofcourtesy, genteel and insinuating:  he waved his hands plausibly ashe went, and his face was sly and handsome.  I thought his eye tookme in, but could not meet it.  This procession went by to a door inthe close, which a serving-man in a fine livery set open; and twoof the soldier-lads carried the prisoner within, the rest lingeringwith their firelocks by the door.There can nothing pass in the streets of a city without somefollowing of idle folk and children.  It was so now; but the morepart melted away incontinent until but three were left.  One was agirl; she was dressed like a lady, and had a screen of the Drummondcolours on her head; but her comrades or (I should say) followerswere ragged gillies, such as I had seen the matches of by the dozenin my Highland journey.  They all spoke together earnestly inGaelic, the sound of which was pleasant in my ears for the sake ofAlan; and, though the rain was by again, and my porter plucked atme to be going, I even drew nearer where they were, to listen.  Thelady scolded sharply, the others making apologies and cringeingbefore her, so that I made sure she was come of a chief's house.All the while the three of them sought in their pockets, and bywhat I could make out, they had the matter of half a farthing amongthe party; which made me smile a little to see all Highland folkalike for fine obeisances and empty sporrans.It chanced the girl turned suddenly about, so that I saw her facefor the first time.  There is no greater wonder than the way theface of a young woman fits in a man's mind, and stays there, and hecould never tell you why; it just seems it was the thing he wanted.She had wonderful bright eyes like stars, and I daresay the eyeshad a part in it; but what I remember the most clearly was the wayher lips were a trifle open as she turned.  And, whatever was thecause, I stood there staring like a fool.  On her side, as she hadnot known there was anyone so near, she looked at me a littlelonger, and perhaps with more surprise, than was entirely civil.It went through my country head she might be wondering at my newclothes; with that, I blushed to my hair, and at the sight of mycolouring it is to be supposed she drew her own conclusions, forshe moved her gillies farther down the close, and they fell againto this dispute, where I could hear no more of it.I had often admired a lassie before then, if scarce so sudden andstrong; and it was rather my disposition to withdraw than to comeforward, for I was much in fear of mockery from the womenkind.  Youwould have thought I had now all the more reason to pursue mycommon practice, since I had met this young lady in the citystreet, seemingly following a prisoner, and accompanied with twovery ragged indecent-like Highlandmen.  But there was here adifferent ingredient; it was plain the girl thought I had beenprying in her secrets; and with my new clothes and sword, and atthe top of my new fortunes, this was more than I could swallow.The beggar on horseback could not bear to be thrust down so low,or, at least of it, not by this young lady.I followed, accordingly, and took off my new hat to her the bestthat I was able."Madam," said I, "I think it only fair to myself to let youunderstand I have no Gaelic.  It is true I was listening, for Ihave friends of my own across the Highland line, and the sound ofthat tongue comes friendly; but for your private affairs, if youhad spoken Greek, I might have had more guess at them."She made me a little, distant curtsey.  "There is no harm done,"said she, with a pretty accent, most like the English (but moreagreeable).  "A cat may look at a king.""I do not mean to offend," said I.  "I have no skill of citymanners; I never before this day set foot inside the doors ofEdinburgh.  Take me for a country lad--it's what I am; and I wouldrather I told you than you found it out.""Indeed, it will be a very unusual thing for strangers to bespeaking to each other on the causeway," she replied.  "But if youare landward {2} bred it will be different.  I am as landward asyourself; I am Highland, as you see, and think myself the fartherfrom my home.""It is not yet a week since I passed the line," said I.  "Less thana week ago I was on the braes of Balwhidder.""Balwhither?" she cries.  "Come ye from Balwhither!  The name of itmakes all there is of me rejoice.  You will not have been longthere, and not known some of our friends or family?""I lived with a very honest, kind man called Duncan Dhu Maclaren,"I replied."Well, I know Duncan, and you give him the true name!" she said;"and if he is an honest man, his wife is honest indeed.""Ay," said I, "they are fine people, and the place is a bonnyplace.""Where in the great world is such another!" she cries; "I am lovingthe smell of that place and the roots that grow there."I was infinitely taken with the spirit of the maid.  "I could bewishing I had brought you a spray of that heather," says I.  "And,though I did ill to speak with you at the first, now it seems wehave common acquaintance, I make it my petition you will not forgetme.  David Balfour is the name I am known by.  This is my luckyday, when I have just come into a landed estate, and am not verylong out of a deadly peril.  I wish you would keep my name in mindfor the sake of Balwhidder," said I, "and I will yours for the sakeof my lucky day.""My name is not spoken," she replied, with a great deal ofhaughtiness.  "More than a hundred years it has not gone upon men'stongues, save for a blink.  I am nameless, like the Folk of Peace.{3}  Catriona Drummond is the one I use."Now indeed I knew where I was standing.  In all broad Scotlandthere was but the one name proscribed, and that was the name of theMacgregors.  Yet so far from fleeing this undesirable acquaintancy,I plunged the deeper in."I have been sitting with one who was in the same case withyourself," said I, "and I think he will be one of your friends.They called him Robin Oig.""Did ye so?" cries she.  "Ye met Rob?""I passed the night with him," said I."He is a fowl of the night," said she."There was a set of pipes there," I went on, "so you may judge ifthe time passed.""You should be no enemy, at all events," said she.  "That was hisbrother there a moment since, with the red soldiers round him.  Itis him that I call father.""Is it so?" cried I.  "Are you a daughter of James More's?""All the daughter that he has," says she:  "the daughter of aprisoner; that I should forget it so, even for one hour, to talkwith strangers!"Here one of the gillies addressed her in what he had of English, toknow what "she" (meaning by that himself) was to do about "tasneeshin."  I took some note of him for a short, bandy-legged, red-haired, big-headed man, that I was to know more of to my cost."There can be none the day, Neil," she replied.  "How will you get'sneeshin,' wanting siller!  It will teach you another time to bemore careful; and I think James More will not be very well pleasedwith Neil of the Tom.""Miss Drummond," I said, "I told you I was in my lucky day.  Here Iam, and a bank-porter at my tail.  And remember I have had thehospitality of your own country of Balwhidder.""It was not one of my people gave it," said she."Ah, well," said I, "but I am owing your uncle at least for somesprings upon the pipes.  Besides which, I have offered myself to beyour friend, and you have been so forgetful that you did not refuseme in the proper time.""If it had been a great sum, it might have done you honour," saidshe; "but I will tell you what this is.  James More lies shackledin prison; but this time past they will be bringing him down heredaily to the Advocate's. . . .""The Advocate's!" I cried.  "Is that . . . ?""It is the house of the Lord Advocate Grant of Prestongrange," saidshe.  "There they bring my father one time and another, for whatpurpose I have no thought in my mind; but it seems there is somehope dawned for him.  All this same time they will not let me beseeing him, nor yet him write; and we wait upon the King's streetto catch him; and now we give him his snuff as he goes by, and nowsomething else.  And here is this son of trouble, Neil, son ofDuncan, has lost my four-penny piece that was to buy that snuff,and James More must go wanting, and will think his daughter hasforgotten him."I took sixpence from my pocket, gave it to Neil, and bade him goabout his errand.  Then to her, "That sixpence came with me byBalwhidder," said I."Ah!" she said, "you are a friend to the Gregara!""I would not like to deceive you, either," said I.  "I know verylittle of the Gregara and less of James More and his doings, butsince the while I have been standing in this close, I seem to knowsomething of yourself; and if you will just say 'a friend to MissCatriona' I will see you are the less cheated.""The one cannot be without the other," said she."I will even try," said I."And what will you be thinking of myself!" she cried, "to beholding my hand to the first stranger!""I am thinking nothing but that you are a good daughter," said I."I must not be without repaying it," she said; "where is it youstop!""To tell the truth, I am stopping nowhere yet," said I, "being notfull three hours in the city; but if you will give me yourdirection, I will he no bold as come seeking my sixpence formyself.""Will I can trust you for that?" she asked."You need have little fear," said I."James More could not bear it else," said she.  "I stop beyond thevillage of Dean, on the north side of the water, with Mrs.Drummond-Ogilvy of Allardyce, who is my near friend and will beglad to thank you.""You are to see me, then, so soon as what I have to do permits,"said I; and, the remembrance of Alan rolling in again upon my mind,I made haste to say farewell.I could not but think, even as I did so, that we had madeextraordinary free upon short acquaintance, and that a really wiseyoung lady would have shown herself more backward.  I think it wasthe bank-porter that put me from this ungallant train of thought."I thoucht ye had been a lad of some kind o' sense," he began,shooting out his lips.  "Ye're no likely to gang far this gate.  Afule and his siller's shune parted.  Eh, but ye're a greencallant!" he cried, "an' a veecious, tae!  Cleikin' up wi'baubeejoes!""If you dare to speak of the young lady. . . " I began."Leddy!" he cried.  "Haud us and safe us, whatten leddy?  Ca' THONa leddy?  The toun's fu' o' them.  Leddies!  Man, its weel seenye're no very acquant in Embro!"A clap of anger took me."Here," said I, "lead me where I told you, and keep your foul mouthshut!"He did not wholly obey me, for, though he no more addressed medirectly, he very impudent sang at me as he went in a manner ofinnuendo, and with an exceedingly ill voice and ear -"As Mally Lee cam doun the street, her capuchin did flee,She cuist a look ahint her to see her negligee.And we're a' gaun east and wast, we're a' gann ajee,We're a' gaun east and wast courtin' Mally Lee."CHAPTER II--THE HIGHLAND WRITERMr. Charles Stewart the Writer dwelt at the top of the longeststair ever mason set a hand to; fifteen flights of it, no less; andwhen I had come to his door, and a clerk had opened it, and told mehis master was within, I had scarce breath enough to send my porterpacking."Awa' east and west wi' ye!" said I, took the money bag out of hishands, and followed the clerk in.The outer room was an office with the clerk's chair at a tablespread with law papers.  In the inner chamber, which opened fromit, a little brisk man sat poring on a deed, from which he scarceraised his eyes on my entrance; indeed, he still kept his finger inthe place, as though prepared to show me out and fall again to hisstudies.  This pleased me little enough; and what pleased me less,I thought the clerk was in a good posture to overhear what shouldpass between us.I asked if he was Mr. Charles Stewart the Writer."The same," says he; "and, if the question is equally fair, who mayyou be yourself?""You never heard tell of my name nor of me either," said I, "but Ibring you a token from a friend that you know well.  That you knowwell," I repeated, lowering my voice, "but maybe are not just sokeen to hear from at this present being.  And the bits of businessthat I have to propone to you are rather in the nature of beingconfidential.  In short, I would like to think we were quiteprivate."He rose without more words, casting down his paper like a man ill-pleased, sent forth his clerk of an errand, and shut to the house-door behind him."Now, sir," said he, returning, "speak out your mind and fearnothing; though before you begin," he cries out, "I tell you minemisgives me!  I tell you beforehand, ye're either a Stewart or aStewart sent ye.  A good name it is, and one it would ill-become myfather's son to lightly.  But I begin to grue at the sound of it.""My name is called Balfour," said I, "David Balfour of Shaws.  Asfor him that sent me, I will let his token speak."  And I showedthe silver button."Put it in your pocket, sir!" cries he.  "Ye need name no names.The deevil's buckie, I ken the button of him!  And de'il hae't!Where is he now!"I told him I knew not where Alan was, but he had some sure place(or thought he had) about the north side, where he was to lie untila ship was found for him; and how and where he had appointed to bespoken with."It's been always my opinion that I would hang in a tow for thisfamily of mine," he cried, "and, dod!  I believe the day's comenow!  Get a ship for him, quot' he!  And who's to pay for it?  Theman's daft!""That is my part of the affair, Mr. Stewart," said I.  "Here is abag of good money, and if more be wanted, more is to be had whereit came from.""I needn't ask your politics," said he."Ye need not," said I, smiling, "for I'm as big a Whig as grows.""Stop a bit, stop a bit," says Mr. Stewart.  "What's all this?  AWhig?  Then why are you here with Alan's button? and what kind of ablack-foot traffic is this that I find ye out in, Mr. Whig?  Hereis a forfeited rebel and an accused murderer, with two hundredpounds on his life, and ye ask me to meddle in his business, andthen tell me ye're a Whig!  I have no mind of any such Whigsbefore, though I've kent plenty of them.""He's a forfeited rebel, the more's the pity," said I, "for theman's my friend.  I can only wish he had been better guided.  Andan accused murderer, that he is too, for his misfortune; butwrongfully accused.""I hear you say so," said Stewart."More than you are to hear me say so, before long," said I.  "AlanBreck is innocent, and so is James.""Oh!" says he, "the two cases hang together.  If Alan is out, Jamescan never be in."Hereupon I told him briefly of my acquaintance with Alan, of theaccident that brought me present at the Appin murder, and thevarious passages of our escape among the heather, and my recoveryof my estate.  "So, sir, you have now the whole train of theseevents," I went on, "and can see for yourself how I come to be somuch mingled up with the affairs of your family and friends, which(for all of our sakes) I wish had been plainer and less bloody.You can see for yourself, too, that I have certain pieces ofbusiness depending, which were scarcely fit to lay before a lawyerchosen at random.  No more remains, but to ask if you willundertake my service?""I have no great mind to it; but coming as you do with Alan'sbutton, the choice is scarcely left me," said he.  "What are yourinstructions?" he added, and took up his pen."The first point is to smuggle Alan forth of this country," said I,"but I need not be repeating that.""I am little likely to forget it," said Stewart."The next thing is the bit money I am owing to Cluny," I went on."It would be ill for me to find a conveyance, but that should be nostick to you.  It was two pounds five shillings and three-halfpencefarthing sterling."He noted it."Then," said I, "there's a Mr. Henderland, a licensed preacher andmissionary in Ardgour, that I would like well to get some snuffinto the hands of; and, as I daresay you keep touch with yourfriends in Appin (so near by), it's a job you could doubtlessovertake with the other.""How much snuff are we to say?" he asked."I was thinking of two pounds," said I."Two," said he."Then there's the lass Alison Hastie, in Lime Kilns," said I.  "Herthat helped Alan and me across the Forth.  I was thinking if Icould get her a good Sunday gown, such as she could wear withdecency in her degree, it would be an ease to my conscience; forthe mere truth is, we owe her our two lives.""I am glad so see you are thrifty, Mr. Balfour," says he, makinghis notes."I would think shame to be otherwise the first day of my fortune,"said I.  "And now, if you will compute the outlay and your ownproper charges, I would be glad to know if I could get somespending-money back.  It's not that I grudge the whole of it to getAlan safe; it's not that I lack more; but having drawn so much theone day, I think it would have a very ill appearance if I was backagain seeking, the next.  Only be sure you have enough," I added,"for I am very undesirous to meet with you again.""Well, and I'm pleased to see you're cautious, too," said theWriter.  "But I think ye take a risk to lay so considerable a sumat my discretion."He said this with a plain sneer."I'll have to run the hazard," I replied.  "O, and there's anotherservice I would ask, and that's to direct me to a lodging, for Ihave no roof to my head.  But it must be a lodging I may seem tohave hit upon by accident, for it would never do if the LordAdvocate were to get any jealousy of our acquaintance.""Ye may set your weary spirit at rest," said he.  "I will nevername your name, sir; and it's my belief the Advocate is still somuch to be sympathised with that he doesnae ken of your existence."I saw I had got to the wrong side of the man."There's a braw day coming for him, then," said I, "for he'll haveto learn of it on the deaf side of his head no later than to-morrow, when I call on him.""When ye CALL on him!" repeated Mr. Stewart.  "Am I daft, or areyou!  What takes ye near the Advocate!""O, just to give myself up," said I."Mr. Balfour," he cried, "are ye making a mock of me?""No, sir," said I, "though I think you have allowed yourself somesuch freedom with myself.  But I give you to understand once andfor all that I am in no jesting spirit.""Nor yet me," says Stewart.  "And I give yon to understand (ifthat's to be the word) that I like the looks of your behaviour lessand less.  You come here to me with all sorts of propositions,which will put me in a train of very doubtful acts and bring meamong very undesirable persons this many a day to come.  And thenyou tell me you're going straight out of my office to make yourpeace with the Advocate!  Alan's button here or Alan's buttonthere, the four quarters of Alan wouldnae bribe me further in.""I would take it with a little more temper," said I, "and perhapswe can avoid what you object to.  I can see no way for it but togive myself up, but perhaps you can see another; and if you could,I could never deny but what I would be rather relieved.  For Ithink my traffic with his lordship is little likely to agree withmy health.  There's just the one thing clear, that I have to givemy evidence; for I hope it'll save Alan's character (what's left ofit), and James's neck, which is the more immediate."He was silent for a breathing-space, and then, "My man," said he,"you'll never be allowed to give such evidence.""We'll have to see about that," said I; "I'm stiff-necked when Ilike.""Ye muckle ass!" cried Stewart, "it's James they want; James hasgot to hang--Alan, too, if they could catch him--but Jameswhatever!  Go near the Advocate with any such business, and you'llsee! he'll find a way to muzzle, ye.""I think better of the Advocate than that," said I."The Advocate be dammed!" cries he.  "It's the Campbells, man!You'll have the whole clanjamfry of them on your back; and so willthe Advocate too, poor body!  It's extraordinar ye cannot see whereye stand!  If there's no fair way to stop your gab, there's a foulone gaping.  They can put ye in the dock, do ye no see that?" hecried, and stabbed me with one finger in the leg."Ay," said I, "I was told that same no further back than thismorning by another lawyer.""And who was he?" asked Stewart, "He spoke sense at least."I told I must be excused from naming him, for he was a decent stoutold Whig, and had little mind to be mixed up in such affairs."I think all the world seems to be mixed up in it!" cries Stewart."But what said you?""I told him what had passed between Rankeillor and myself beforethe house of Shaws."Well, and so ye will hang!" said he.  "Ye'll hang beside JamesStewart.  There's your fortune told.""I hope better of it yet than that," said I; "but I could neverdeny there was a risk.""Risk!" says he, and then sat silent again.  "I ought to thank youfor you staunchness to my friends, to whom you show a very goodspirit," he says, "if you have the strength to stand by it.  But Iwarn you that you're wading deep.  I wouldn't put myself in yourplace (me that's a Stewart born!) for all the Stewarts that everthere were since Noah.  Risk? ay, I take over-many; but to be triedin court before a Campbell jury and a Campbell judge, and that in aCampbell country and upon a Campbell quarrel--think what you likeof me, Balfour, it's beyond me.""It's a different way of thinking, I suppose," said I; "I wasbrought up to this one by my father before me.""Glory to his bones! he has left a decent son to his name," sayshe.  "Yet I would not have you judge me over-sorely.  My case isdooms hard.  See, sir, ye tell me ye're a Whig:  I wonder what Iam.  No Whig to be sure; I couldnae be just that.  But--laigh inyour ear, man--I'm maybe no very keen on the other side.""Is that a fact?" cried I.  "It's what I would think of a man ofyour intelligence.""Hut! none of your whillywhas!" {4} cries he.  "There'sintelligence upon both sides.  But for my private part I have noparticular desire to harm King George; and as for King James, Godbless him! he does very well for me across the water.  I'm alawyer, ye see:  fond of my books and my bottle, a good plea, awell-drawn deed, a crack in the Parliament House with other lawyerbodies, and perhaps a turn at the golf on a Saturday at e'en.Where do ye come in with your Hieland plaids and claymores?""Well," said I, "it's a fact ye have little of the wildHighlandman.""Little?" quoth he.  "Nothing, man!  And yet I'm Hieland born, andwhen the clan pipes, who but me has to dance!  The clan and thename, that goes by all.  It's just what you said yourself; myfather learned it to me, and a bonny trade I have of it.  Treasonand traitors, and the smuggling of them out and in; and the Frenchrecruiting, weary fall it! and the smuggling through of therecruits; and their pleas--a sorrow of their pleas!  Here have Ibeen moving one for young Ardsheil, my cousin; claimed the estateunder the marriage contract--a forfeited estate!  I told them itwas nonsense:  muckle they cared!  And there was I cocking behind ayadvocate that liked the business as little as myself, for it wasfair ruin to the pair of us--a black mark, DISAFFECTED, branded onour hurdies, like folk's names upon their kye!  And what can I do?I'm a Stewart, ye see, and must fend for my clan and family.  Thenno later by than yesterday there was one of our Stewart ladscarried to the Castle.  What for?  I ken fine:  Act of 1736:recruiting for King Lewie.  And you'll see, he'll whistle me in tobe his lawyer, and there'll be another black mark on my chara'ter!I tell you fair:  if I but kent the heid of a Hebrew word from thehurdies of it, be dammed but I would fling the whole thing up andturn minister!""It's rather a hard position," said I."Dooms hard!" cries he.  "And that's what makes me think so much ofye--you that's no Stewart--to stick your head so deep in Stewartbusiness.  And for what, I do not know:  unless it was the sense ofduty.""I hope it will be that," said I."Well," says he, "it's a grand quality.  But here is my clerk back;and, by your leave, we'll pick a bit of dinner, all the three ofus.  When that's done, I'll give you the direction of a very decentman, that'll be very fain to have you for a lodger.  And I'll fillyour pockets to ye, forbye, out of your ain bag.  For thisbusiness'll not be near as dear as ye suppose--not even the shippart of it."I made him a sign that his clerk was within hearing."Hoot, ye neednae mind for Robbie," cries he.  "A Stewart, too,puir deevil! and has smuggled out more French recruits andtrafficking Papists than what he has hairs upon his face.  Why,it's Robin that manages that branch of my affairs.  Who will wehave now, Rob, for across the water!""There'll be Andie Scougal, in the Thristle," replied Rob.  "I sawHoseason the other day, but it seems he's wanting the ship.  Thenthere'll be Tam Stobo; but I'm none so sure of Tam.  I've seen himcolloguing with some gey queer acquaintances; and if was anybodyimportant, I would give Tam the go-by.""The head's worth two hundred pounds, Robin," said Stewart."Gosh, that'll no be Alan Breck!" cried the clerk."Just Alan," said his master."Weary winds! that's sayrious," cried Robin.  "I'll try Andie,then; Andie'll be the best.""It seems it's quite a big business," I observed."Mr. Balfour, there's no end to it," said Stewart."There was a name your clerk mentioned," I went on:  "Hoseason.That must be my man, I think:  Hoseason, of the brig Covenant.Would you set your trust on him?""He didnae behave very well to you and Alan," said Mr. Stewart;"but my mind of the man in general is rather otherwise.  If he hadtaken Alan on board his ship on an agreement, it's my notion hewould have proved a just dealer.  How say ye, Rob?""No more honest skipper in the trade than Eli," said the clerk.  "Iwould lippen to {5} Eli's word--ay, if it was the Chevalier, orAppin himsel'," he added."And it was him that brought the doctor, wasnae't?" asked themaster."He was the very man," said the clerk."And I think he took the doctor back?" says Stewart."Ay, with his sporran full!" cried Robin.  "And Eli kent of that!"{6}"Well, it seems it's hard to ken folk rightly," said I."That was just what I forgot when ye came in, Mr. Balfour!" saysthe Writer.CHAPTER III--I GO TO PILRIGThe next morning, I was no sooner awake in my new lodging than Iwas up and into my new clothes; and no sooner the breakfastswallowed, than I was forth on my adventurers.  Alan, I could hope,was fended for; James was like to be a more difficult affair, and Icould not but think that enterprise might cost me dear, even aseverybody said to whom I had opened my opinion.  It seemed I wascome to the top of the mountain only to cast myself down; that Ihad clambered up, through so many and hard trials, to be rich, tobe recognised, to wear city clothes and a sword to my side, all tocommit mere suicide at the last end of it, and the worst kind ofsuicide, besides, which is to get hanged at the King's charges.What was I doing it for? I asked, as I went down the high Streetand out north by Leith Wynd.  First I said it was to save JamesStewart; and no doubt the memory of his distress, and his wife'scries, and a word or so I had let drop on that occasion worked uponme strongly.  At the same time I reflected that it was (or ought tobe) the most indifferent matter to my father's son, whether Jamesdied in his bed or from a scaffold.  He was Alan's cousin, to besure; but so far as regarded Alan, the best thing would be to lielow, and let the King, and his Grace of Argyll, and the corbiecrows, pick the bones of his kinsman their own way.  Nor could Iforget that, while we were all in the pot together, James had shownno such particular anxiety whether for Alan or me.Next it came upon me I was acting for the sake of justice:  and Ithought that a fine word, and reasoned it out that (since we dweltin polities, at some discomfort to each one of us) the main thingof all must still be justice, and the death of any innocent man awound upon the whole community.  Next, again, it was the Accuser ofthe Brethren that gave me a turn of his argument; bade me thinkshame for pretending myself concerned in these high matters, andtold me I was but a prating vain child, who had spoken big words toRankeillor and to Stewart, and held myself bound upon my vanity tomake good that boastfulness.  Nay, and he hit me with the other endof the stick; for he accused me of a kind of artful cowardice,going about at the expense of a little risk to purchase greatersafety.  No doubt, until I had declared and cleared myself, I mightany day encounter Mungo Campbell or the sheriff's officer, and berecognised, and dragged into the Appin murder by the heels; and, nodoubt, in case I could manage my declaration with success, I shouldbreathe more free for ever after.  But when I looked this argumentfull in the face I could see nothing to be ashamed of.  As for therest, "Here are the two roads," I thought, "and both go to the sameplace.  It's unjust that James should hang if I can save him; andit would be ridiculous in me to have talked so much and then donothing.  It's lucky for James of the Glens that I have boastedbeforehand; and none so unlucky for myself, because now I'mcommitted to do right.  I have the name of a gentleman and themeans of one; it would be a poor duty that I was wanting in theessence."  And then I thought this was a Pagan spirit, and said aprayer in to myself, asking for what courage I might lack, and thatI might go straight to my duty like a soldier to battle, and comeoff again scatheless, as so many do.This train of reasoning brought me to a more resolved complexion;though it was far from closing up my sense of the dangers thatsurrounded me, nor of how very apt I was (if I went on) to stumbleon the ladder of the gallows.  It was a plain, fair morning, butthe wind in the east.  The little chill of it sang in my blood, andgave me a feeling of the autumn, and the dead leaves, and deadfolks' bodies in their graves.  It seemed the devil was in it, if Iwas to die in that tide of my fortunes and for other folks'affairs.  On the top of the Calton Hill, though it was not thecustomary time of year for that diversion, some children werecrying and running with their kites.  These toys appeared veryplain against the sky; I remarked a great one soar on the wind to ahigh altitude and then plump among the whins; and I thought tomyself at sight of it, "There goes Davie."My way lay over Mouter's Hill, and through an end of a clachan onthe braeside among fields.  There was a whirr of looms in it wentfrom house to house; bees bummed in the gardens; the neighboursthat I saw at the doorsteps talked in a strange tongue; and I foundout later that this was Picardy, a village where the French weaverswrought for the Linen Company.  Here I got a fresh direction forPilrig, my destination; and a little beyond, on the wayside, cameby a gibbet and two men hanged in chains.  They were dipped in tar,as the manner is; the wind span them, the chains clattered, and thebirds hung about the uncanny jumping-jacks and cried.  The sightcoming on me suddenly, like an illustration of my fears, I couldscarce be done with examining it and drinking in discomfort.  And,as I thus turned and turned about the gibbet, what should I strikeon, but a weird old wife, that sat behind a leg of it, and nodded,and talked aloud to herself with becks and courtesies."Who are these two, mother?" I asked, and pointed to the corpses."A blessing on your precious face!" she cried.  "Twa joes {7}o'mine:  just two o' my old joes, my hinny dear.""What did they suffer for?" I asked."Ou, just for the guid cause," said she.  "Aften I spaed to themthe way that it would end.  Twa shillin' Scots:  no pickle mair;and there are twa bonny callants hingin' for 't!  They took it fraea wean {8} belanged to Brouchton.""Ay!" said I to myself, and not to the daft limmer, "and did theycome to such a figure for so poor a business?  This is to lose allindeed.""Gie's your loof, {9} hinny," says she, "and let me spae your weirdto ye.""No, mother," said I, "I see far enough the way I am.  It's an uncothing to see too far in front.""I read it in your bree," she said.  "There's a bonnie lassie thathas bricht een, and there's a wee man in a braw coat, and a big manin a pouthered wig, and there's the shadow of the wuddy, {10} joe,that lies braid across your path.  Gie's your loof, hinny, and letAuld Merren spae it to ye bonny."The two chance shots that seemed to point at Alan and the daughterof James More struck me hard; and I fled from the eldritchcreature, casting her a baubee, which she continued to sit and playwith under the moving shadows of the hanged.My way down the causeway of Leith Walk would have been morepleasant to me but for this encounter.  The old rampart ran amongfields, the like of them I had never seen for artfulness ofagriculture; I was pleased, besides, to be so far in the stillcountryside; but the shackles of the gibbet clattered in my head;and the mope and mows of the old witch, and the thought of the deadmen, hag-rode my spirits.  To hang on a gallows, that seemed a hardcase; and whether a man came to hang there for two shillings Scots,or (as Mr. Stewart had it) from the sense of duty, once he wastarred and shackled and hung up, the difference seemed small.There might David Balfour hang, and other lads pass on theirerrands and think light of him; and old daft limmers sit at a leg-foot and spae their fortunes; and the clean genty maids go by, andlook to the other aide, and hold a nose.  I saw them plain, andthey had grey eyes, and their screens upon their heads were of theDrummed colours.I was thus in the poorest of spirits, though still pretty resolved,when I came in view of Pilrig, a pleasant gabled house set by thewalkside among some brave young woods.  The laird's horse wasstanding saddled at the door as I came up, but himself was in thestudy, where he received me in the midst of learned works andmusical instruments, for he was not only a deep philosopher butmuch of a musician.  He greeted me at first pretty well, and whenhe had read Rankeillor's letter, placed himself obligingly at mydisposal."And what is it, cousin David!" said he--"since it appears that weare cousins--what is this that I can do for you!  A word toPrestongrange!  Doubtless that is easily given.  But what should bethe word?""Mr. Balfour," said I, "if I were to tell you my whole story theway it fell out, it's my opinion (and it was Rankeillor's beforeme) that you would be very little made up with it.""I am sorry to hear this of you, kinsman," says he."I must not take that at your hands, Mr. Balfour," said I; "I havenothing to my charge to make me sorry, or you for me, but just thecommon infirmities of mankind.  'The guilt of Adam's first sin, thewant of original righteousness, and the corruption of my wholenature,' so much I must answer for, and I hope I have been taughtwhere to look for help," I said; for I judged from the look of theman he would think the better of me if I knew my questions. {11}"But in the way of worldly honour I have no great stumble toreproach myself with; and my difficulties have befallen me verymuch against my will and (by all that I can see) without my fault.My trouble is to have become dipped in a political complication,which it is judged you would be blythe to avoid a knowledge of.""Why, very well, Mr. David," he replied, "I am pleased to see youare all that Rankeillor represented.  And for what you say ofpolitical complications, you do me no more than justice.  It is mystudy to be beyond suspicion, and indeed outside the field of it.The question is," says he, "how, if I am to know nothing of thematter, I can very well assist you?""Why sir," said I, "I propose you should write to his lordship,that I am a young man of reasonable good family and of good means:both of which I believe to be the case.""I have Rankeillor's word for it," said Mr. Balfour, "and I countthat a warran-dice against all deadly.""To which you might add (if you will take my word for so much) thatI am a good churchman, loyal to King George, and so brought up," Iwent on."None of which will do you any harm," said Mr. Balfour."Then you might go on to say that I sought his lordship on a matterof great moment, connected with His Majesty's service and theadministration of justice," I suggested."As I am not to hear the matter," says the laird, "I will not takeupon myself to qualify its weight.  'Great moment' therefore falls,and 'moment' along with it.  For the rest I might express myselfmuch as you propose.""And then, sir," said I, and rubbed my neck a little with my thumb,"then I would be very desirous if you could slip in a word thatmight perhaps tell for my protection.""Protection?" says he, "for your protection!  Here is a phrase thatsomewhat dampens me.  If the matter be so dangerous, I own I wouldbe a little loath to move in it blindfold.""I believe I could indicate in two words where the thing sticks,"said I."Perhaps that would be the best," said he."Well, it's the Appin murder," said I.He held up both his hands.  "Sirs! sirs!" cried he.I thought by the expression of his face and voice that I had lostmy helper."Let me explain. . ." I began."I thank you kindly, I will hear no more of it," says he.  "Idecline in toto to hear more of it.  For your name's sake andRankeillor's, and perhaps a little for your own, I will do what Ican to help you; but I will hear no more upon the facts.  And it ismy first clear duty to warn you.  These are deep waters, Mr. David,and you are a young man.  Be cautious and think twice.""It is to be supposed I will have thought oftener than that, Mr.Balfour," said I, "and I will direct your attention again toRankeillor's letter, where (I hope and believe) he has registeredhis approval of that which I design.""Well, well," said he; and then again, "Well, well!  I will do whatI can for you."  There with he took a pen and paper, sat a while inthought, and began to write with much consideration.  "I understandthat Rankeillor approved of what you have in mind?" he askedpresently."After some discussion, sir, he bade me to go forward in God'sname," said I."That is the name to go in," said Mr. Balfour, and resumed hiswriting.  Presently, he signed, re-read what he had written, andaddressed me again.  "Now here, Mr. David," said he, "is a letterof introduction, which I will seal without closing, and give intoyour hands open, as the form requires.  But, since I am acting inthe dark, I will just read it to you, so that you may see if itwill secure your end -"PILRIG, August 26th, 1751."My Lord,--This is to bring to your notice my namesake and cousin,David Balfour Esquire of Shaws, a young gentleman of unblemisheddescent and good estate.  He has enjoyed, besides, the morevaluable advantages of a godly training, and his politicalprinciples are all that your lordship can desire.  I am not in Mr.Balfour's confidence, but I understand him to have a matter todeclare, touching His Majesty's service and the administration ofjustice; purposes for which your Lordship's zeal is known.  Ishould add that the young gentleman's intention is known to andapproved by some of his friends, who will watch with hopefulanxiety the event of his success or failure."Whereupon," continued Mr. Balfour, "I have subscribed myself withthe usual compliments.  You observe I have said 'some of yourfriends'; I hope you can justify my plural?""Perfectly, sir; my purpose is known and approved by more thanone," said I.  "And your letter, which I take a pleasure to thankyou for, is all I could have hoped.""It was all I could squeeze out," said he; "and from what I know ofthe matter you design to meddle in, I can only pray God that it mayprove sufficient."CHAPTER IV--LORD ADVOCATE PRESTONGRANGEMy kinsman kept me to a meal, "for the honour of the roof," hesaid; and I believe I made the better speed on my return.  I had nothought but to be done with the next stage, and have myself fullycommitted; to a person circumstanced as I was, the appearance ofclosing a door on hesitation and temptation was itself extremelytempting; and I was the more disappointed, when I came toPrestongrange's house, to be informed he was abroad.  I believe itwas true at the moment, and for some hours after; and then I haveno doubt the Advocate came home again, and enjoyed himself in aneighbouring chamber among friends, while perhaps the very fact ofmy arrival was forgotten.  I would have gone away a dozen times,only for this strong drawing to have done with my declaration outof hand and be able to lay me down to sleep with a free conscience.At first I read, for the little cabinet where I was left containeda variety of books.  But I fear I read with little profit; and theweather falling cloudy, the dusk coming up earlier than usual, andmy cabinet being lighted with but a loophole of a window, I was atlast obliged to desist from this diversion (such as it was), andpass the rest of my time of waiting in a very burthensome vacuity.The sound of people talking in a near chamber, the pleasant note ofa harpsichord, and once the voice of a lady singing, bore me a kindof company.I do not know the hour, but the darkness was long come, when thedoor of the cabinet opened, and I was aware, by the light behindhim, of a tall figure of a man upon the threshold.  I rose at once."Is anybody there?" he asked.  "Who in that?""I am bearer of a letter from the laird of Pilrig to the LordAdvocate," said I."Have you been here long?" he asked."I would not like to hazard an estimate of how many hours," said I."It is the first I hear of it," he replied, with a chuckle.  "Thelads must have forgotten you.  But you are in the bit at last, forI am Prestongrange."So saying, he passed before me into the next room, whither (uponhis sign) I followed him, and where he lit a candle and took hisplace before a business-table.  It was a long room, of a goodproportion, wholly lined with books.  That small spark of light ina corner struck out the man's handsome person and strong face.  Hewas flushed, his eye watered and sparkled, and before he sat down Iobserved him to sway back and forth.  No doubt, he had been suppingliberally; but his mind and tongue were under full control."Well, sir, sit ye down," said he, "and let us see Pilrig'sletter."He glanced it through in the beginning carelessly, looking up andbowing when he came to my name; but at the last words I thought Iobserved his attention to redouble, and I made sure he read themtwice.  All this while you are to suppose my heart was beating, forI had now crossed my Rubicon and was come fairly on the field ofbattle."I am pleased to make your acquaintance, Mr. Balfour," he said,when he had done.  "Let me offer you a glass of claret.""Under your favour, my lord, I think it would scarce be fair onme," said I.  "I have come here, as the letter will have mentioned,on a business of some gravity to myself; and, as I am little usedwith wine, I might be the sooner affected.""You shall be the judge," said he.  "But if you will permit, Ibelieve I will even have the bottle in myself."He touched a bell, and a footman came, as at a signal, bringingwine and glasses."You are sure you will not join me?" asked the Advocate.  "Well,here is to our better acquaintance!  In what way can I serve you?""I should, perhaps, begin by telling you, my lord, that I am hereat your own pressing invitation," said I."You have the advantage of me somewhere," said he, "for I profess Ithink I never heard of you before this evening.""Right, my lord; the name is, indeed, new to you," said I.  "Andyet you have been for some time extremely wishful to make myacquaintance, and have declared the same in public.""I wish you would afford me a clue," says he.  "I am no Daniel.""It will perhaps serve for such," said I, "that if I was in ajesting humour--which is far from the case--I believe I might lay aclaim on your lordship for two hundred pounds.""In what sense?" he inquired."In the sense of rewards offered for my person," said I.He thrust away his glass once and for all, and sat straight up inthe chair where he had been previously lolling.  "What am I tounderstand?" said he."A TALL STRONG LAD OF ABOUT EIGHTEEN," I quoted, "SPEAKS LIKE aLOWLANDER AND HAS NO BEARD.""I recognise those words," said he, "which, if you have come herewith any ill-judged intention of amusing yourself, are like toprove extremely prejudicial to your safety.""My purpose in this," I replied, "is just entirely as serious aslife and death, and you have understood me perfectly.  I am the boywho was speaking with Glenure when he was shot.""I can only suppose (seeing you here) that you claim to beinnocent," said he."The inference is clear," I said.  "I am a very loyal subject toKing George, but if I had anything to reproach myself with, I wouldhave had more discretion than to walk into your den.""I am glad of that," said he.  "This horrid crime, Mr. Balfour, isof a dye which cannot permit any clemency.  Blood has beenbarbarously shed.  It has been shed in direct opposition to hisMajesty and our whole frame of laws, by those who are their knownand public oppugnants.  I take a very high sense of this.  I willnot deny that I consider the crime as directly personal to hisMajesty.""And unfortunately, my lord," I added, a little drily, "directlypersonal to another great personage who may be nameless.""If you mean anything by those words, I must tell you I considerthem unfit for a good subject; and were they spoke publicly Ishould make it my business to take note of them," said he.  "You donot appear to me to recognise the gravity of your situation, or youwould be more careful not to pejorate the same by words whichglance upon the purity of justice.  Justice, in this country, andin my poor hands, is no respecter of persons.""You give me too great a share in my own speech, my lord," said I."I did but repeat the common talk of the country, which I haveheard everywhere, and from men of all opinions as I came along.""When you are come to more discretion you will understand such talkin not to be listened to, how much less repeated," says theAdvocate.  "But I acquit you of an ill intention.  That nobleman,whom we all honour, and who has indeed been wounded in a near placeby the late barbarity, sits too high to be reached by theseaspersions.  The Duke of Argyle--you see that I deal plainly withyou--takes it to heart as I do, and as we are both bound to do byour judicial functions and the service of his Majesty; and I couldwish that all hands, in this ill age, were equally clean of familyrancour.  But from the accident that this is a Campbell who hasfallen martyr to his duty--as who else but the Campbells have everput themselves foremost on that path?--I may say it, who am noCampbell--and that the chief of that great house happens (for allour advantages) to be the present head of the College of Justice,small minds and disaffected tongues are set agog in everychangehouse in the country; and I find a young gentleman like Mr.Balfour so ill-advised as to make himself their echo."  So much hespoke with a very oratorical delivery, as if in court, and thendeclined again upon the manner of a gentleman.  "All this apart,"said he.  "It now remains that I should learn what I am to do withyou.""I had thought it was rather I that should learn the same from yourlordship," said I."Ay, true," says the Advocate.  "But, you see, you come to me wellrecommended.  There is a good honest Whig name to this letter,"says he, picking it up a moment from the table.  "And--extra-judicially, Mr, Balfour--there is always the possibility of somearrangement, I tell you, and I tell you beforehand that you may bethe more upon your guard, your fate lies with me singly.  In such amatter (be it said with reverence) I am more powerful than theKing's Majesty; and should you please me--and of course satisfy myconscience--in what remains to be held of our interview, I tell youit may remain between ourselves.""Meaning how?" I asked."Why, I mean it thus, Mr. Balfour," said he, "that if you givesatisfaction, no soul need know so much as that you visited myhouse; and you may observe that I do not even call my clerk."I saw what way he was driving.  "I suppose it is needless anyoneshould be informed upon my visit," said I, "though the precisenature of my gains by that I cannot see.  I am not at all ashamedof coming here.""And have no cause to be," says he, encouragingly.  "Nor yet (ifyou are careful) to fear the consequences.""My lord," said I, "speaking under your correction, I am not veryeasy to be frightened.""And I am sure I do not seek to frighten you," says he.  "But tothe interrogation; and let me warn you to volunteer nothing beyondthe questions I shall ask you.  It may consist very immediatelywith your safety.  I have a great discretion, it is true, but thereare bounds to it.""I shall try to follow your lordship's advice," said I.He spread a sheet of paper on the table and wrote a heading.  "Itappears you were present, by the way, in the wood of Lettermore atthe moment of the fatal shot," he began.  "Was this by accident?""By accident," said I."How came you in speech with Colin Campbell?" he asked."I was inquiring my way of him to Aucharn," I replied.I observed he did not write this answer down."H'm, true," said he, "I had forgotten that.  And do you know, Mr.Balfour, I would dwell, if I were you, as little as might be onyour relations with these Stewarts.  It might be found tocomplicate our business.  I am not yet inclined to regard thesematters as essential.""I had thought, my lord, that all points of fact were equallymaterial in such a case," said I."You forget we are now trying these Stewarts," he replied, withgreat significance.  "If we should ever come to be trying you, itwill be very different; and I shall press these very questions thatI am now willing to glide upon.  But to resume:  I have it here inMr. Mungo Campbell's precognition that you ran immediately up thebrae.  How came that?""Not immediately, my lord, and the cause was my seeing of themurderer.""You saw him, then?""As plain as I see your lordship, though not so near hand.""You know him?""I should know him again.""In your pursuit you were not so fortunate, then, as to overtakehim?""I was not.""Was he alone?""He was alone.""There was no one else in that neighbourhood?""Alan Breck Stewart was not far off, in a piece of a wood."The Advocate laid his pen down.  "I think we are playing at crosspurposes," said he, "which you will find to prove a very illamusement for yourself.""I content myself with following your lordship's advice, andanswering what I am asked," said I."Be so wise as to bethink yourself in time," said he, "I use youwith the most anxious tenderness, which you scarce seem toappreciate, and which (unless you be more careful) may prove to bein vain.""I do appreciate your tenderness, but conceive it to be mistaken,"I replied, with something of a falter, for I saw we were come togrips at last.  "I am here to lay before you certain information,by which I shall convince you Alan had no hand whatever in thekilling of Glenure."The Advocate appeared for a moment at a stick, sitting with pursedlips, and blinking his eyes upon me like an angry cat.  "Mr.Balfour," he said at last, "I tell you pointedly you go an ill wayfor your own interests.""My lord," I said, "I am as free of the charge of considering myown interests in this matter as your lordship.  As God judges me, Ihave but the one design, and that is to see justice executed andthe innocent go clear.  If in pursuit of that I come to fall underyour lordship's displeasure, I must bear it as I may."At this he rose from his chair, lit a second candle, and for awhile gazed upon me steadily.  I was surprised to see a greatchange of gravity fallen upon his face, and I could have almostthought he was a little pale."You are either very simple, or extremely the reverse, and I seethat I must deal with you more confidentially," says he.  "This isa political case--ah, yes, Mr. Balfour! whether we like it or no,the case is political--and I tremble when I think what issues maydepend from it.  To a political case, I need scarce tell a youngman of your education, we approach with very different thoughtsfrom one which is criminal only.  Salus populi suprema lex is amaxim susceptible of great abuse, but it has that force which wefind elsewhere only in the laws of nature:  I mean it has the forceof necessity.  I will open this out to you, if you will allow me,at more length.  You would have me believe--""Under your pardon, my lord, I would have you to believe nothingbut that which I can prove," said I."Tut! tut; young gentleman," says he, "be not so pragmatical, andsuffer a man who might be your father (if it was nothing more) toemploy his own imperfect language, and express his own poorthoughts, even when they have the misfortune not to coincide withMr. Balfour's.  You would have me to believe Breck innocent.  Iwould think this of little account, the more so as we cannot catchour man.  But the matter of Breck's innocence shoots beyond itself.Once admitted, it would destroy the whole presumptions of our caseagainst another and a very different criminal; a man grown old intreason, already twice in arms against his king and already twiceforgiven; a fomentor of discontent, and (whoever may have fired theshot) the unmistakable original of the deed in question.  I neednot tell you that I mean James Stewart.""And I can just say plainly that the innocence of Alan and of Jamesis what I am here to declare in private to your lordship, and whatI am prepared to establish at the trial by my testimony," said I."To which I can only answer by an equal plainness, Mr. Balfour,"said he, "that (in that case) your testimony will not be called byme, and I desire you to withhold it altogether.""You are at the head of Justice in this country," I cried, "and youpropose to me a crime!""I am a man nursing with both hands the interests of this country,"he replied, "and I press on you a political necessity.  Patriotismis not always moral in the formal sense.  You might be glad of it,I think:  it is your own protection; the facts are heavy againstyou; and if I am still trying to except you from a very dangerousplace, it is in part of course because I am not insensible to yourhonesty in coming here; in part because of Pilrig's letter; but inpart, and in chief part, because I regard in this matter mypolitical duty first and my judicial duty only second.  For thesame reason--I repeat it to you in the same frank words--I do notwant your testimony.""I desire not to be thought to make a repartee, when I express onlythe plain sense of our position," said I.  "But if your lordshiphas no need of my testimony, I believe the other side would beextremely blythe to get it."Prestongrange arose and began to pace to and fro in the room.  "Youare not so young," he said, "but what you must remember veryclearly the year '45 and the shock that went about the country.  Iread in Pilrig's letter that you are sound in Kirk and State.  Whosaved them in that fatal year?  I do not refer to His RoyalHighness and his ramrods, which were extremely useful in their day;but the country had been saved and the field won before everCumberland came upon Drummossie.  Who saved it?  I repeat; whosaved the Protestant religion and the whole frame of our civilinstitutions?  The late Lord President Culloden, for one; he playeda man's part, and small thanks he got for it--even as I, whom yousee before you, straining every nerve in the same service, look forno reward beyond the conscience of my duties done.  After thePresident, who else?  You know the answer as well as I do; 'tispartly a scandal, and you glanced at it yourself, and I reprovedyou for it, when you first came in.  It was the Duke and the greatclan of Campbell.  Now here is a Campbell foully murdered, and thatin the King's service.  The Duke and I are Highlanders.  But we areHighlanders civilised, and it is not so with the great mass of ourclans and families.  They have still savage virtues and defects.They are still barbarians, like these Stewarts; only the Campbellswere barbarians on the right side, and the Stewarts were barbarianson the wrong.  Now be you the judge.  The Campbells expectvengeance.  If they do not get it--if this man James escape--therewill be trouble with the Campbells.  That means disturbance in theHighlands, which are uneasy and very far from being disarmed:  thedisarming is a farce. . .""I can bear you out in that," said I."Disturbance in the Highlands makes the hour of our old watchfulenemy," pursued his lordship, holding out a finger as he paced;"and I give you my word we may have a '45 again with the Campbellson the other side.  To protect the life of this man Stewart--whichis forfeit already on half-a-dozen different counts if not on this--do you propose to plunge your country in war, to jeopardise thefaith of your fathers, and to expose the lives and fortunes of howmany thousand innocent persons? . . .  These are considerationsthat weigh with me, and that I hope will weigh no less withyourself, Mr. Balfour, as a lover of your country, good government,and religious truth.""You deal with me very frankly, and I thank you for it," said I."I will try on my side to be no less honest.  I believe your policyto be sound.  I believe these deep duties may lie upon yourlordship; I believe you may have laid them on your conscience whenyou took the oath of the high office which you hold.  But for me,who am just a plain man--or scarce a man yet--the plain duties mustsuffice.  I can think but of two things, of a poor soul in theimmediate and unjust danger of a shameful death, and of the criesand tears of his wife that still tingle in my head.  I cannot seebeyond, my lord.  It's the way that I am made.  If the country hasto fall, it has to fall.  And I pray God, if this be wilfulblindness, that He may enlighten me before too late."He had heard me motionless, and stood so a while longer."This is an unexpected obstacle," says he, aloud, but to himself."And how is your lordship to dispose of me?" I asked."If I wished," said he, "you know that you might sleep in gaol?""My lord," said I, "I have slept in worse places.""Well, my boy," said he, "there is one thing appears very plainlyfrom our interview, that I may rely on your pledged word.  Give meyour honour that you will be wholly secret, not only on what haspassed to-night, but in the matter of the Appin case, and I let yougo free.""I will give it till to-morrow or any other near day that you mayplease to set," said I.  "I would not be thought too wily; but if Igave the promise without qualification your lordship would haveattained his end.""I had no thought to entrap you," said he."I am sure of that," said I."Let me see," he continued.  "To-morrow is the Sabbath.  Come to meon Monday by eight in the morning, and give me our promise untilthen.""Freely given, my lord," said I.  "And with regard to what hasfallen from yourself, I will give it for an long as it shall pleaseGod to spare your days.""You will observe," he said next, "that I have made no employmentof menaces.""It was like your lordship's nobility," said I.  "Yet I am notaltogether so dull but what I can perceive the nature of those youhave not uttered.""Well," said he, "good-night to you.  May you sleep well, for Ithink it is more than I am like to do."With that he sighed, took up a candle, and gave me his conveyanceas far as the street door.CHAPTER V--IN THE ADVOCATE'S HOUSEThe next day, Sabbath, August 27th, I had the occasion I had longlooked forward to, to hear some of the famous Edinburgh preachers,all well known to me already by the report of Mr Campbell.  Alas!and I might just as well have been at Essendean, and sitting underMr. Campbell's worthy self! the turmoil of my thoughts, which dweltcontinually on the interview with Prestongrange, inhibiting me fromall attention.  I was indeed much less impressed by the reasoningof the divines than by the spectacle of the thronged congregationin the churches, like what I imagined of a theatre or (in my thendisposition) of an assize of trial; above all at the West Kirk,with its three tiers of galleries, where I went in the vain hopethat I might see Miss Drummond.On the Monday I betook me for the first time to a barber's, and wasvery well pleased with the result.  Thence to the Advocate's, wherethe red coats of the soldiers showed again about his door, making abright place in the close.  I looked about for the young lady andher gillies:  there was never a sign of them.  But I was no soonershown into the cabinet or antechamber where I had spent so wearyfula time upon the Saturday, than I was aware of the tall figure ofJames More in a corner.  He seemed a prey to a painful uneasiness,reaching forth his feet and hands, and his eyes speeding here andthere without rest about the walls of the small chamber, whichrecalled to me with a sense of pity the man's wretched situation.I suppose it was partly this, and partly my strong continuinginterest in his daughter, that moved me to accost him."Give you a good-morning, sir," said I."And a good-morning to you, sir," said he."You bide tryst with Prestongrange?" I asked."I do, sir, and I pray your business with that gentleman be moreagreeable than mine," was his reply."I hope at least that yours will be brief, for I suppose you passbefore me," said I."All pass before me," he said, with a shrug and a gesture upward ofthe open hands.  "It was not always so, sir, but times change.  Itwas not so when the sword was in the scale, young gentleman, andthe virtues of the soldier might sustain themselves."There came a kind of Highland snuffle out of the man that raised mydander strangely."Well, Mr. Macgregor," said I, "I understand the main thing for asoldier is to be silent, and the first of his virtues never tocomplain.""You have my name, I perceive"--he bowed to me with his armscrossed--"though it's one I must not use myself.  Well, there is apublicity--I have shown my face and told my name too often in thebeards of my enemies.  I must not wonder if both should be known tomany that I know not.""That you know not in the least, sir," said I, "nor yet anybodyelse; but the name I am called, if you care to hear it, isBalfour.""It is a good name," he replied, civilly; "there are many decentfolk that use it.  And now that I call to mind, there was a younggentleman, your namesake, that marched surgeon in the year '45 withmy battalion.""I believe that would be a brother to Balfour of Baith," said I,for I was ready for the surgeon now."The same, sir," said James More.  "And since I have been fellow-soldier with your kinsman, you must suffer me to grasp your hand."He shook hands with me long and tenderly, beaming on me the whileas though he had found a brother."Ah!" says he, "these are changed days since your cousin and Iheard the balls whistle in our lugs.""I think he was a very far-away cousin," said I, drily, "and Iought to tell you that I never clapped eyes upon the man.""Well, well," said he, "it makes no change.  And you--I do notthink you were out yourself, sir--I have no clear mind of yourface, which is one not probable to be forgotten.""In the year you refer to, Mr. Macgregor, I was getting skelped inthe parish school," said I."So young!" cries he.  "Ah, then, you will never be able to thinkwhat this meeting is to me.  In the hour of my adversity, and herein the house of my enemy, to meet in with the blood of an oldbrother-in-arms--it heartens me, Mr. Balfour, like the skirting ofthe highland pipes!  Sir, this is a sad look back that many of ushave to make:  some with falling tears.  I have lived in my owncountry like a king; my sword, my mountains, and the faith of myfriends and kinsmen sufficed for me.  Now I lie in a stinkingdungeon; and do you know, Mr. Balfour," he went on, taking my armand beginning to lead me about, "do you know, sir, that I lack mereneCESSaries?  The malice of my foes has quite sequestered myresources.  I lie, as you know, sir, on a trumped-up charge, ofwhich I am as innocent as yourself.  They dare not bring me to mytrial, and in the meanwhile I am held naked in my prison.  I couldhave wished it was your cousin I had met, or his brother Baithhimself.  Either would, I know, have been rejoiced to help me;while a comparative stranger like yourself--"I would be ashamed to set down all he poured out to me in thisbeggarly vein, or the very short and grudging answers that I madeto him.  There were times when I was tempted to stop his mouth withsome small change; but whether it was from shame or pride--whetherit was for my own sake or Catriona's--whether it was because Ithought him no fit father for his daughter, or because I resentedthat grossness of immediate falsity that clung about the manhimself--the thing was clean beyond me.  And I was still beingwheedled and preached to, and still being marched to and fro, threesteps and a turn, in that small chamber, and had already, by somevery short replies, highly incensed, although not finallydiscouraged, my beggar, when Prestongrange appeared in the doorwayand bade me eagerly into his big chamber."I have a moment's engagements," said he; "and that you may not sitempty-handed I am going to present you to my three braw daughters,of whom perhaps you may have heard, for I think they are morefamous than papa.  This way."He led me into another long room above, where a dry old lady sat ata frame of embroidery, and the three handsomest young women (Isuppose) in Scotland stood together by a window."This is my new friend, Mr Balfour," said he, presenting me by thearm, "David, here is my sister, Miss Grant, who is so good as keepmy house for me, and will be very pleased if she can help you.  Andhere," says he, turning to the three younger ladies, "here are myTHREE BRAW DAUCHTERS.  A fair question to ye, Mr. Davie:  which ofthe three is the best favoured?  And I wager he will never have theimpudence to propound honest Alan Ramsay's answer!"Hereupon all three, and the old Miss Grant as well, cried outagainst this sally, which (as I was acquainted with the verses hereferred to) brought shame into my own check.  It seemed to me acitation unpardonable in a father, and I was amazed that theseladies could laugh even while they reproved, or made believe to.Under cover of this mirth, Prestongrange got forth of the chamber,and I was left, like a fish upon dry land, in that very unsuitablesociety.  I could never deny, in looking back upon what followed,that I was eminently stockish; and I must say the ladies were welldrilled to have so long a patience with me.  The aunt indeed satclose at her embroidery, only looking now and again and smiling;but the misses, and especially the eldest, who was besides the mosthandsome, paid me a score of attentions which I was very ill ableto repay.  It was all in vain to tell myself I was a young followof some worth as well as a good estate, and had no call to feelabashed before these lasses, the eldest not so much older thanmyself, and no one of them by any probability half as learned.Reasoning would not change the fact; and there were times when thecolour came into my face to think I was shaved that day for thefirst time.The talk going, with all their endeavours, very heavily, the eldesttook pity on my awkwardness, sat down to her instrument, of whichshe was a passed mistress, and entertained me for a while withplaying and singing, both in the Scots and in the Italian manners;this put me more at my ease, and being reminded of Alan's air thathe had taught me in the hole near Carriden, I made so bold as towhistle a bar or two, and ask if she knew that.She shook her head.  "I never heard a note of it," said she."Whistle it all through.  And now once again," she added, after Ihad done so.Then she picked it out upon the keyboard, and (to my surprise)instantly enriched the same with well-sounding chords, and sang, asshe played, with a very droll expression and broad accent -"Haenae I got just the lilt of it?Isnae this the tune that ye whustled?""You see," she says, "I can do the poetry too, only it won't rhyme.And then again:"I am Miss Grant, sib to the Advocate:You, I believe, are Dauvit Balfour."I told her how much astonished I was by her genius."And what do you call the name of it?" she asked."I do not know the real name," said I.  "I just call it Alan'sair."She looked at me directly in the face.  "I shall call it David'sair," said she; "though if it's the least like what your namesakeof Israel played to Saul I would never wonder that the king gotlittle good by it, for it's but melancholy music.  Your other nameI do not like; so if you was ever wishing to hear your tune againyou are to ask for it by mine."This was said with a significance that gave my heart a jog.  "Whythat, Miss Grant?" I asked."Why," says she, "if ever you should come to get hanged, I will setyour last dying speech and confession to that tune and sing it."This put it beyond a doubt that she was partly informed of my storyand peril.  How, or just how much, it was more difficult to guess.It was plain she knew there was something of danger in the name ofAlan, and thus warned me to leave it out of reference; and plainshe knew that I stood under some criminal suspicion.  I judgedbesides that the harshness of her last speech (which besides shehad followed up immediately with a very noisy piece of music) wasto put an end to the present conversation.  I stood beside her,affecting to listen and admire, but truly whirled away by my ownthoughts.  I have always found this young lady to be a lover of themysterious; and certainly this first interview made a mystery thatwas beyond my plummet.  One thing I learned long after, the hoursof the Sunday had been well employed, the bank porter had beenfound and examined, my visit to Charles Stewart was discovered, andthe deduction made that I was pretty deep with James and Alan, andmost likely in a continued correspondence with the last.  Hencethis broad hint that was given me across the harpsichord.In the midst of the piece of music, one of the younger misses, whowas at a window over the close, cried on her sisters to come quick,for there was "Grey eyes again."  The whole family trooped there atonce, and crowded one another for a look.  The window whither theyran was in an odd corner of that room, gave above the entrancedoor, and flanked up the close."Come, Mr. Balfour," they cried, "come and see.  She is the mostbeautiful creature!  She hangs round the close-head these lastdays, always with some wretched-like gillies, and yet seems quite alady."I had no need to look; neither did I look twice, or long.  I wasafraid she might have seen me there, looking down upon her fromthat chamber of music, and she without, and her father in the samehouse, perhaps begging for his life with tears, and myself come butnewly from rejecting his petitions.  But even that glance set me ina better conceit of myself and much less awe of the young ladies.They were beautiful, that was beyond question, but Catriona wasbeautiful too, and had a kind of brightness in her like a coal offire.  As much as the others cast me down, she lifted me up.  Iremembered I had talked easily with her.  If I could make no handof it with these fine maids, it was perhaps something their ownfault.  My embarrassment began to be a little mingled and lightenedwith a sense of fun; and when the aunt smiled at me from herembroidery, and the three daughters unbent to me like a baby, allwith "papa's orders" written on their faces, there were times whenI could have found it in my heart to smile myself.Presently papa returned, the same kind, happy-like, pleasant-spokenman."Now, girls," said he, "I must take Mr. Balfour away again; but Ihope you have been able to persuade him to return where I shall bealways gratified to find him."So they each made me a little farthing compliment, and I was ledaway.If this visit to the family had been meant to soften my resistance,it was the worst of failures.  I was no such ass but what Iunderstood how poor a figure I had made, and that the girls wouldbe yawning their jaws off as soon as my stiff back was turned.  Ifelt I had shown how little I had in me of what was soft andgraceful; and I longed for a chance to prove that I had somethingof the other stuff, the stern and dangerous.Well, I was to be served to my desire, for the scene to which hewas conducting me was of a different character.CHAPTER VI--UMQUILE THE MASTER OF LOVATThere was a man waiting us in Prestongrange's study, whom Idistasted at the first look, as we distaste a ferret or an earwig.He was bitter ugly, but seemed very much of a gentleman; had stillmanners, but capable of sudden leaps and violences; and a smallvoice, which could ring out shrill and dangerous when he sodesired.The Advocate presented us in a familiar, friendly way."Here, Fraser," said he, "here is Mr. Balfour whom we talked about.Mr. David, this is Mr. Simon Fraser, whom we used to call byanother title, but that is an old song.  Mr. Fraser has an errandto you."With that he stepped aside to his book-shelves, and made believe toconsult a quarto volume in the far end.I was thus left (in a sense) alone with perhaps the last person inthe world I had expected.  There was no doubt upon the terms ofintroduction; this could be no other than the forfeited Master ofLovat and chief of the great clan Fraser.  I knew he had led hismen in the Rebellion; I knew his father's head--my old lord's, thatgrey fox of the mountains--to have fallen on the block for thatoffence, the lands of the family to have been seized, and theirnobility attainted.  I could not conceive what he should be doingin Grant's house; I could not conceive that he had been called tothe bar, had eaten all his principles, and was now currying favourwith the Government even to the extent of acting Advocate-Depute inthe Appin murder."Well, Mr. Balfour," said he, "what is all this I hear of ye?""It would not become me to prejudge," said I, "but if the Advocatewas your authority he is fully possessed of my opinions.""I may tell you I am engaged in the Appin case," he went on; "I amto appear under Prestongrange; and from my study of theprecognitions I can assure you your opinions are erroneous.  Theguilt of Breck is manifest; and your testimony, in which you admityou saw him on the hill at the very moment, will certify hishanging.""It will be rather ill to hang him till you catch him," I observed."And for other matters I very willingly leave you to your ownimpressions.""The Duke has been informed," he went on.  "I have just come fromhis Grace, and he expressed himself before me with an honestfreedom like the great nobleman he is.  He spoke of you by name,Mr. Balfour, and declared his gratitude beforehand in case youwould be led by those who understand your own interests and thoseof the country so much better than yourself.  Gratitude is no emptyexpression in that mouth:  experto-crede.  I daresay you knowsomething of my name and clan, and the damnable example andlamented end of my late father, to say nothing of my own errata.Well, I have made my peace with that good Duke; he has intervenedfor me with our friend Prestongrange; and here I am with my foot inthe stirrup again and some of the responsibility shared into myhand of prosecuting King George's enemies and avenging the latedaring and barefaced insult to his Majesty.""Doubtless a proud position for your father's son," says I.He wagged his bald eyebrows at me.  "You are pleased to makeexperiments in the ironical, I think," said he.  "But I am hereupon duty, I am here to discharge my errand in good faith, it is invain you think to divert me.  And let me tell you, for a youngfellow of spirit and ambition like yourself, a good shove in thebeginning will do more than ten years' drudgery.  The shove is nowat your command; choose what you will to be advanced in, the Dukewill watch upon you with the affectionate disposition of a father.""I am thinking that I lack the docility of the son," says I."And do you really suppose, sir, that the whole policy of thiscountry is to be suffered to trip up and tumble down for an ill-mannered colt of a boy?" he cried.  "This has been made a testcase, all who would prosper in the future must put a shoulder tothe wheel.  Look at me!  Do you suppose it is for my pleasure thatI put myself in the highly invidious position of persecuting a manthat I have drawn the sword alongside of?  The choice is not leftme.""But I think, sir, that you forfeited your choice when you mixed inwith that unnatural rebellion," I remarked.  "My case is happilyotherwise; I am a true man, and can look either the Duke or KingGeorge in the face without concern.""Is it so the wind sits?" says he.  "I protest you are fallen inthe worst sort of error.  Prestongrange has been hitherto so civil(he tells me) as not to combat your allegations; but you must notthink they are not looked upon with strong suspicion.  You say youare innocent.  My dear sir, the facts declare you guilty.""I was waiting for you there," said I."The evidence of Mungo Campbell; your flight after the completionof the murder; your long course of secresy--my good young man!"said Mr. Simon, "here is enough evidence to hang a bullock, let bea David Balfour!  I shall be upon that trial; my voice shall beraised; I shall then speak much otherwise from what I do to-day,and far less to your gratification, little as you like it now!  Ah,you look white!" cries he.  "I have found the key of your impudentheart.  You look pale, your eyes waver, Mr. David!  You see thegrave and the gallows nearer by than you had fancied.""I own to a natural weakness," said I.  "I think no shame for that.Shame. . ."  I was going on."Shame waits for you on the gibbet," he broke in."Where I shall but be even'd with my lord your father," said I."Aha, but not so!" he cried, "and you do not yet see to the bottomof this business.  My father suffered in a great cause, and fordealing in the affairs of kings.  You are to hang for a dirtymurder about boddle-pieces.  Your personal part in it, thetreacherous one of holding the poor wretch in talk, youraccomplices a pack of ragged Highland gillies.  And it can beshown, my great Mr. Balfour--it can be shown, and it WILL be shown,trust ME that has a finger in the pie--it can be shown, and shallbe shown, that you were paid to do it.  I think I can see the looksgo round the court when I adduce my evidence, and it shall appearthat you, a young man of education, let yourself be corrupted tothis shocking act for a suit of cast clothes, a bottle of Highlandspirits, and three-and-fivepence-halfpenny in copper money."There was a touch of the truth in these words that knocked me likea blow:  clothes, a bottle of usquebaugh, and three-and-fivepence-halfpenny in change made up, indeed, the most of what Alan and Ihad carried from Auchurn; and I saw that some of James's people hadbeen blabbing in their dungeons."You see I know more than you fancied," he resumed in triumph."And as for giving it this turn, great Mr. David, you must notsuppose the Government of Great Britain and Ireland will ever bestuck for want of evidence.  We have men here in prison who willswear out their lives as we direct them; as I direct, if you preferthe phrase.  So now you are to guess your part of glory if youchoose to die.  On the one hand, life, wine, women, and a duke tobe your handgun:  on the other, a rope to your craig, and a gibbetto clatter your bones on, and the lousiest, lowest story to handdown to your namesakes in the future that was ever told about ahired assassin.  And see here!" he cried, with a formidable shrillvoice, "see this paper that I pull out of my pocket.  Look at thename there:  it is the name of the great David, I believe, the inkscarce dry yet.  Can you guess its nature?  It is the warrant foryour arrest, which I have but to touch this bell beside me to haveexecuted on the spot.  Once in the Tolbooth upon this paper, mayGod help you, for the die is cast!"I must never deny that I was greatly horrified by so much baseness,and much unmanned by the immediacy and ugliness of my danger.  Mr.Simon had already gloried in the changes of my hue; I make no doubtI was now no ruddier than my shirt; my speech besides trembled."There is a gentleman in this room," cried I.  "I appeal to him.  Iput my life and credit in his hands."Prestongrange shut his book with a snap.  "I told you so, Simon,"said he; "you have played your hand for all it was worth, and youhave lost.  Mr. David," he went on, "I wish you to believe it wasby no choice of mine you were subjected to this proof.  I wish youcould understand how glad I am you should come forth from it withso much credit.  You may not quite see how, but it is a little of aservice to myself.  For had our friend here been more successfulthan I was last night, it might have appeared that he was a betterjudge of men than I; it might have appeared we were altogether inthe wrong situations, Mr. Simon and myself.  And I know our friendSimon to be ambitious," says he, striking lightly on Fraser'sshoulder.  "As for this stage play, it is over; my sentiments arevery much engaged in your behalf; and whatever issue we can find tothis unfortunate affair, I shall make it my business to see it isadopted with tenderness to you."These were very good words, and I could see besides that there waslittle love, and perhaps a spice of genuine ill-will, between thesetwo who were opposed to me.  For all that, it was unmistakable thisinterview had been designed, perhaps rehearsed, with the consent ofboth; it was plain my adversaries were in earnest to try me by allmethods; and now (persuasion, flattery, and menaces having beentried in vain) I could not but wonder what would be their nextexpedient.  My eyes besides were still troubled, and my knees looseunder me, with the distress of the late ordeal; and I could do nomore than stammer the same form of words:  "I put my life andcredit in your hands.""Well, well," said he, "we must try to save them.  And in themeanwhile let us return to gentler methods.  You must not bear anygrudge upon my friend, Mr. Simon, who did but speak by his brief.And even if you did conceive some malice against myself, who stoodby and seemed rather to hold a candle, I must not let that extendto innocent members of my family.  These are greatly engaged to seemore of you, and I cannot consent to have my young womenfolkdisappointed.  To-morrow they will be going to Hope Park, where Ithink it very proper you should make your bow.  Call for me first,when I may possibly have something for your private hearing; thenyou shall be turned abroad again under the conduct of my misses;and until that time repeat to me your promise of secrecy."I had done better to have instantly refused, but in truth I wasbeside the power of reasoning; did as I was bid; took my leave Iknow not how; and when I was forth again in the close, and the doorhad shut behind me, was glad to lean on a house wall and wipe myface.  That horrid apparition (as I may call it) of Mr. Simon rangin my memory, as a sudden noise rings after it is over in the ear.Tales of the man's father, of his falseness, of his manifoldperpetual treacheries, rose before me from all that I had heard andread, and joined on with what I had just experienced of himself.Each time it occurred to me, the ingenious foulness of that calumnyhe had proposed to nail upon my character startled me afresh.  Thecase of the man upon the gibbet by Leith Walk appeared scarcedistinguishable from that I was now to consider as my own.  To roba child of so little more than nothing was certainly a paltryenterprise for two grown men; but my own tale, as it was to berepresented in a court by Simon Fraser, appeared a fair second inevery possible point of view of sordidness and cowardice.The voices of two of Prestongrange's liveried men upon his doorsteprecalled me to myself."Ha'e," said the one, "this billet as fast as ye can link to thecaptain.""Is that for the cateran back again?" asked the other."It would seem sae," returned the first.  "Him and Simon areseeking him.""I think Prestongrange is gane gyte," says the second.  "He'll haveJames More in bed with him next.""Weel, it's neither your affair nor mine's," said the first.And they parted, the one upon his errand, and the other back intothe house.This looked as ill as possible.  I was scarce gone and they weresending already for James More, to whom I thought Mr. Simon musthave pointed when he spoke of men in prison and ready to redeemtheir lives by all extremities.  My scalp curdled among my hair,and the next moment the blood leaped in me to remember Catriona.Poor lass! her father stood to be hanged for pretty indefensiblemisconduct.  What was yet more unpalatable, it now seemed he wasprepared to save his four quarters by the worst of shame and themost foul of cowardly murders--murder by the false oath; and tocomplete our misfortunes, it seemed myself was picked out to be thevictim.I began to walk swiftly and at random, conscious only of a desirefor movement, air, and the open country.CHAPTER VII--I MAKE A FAULT IN HONOURI came forth, I vow I know not how, on the Lang Dykes {12}.  Thisis a rural road which runs on the north side over against the city.Thence I could see the whole black length of it tail down, fromwhere the castle stands upon its crags above the loch in a longline of spires and gable ends, and smoking chimneys, and at thesight my heart swelled in my bosom.  My youth, as I have told, wasalready inured to dangers; but such danger as I had seen the faceof but that morning, in the midst of what they call the safety of atown, shook me beyond experience.  Peril of slavery, peril ofshipwreck, peril of sword and shot, I had stood all of thesewithout discredit; but the peril there was in the sharp voice andthe fat face of Simon, property Lord Lovat, daunted me wholly.I sat by the lake side in a place where the rushes went down intothe water, and there steeped my wrists and laved my temples.  If Icould have done so with any remains of self-esteem, I would nowhave fled from my foolhardy enterprise.  But (call it courage orcowardice, and I believe it was both the one and the other) Idecided I was ventured out beyond the possibility of a retreat.  Ihad out-faced these men, I would continue to out-face them; comewhat might, I would stand by the word spoken.The sense of my own constancy somewhat uplifted my spirits, but notmuch.  At the best of it there was an icy place about my heart, andlife seemed a black business to be at all engaged in.  For twosouls in particular my pity flowed.  The one was myself, to be sofriendless and lost among dangers.  The other was the girl, thedaughter of James More.  I had seen but little of her; yet my viewwas taken and my judgment made.  I thought her a lass of a cleanhonour, like a man's; I thought her one to die of a disgrace; andnow I believed her father to be at that moment bargaining his vilelife for mine.  It made a bond in my thoughts betwixt the girl andme.  I had seen her before only as a wayside appearance, though onethat pleased me strangely; I saw her now in a sudden nearness ofrelation, as the daughter of my blood foe, and I might say, mymurderer.  I reflected it was hard I should be so plagued andpersecuted all my days for other folks' affairs, and have no mannerof pleasure myself.  I got meals and a bed to sleep in when myconcerns would suffer it; beyond that my wealth was of no help tome.  If I was to hang, my days were like to be short; if I was notto hang but to escape out of this trouble, they might yet seem longto me ere I was done with them.  Of a sudden her face appeared inmy memory, the way I had first seen it, with the parted lips; atthat, weakness came in my bosom and strength into my legs; and Iset resolutely forward on the way to Dean.  If I was to hang to-morrow, and it was sure enough I might very likely sleep that nightin a dungeon, I determined I should hear and speak once more withCatriona.The exercise of walking and the thought of my destination braced meyet more, so that I began to pluck up a kind of spirit.  In thevillage of Dean, where it sits in the bottom of a glen beside theriver, I inquired my way of a miller's man, who sent me up the hillupon the farther side by a plain path, and so to a decent-likesmall house in a garden of lawns and apple-trees.  My heart beathigh as I stepped inside the garden hedge, but it fell low indeedwhen I came face to face with a grim and fierce old lady, walkingthere in a white mutch with a man's hat strapped upon the top ofit."What do ye come seeking here?" she asked.I told her I was after Miss Drummond."And what may be your business with Miss Drummond?" says she.I told her I had met her on Saturday last, had been so fortunate asto render her a trifling service, and was come now on the younglady's invitation."O, so you're Saxpence!" she cried, with a very sneering manner."A braw gift, a bonny gentleman.  And hae ye ony ither name anddesignation, or were ye bapteesed Saxpence?" she asked.I told my name."Preserve me!" she cried.  "Has Ebenezer gotten a son?""No, ma'am," said I.  "I am a son of Alexander's.  It's I that amthe Laird of Shaws.""Ye'll find your work cut out for ye to establish that," quoth she."I perceive you know my uncle," said I; "and I daresay you may bethe better pleased to hear that business is arranged.""And what brings ye here after Miss Drummond?" she pursued."I'm come after my saxpence, mem," said I.  "It's to be thought,being my uncle's nephew, I would be found a careful lad.""So ye have a spark of sleeness in ye?" observed the old lady, withsome approval.  "I thought ye had just been a cuif--you and yoursaxpence, and your LUCKY DAY and your SAKE OF BALWHIDDER"--fromwhich I was gratified to learn that Catriona had not forgotten someof our talk.  "But all this is by the purpose," she resumed.  "Am Ito understand that ye come here keeping company?""This is surely rather an early question," said I.  "The maid isyoung, so am I, worse fortune.  I have but seen her the once.  I'llnot deny," I added, making up my mind to try her with somefrankness, "I'll not deny but she has run in my head a good dealsince I met in with her.  That is one thing; but it would be quiteanother, and I think I would look very like a fool, to commitmyself.""You can speak out of your mouth, I see," said the old lady."Praise God, and so can I!  I was fool enough to take charge ofthis rogue's daughter:  a fine charge I have gotten; but it's mine,and I'll carry it the way I want to.  Do ye mean to tell me, Mr.Balfour of Shaws, that you would marry James More's daughter, andhim hanged!  Well, then, where there's no possible marriage thereshall be no manner of carryings on, and take that for said.  Lassesare bruckle things," she added, with a nod; "and though ye wouldnever think it by my wrunkled chafts, I was a lassie mysel', and abonny one.""Lady Allardyce," said I, "for that I suppose to be your name, youseem to do the two sides of the talking, which is a very poormanner to come to an agreement.  You give me rather a home thrustwhen you ask if I would marry, at the gallow's foot, a young ladywhom I have seen but once.  I have told you already I would neverbe so untenty as to commit myself.  And yet I'll go some way withyou.  If I continue to like the lass as well as I have reason toexpect, it will be something more than her father, or the gallowseither, that keeps the two of us apart.  As for my family, I foundit by the wayside like a lost bawbee!  I owe less than nothing tomy uncle and if ever I marry, it will be to please one person:that's myself.""I have heard this kind of talk before ye were born," said Mrs.Ogilvy, "which is perhaps the reason that I think of it so little.There's much to be considered.  This James More is a kinsman ofmine, to my shame be it spoken.  But the better the family, themair men hanged or headed, that's always been poor Scotland'sstory.  And if it was just the hanging!  For my part I think Iwould be best pleased with James upon the gallows, which would beat least an end to him.  Catrine's a good lass enough, and a good-hearted, and lets herself be deaved all day with a runt of an auldwife like me.  But, ye see, there's the weak bit.  She's daft aboutthat long, false, fleeching beggar of a father of hers, and red-madabout the Gregara, and proscribed names, and King James, and awheen blethers.  And you might think ye could guide her, ye wouldfind yourself sore mista'en.  Ye say ye've seen her but the once. ..""Spoke with her but the once, I should have said," I interrupted."I saw her again this morning from a window at Prestongrange's."This I daresay I put in because it sounded well; but I was properlypaid for my ostentation on the return."What's this of it?" cries the old lady, with a sudden pucker ofher face.  "I think it was at the Advocate's door-cheek that ye mether first."I told her that was so."H'm," she said; and then suddenly, upon rather a scolding tone, "Ihave your bare word for it," she cries, "as to who and what youare.  By your way of it, you're Balfour of the Shaws; but for whatI ken you may be Balfour of the Deevil's oxter.  It's possible yemay come here for what ye say, and it's equally possible ye maycome here for deil care what!  I'm good enough Whig to sit quiet,and to have keepit all my men-folk's heads upon their shoulders.But I'm not just a good enough Whig to be made a fool of neither.And I tell you fairly, there's too much Advocate's door andAdvocate's window here for a man that comes taigling after aMacgregor's daughter.  Ye can tell that to the Advocate that sentye, with my fond love.  And I kiss my loof to ye, Mr. Balfour,"says she, suiting the action to the word; "and a braw journey to yeback to where ye cam frae.""If you think me a spy," I broke out, and speech stuck in mythroat.  I stood and looked murder at the old lady for a space,then bowed and turned away."Here!  Hoots!  The callant's in a creel!" she cried.  "Think ye aspy? what else would I think ye--me that kens naething by ye?  ButI see that I was wrong; and as I cannot fight, I'll have toapologise.  A bonny figure I would be with a broadsword.  Ay! ay!"she went on, "you're none such a bad lad in your way; I think ye'llhave some redeeming vices.  But, O! Davit Balfour, ye're damnedcountryfeed.  Ye'll have to win over that, lad; ye'll have tosoople your back-bone, and think a wee pickle less of your daintyself; and ye'll have to try to find out that women-folk are naegrenadiers.  But that can never be.  To your last day you'll ken nomore of women-folk than what I do of sow-gelding."I had never been used with such expressions from a lady's tongue,the only two ladies I had known, Mrs. Campbell and my mother, beingmost devout and most particular women; and I suppose my amazementmust have been depicted in my countenance, for Mrs. Ogilvy burstforth suddenly in a fit of laughter."Keep me!" she cried, struggling with her mirth, "you have thefinest timber face--and you to marry the daughter of a Hielandcateran!  Davie, my dear, I think we'll have to make a match of it--if it was just to see the weans.  And now," she went on, "there'sno manner of service in your daidling here, for the young woman isfrom home, and it's my fear that the old woman is no suitablecompanion for your father's son.  Forbye that I have nobody butmyself to look after my reputation, and have been long enough alonewith a sedooctive youth.  And come back another day for yoursaxpence!" she cried after me as I left.My skirmish with this disconcerting lady gave my thoughts aboldness they had otherwise wanted.  For two days the image ofCatriona had mixed in all my meditations; she made theirbackground, so that I scarce enjoyed my own company without a glintof her in a corner of my mind.  But now she came immediately near;I seemed to touch her, whom I had never touched but the once; I letmyself flow out to her in a happy weakness, and looking all about,and before and behind, saw the world like an undesirable desert,where men go as soldiers on a march, following their duty with whatconstancy they have, and Catriona alone there to offer me somepleasure of my days.  I wondered at myself that I could dwell onsuch considerations in that time of my peril and disgrace; and whenI remembered my youth I was ashamed.  I had my studies to complete:I had to be called into some useful business; I had yet to take mypart of service in a place where all must serve; I had yet tolearn, and know, and prove myself a man; and I had so much sense asblush that I should be already tempted with these further-on andholier delights and duties.  My education spoke home to me sharply;I was never brought up on sugar biscuits but on the hard food ofthe truth.  I knew that he was quite unfit to be a husband who wasnot prepared to be a father also; and for a boy like me to play thefather was a mere derision.When I was in the midst of these thoughts and about half-way backto town I saw a figure coming to meet me, and the trouble of myheart was heightened.  It seemed I had everything in the world tosay to her, but nothing to say first; and remembering how tongue-tied I had been that morning at the Advocate's I made sure that Iwould find myself struck dumb.  But when she came up my fears fledaway; not even the consciousness of what I had been privatelythinking disconcerted me the least; and I found I could talk withher as easily and rationally as I might with Alan."O!" she cried, "you have been seeking your sixpence; did you getit?"I told her no; but now I had met with her my walk was not in vain."Though I have seen you to-day already," said I, and told her whereand when."I did not see you," she said.  "My eyes are big, but there arebetter than mine at seeing far.  Only I heard singing in thehouse.""That was Miss Grant," said I, "the eldest and the bonniest.""They say they are all beautiful," said she."They think the same of you, Miss Drummond," I replied, "and wereall crowding to the window to observe you.""It is a pity about my being so blind," said she, "or I might haveseen them too.  And you were in the house?  You must have beenhaving the fine time with the fine music and the pretty ladies.""There is just where you are wrong," said I; "for I was as uncouthas a sea-fish upon the brae of a mountain.  The truth is that I ambetter fitted to go about with rudas men than pretty ladies.""Well, I would think so too, at all events!" said she, at which weboth of us laughed."It is a strange thing, now," said I.  "I am not the least afraidwith you, yet I could have run from the Miss Grants.  And I wasafraid of your cousin too.""O, I think any man will be afraid of her," she cried.  "My fatheris afraid of her himself."The name of her father brought me to a stop.  I looked at her asshe walked by my side; I recalled the man, and the little I knewand the much I guessed of him; and comparing the one with theother, felt like a traitor to be silent."Speaking of which," said I, "I met your father no later than thismorning.""Did you?" she cried, with a voice of joy that seemed to mock atme.  "You saw James More?  You will have spoken with him then?""I did even that," said I.Then I think things went the worst way for me that was humanlypossible.  She gave me a look of mere gratitude.  "Ah, thank youfor that!" says she."You thank me for very little," said I, and then stopped.  But itseemed when I was holding back so much, something at least had tocome out.  "I spoke rather ill to him," said I; "I did no like himvery much; I spoke him rather ill, and he was angry.""I think you had little to do then, and less to tell it to hisdaughter!" she cried out.  "But those that do not love and cherishhim I will not know.""I will take the freedom of a word yet," said I, beginning totremble.  "Perhaps neither your father nor I are in the best ofspirits at Prestongrange's.  I daresay we both have anxiousbusiness there, for it's a dangerous house.  I was sorry for himtoo, and spoke to him the first, if I could but have spoken thewiser.  And for one thing, in my opinion, you will soon find thathis affairs are mending.""It will not be through your friendship, I am thinking," said she;"and he is much made up to you for your sorrow.""Miss Drummond," cried I, "I am alone in this world.""And I am not wondering at that," said she."O, let me speak!" said I.  "I will speak but the once, and thenleave you, if you will, for ever.  I came this day in the hopes ofa kind word that I am sore in want of.  I know that what I saidmust hurt you, and I knew it then.  It would have been easy to havespoken smooth, easy to lie to you; can you not think how I wastempted to the same?  Cannot you see the truth of my heart shineout?""I think here is a great deal of work, Mr. Balfour," said she.  "Ithink we will have met but the once, and will can part like gentlefolk.""O, let me have one to believe in me!" I pleaded, "I cannae bear itelse.  The whole world is clanned against me.  How am I to gothrough with my dreadful fate?  If there's to be none to believe inme I cannot do it.  The man must just die, for I cannot do it."She had still looked straight in front of her, head in air; but atmy words or the tone of my voice she came to a stop.  "What is thisyou say?" she asked.  "What are you talking of?""It is my testimony which may save an innocent life," said I, "andthey will not suffer me to bear it.  What would you do yourself?You know what this is, whose father lies in danger.  Would youdesert the poor soul?  They have tried all ways with me.  They havesought to bribe me; they offered me hills and valleys.  And to-daythat sleuth-hound told me how I stood, and to what a length hewould go to butcher and disgrace me.  I am to be brought in a partyto the murder; I am to have held Glenure in talk for money and oldclothes; I am to be killed and shamed.  If this is the way I am tofall, and me scarce a man--if this is the story to be told of me inall Scotland--if you are to believe it too, and my name is to benothing but a by-word--Catriona, how can I go through with it?  Thething's not possible; it's more than a man has in his heart."I poured my words out in a whirl, one upon the other; and when Istopped I found her gazing on me with a startled face."Glenure!  It is the Appin murder," she said softly, but with avery deep surprise.I had turned back to bear her company, and we were now come nearthe head of the brae above Dean village.  At this word I stepped infront of her like one suddenly distracted."For God's sake!" I cried, "for God's sake, what is this that Ihave done?" and carried my fists to my temples.  "What made me doit?  Sure, I am bewitched to say these things!""In the name of heaven, what ails you now!" she cried."I gave my honour," I groaned, "I gave my honour and now I havebroke it.  O, Catriona!""I am asking you what it is," she said; "was it these things youshould not have spoken?  And do you think I have no honour, then?or that I am one that would betray a friend?  I hold up my righthand to you and swear.""O, I knew you would be true!" said I.  "It's me--it's here.  Ithat stood but this morning and out-faced them, that risked ratherto die disgraced upon the gallows than do wrong--and a few hoursafter I throw my honour away by the roadside in common talk!'There is one thing clear upon our interview,' says he, 'that I canrely on your pledged word.'  Where is my word now?  Who couldbelieve me now?  You could not believe me.  I am clean fallen down;I had best die!"  All this I said with a weeping voice, but I hadno tears in my body."My heart is sore for you," said she, "but be sure you are toonice.  I would not believe you, do you say?  I would trust you withanything.  And these men?  I would not be thinking of them!  Menwho go about to entrap and to destroy you!  Fy! this is no time tocrouch.  Look up!  Do you not think I will be admiring you like agreat hero of the good--and you a boy not much older than myself?And because you said a word too much in a friend's ear, that woulddie ere she betrayed you--to make such a matter!  It is one thingthat we must both forget.""Catriona," said I, looking at her, hang-dog, "is this true of it?Would ye trust me yet?""Will you not believe the tears upon my face?" she cried.  "It isthe world I am thinking of you, Mr. David Balfour.  Let them hangyou; I will never forget, I will grow old and still remember you.I think it is great to die so:  I will envy you that gallows.""And maybe all this while I am but a child frighted with bogles,"said I.  "Maybe they but make a mock of me.""It is what I must know," she said.  "I must hear the whole.  Theharm is done at all events, and I must hear the whole."I had sat down on the wayside, where she took a place beside me,and I told her all that matter much as I have written it, mythoughts about her father's dealings being alone omitted."Well," she said, when I had finished, "you are a hero, surely, andI never would have thought that same!  And I think you are inperil, too.  O, Simon Fraser! to think upon that man!  For his lifeand the dirty money, to be dealing in such traffic!"  And just thenshe called out aloud with a queer word that was common with her,and belongs, I believe, to her own language.  "My torture!" saysshe, "look at the sun!"Indeed, it was already dipping towards the mountains.She bid me come again soon, gave me her hand, and left me in aturmoil of glad spirits.  I delayed to go home to my lodging, for Ihad a terror of immediate arrest; but got some supper at a changehouse, and the better part of that night walked by myself in thebarley-fields, and had such a sense of Catriona's presence that Iseemed to bear her in my arms.CHAPTER VIII--THE BRAVOThe next day, August 29th, I kept my appointment at the Advocate'sin a coat that I had made to my own measure, and was but newlyready,"Aha," says Prestongrange, "you are very fine to-day; my misses areto have a fine cavalier.  Come, I take that kind of you.  I takethat kind of you, Mr. David.  O, we shall do very well yet, and Ibelieve your troubles are nearly at an end.""You have news for me?" cried I."Beyond anticipation," he replied.  "Your testimony is after all tobe received; and you may go, if you will, in my company to thetrial, which in to be held at Inverary, Thursday, 21st proximo."I was too much amazed to find words."In the meanwhile," he continued, "though I will not ask you torenew your pledge, I must caution you strictly to be reticent.  To-morrow your precognition must be taken; and outside of that, do youknow, I think least said will be soonest mended.""I shall try to go discreetly,' said I.  "I believe it is yourselfthat I must thank for this crowning mercy, and I do thank yougratefully.  After yesterday, my lord, this is like the doors ofHeaven.  I cannot find it in my heart to get the thing believed.""Ah, but you must try and manage, you must try and manage tobelieve it," says he, soothing-like, "and I am very glad to hearyour acknowledgment of obligation, for I think you may be able torepay me very shortly"--he coughed--"or even now.  The matter ismuch changed.  Your testimony, which I shall not trouble you forto-day, will doubtless alter the complexion of the case for allconcerned, and this makes it less delicate for me to enter with youon a side issue.""My Lord," I interrupted, "excuse me for interrupting you, but howhas this been brought about?  The obstacles you told me of onSaturday appeared even to me to be quite insurmountable; how has itbeen contrived?""My dear Mr. David," said he, "it would never do for me to divulge(even to you, as you say) the councils of the Government; and youmust content yourself, if you please, with the gross fact."He smiled upon me like a father as he spoke, playing the while witha new pen; methought it was impossible there could be any shadow ofdeception in the man:  yet when he drew to him a sheet of paper,dipped his pen among the ink, and began again to address me, I wassomehow not so certain, and fell instinctively into an attitude ofguard."There is a point I wish to touch upon," he began.  "I purposelyleft it before upon one side, which need be now no longernecessary.  This is not, of course, a part of your examination,which is to follow by another hand; this is a private interest ofmy own.  You say you encountered Alan Breck upon the hill?""I did, my lord," said I"This was immediately after the murder?""It was.""Did you speak to him?""I did.""You had known him before, I think?" says my lord, carelessly."I cannot guess your reason for so thinking, my lord," I replied,"but such in the fact.""And when did you part with him again?" said he."I reserve my answer," said I.  "The question will be put to me atthe assize.""Mr. Balfour," said he, "will you not understand that all this iswithout prejudice to yourself?  I have promised you life andhonour; and, believe me, I can keep my word.  You are thereforeclear of all anxiety.  Alan, it appears, you suppose you canprotect; and you talk to me of your gratitude, which I think (ifyou push me) is not ill-deserved.  There are a great many differentconsiderations all pointing the same way; and I will never bepersuaded that you could not help us (if you chose) to put salt onAlan's tail.""My lord," said I, "I give you my word I do not so much as guesswhere Alan is."He paused a breath.  "Nor how he might be found?" he asked.I sat before him like a log of wood."And so much for your gratitude, Mr. David!" he observed.  Againthere was a piece of silence.  "Well," said he, rising, "I am notfortunate, and we are a couple at cross purposes.  Let us speak ofit no more; you will receive notice when, where, and by whom, weare to take your precognition.  And in the meantime, my misses mustbe waiting you.  They will never forgive me if I detain theircavalier."Into the hands of these Graces I was accordingly offered up, andfound them dressed beyond what I had thought possible, and lookingfair as a posy.As we went forth from the doors a small circumstance occurred whichcame afterwards to look extremely big.  I heard a whistle soundloud and brief like a signal, and looking all about, spied for onemoment the red head of Neil of the Tom, the son of Duncan.  Thenext moment he was gone again, nor could I see so much as theskirt-tail of Catriona, upon whom I naturally supposed him to bethen attending.My three keepers led me out by Bristo and the Bruntsfield Links;whence a path carried us to Hope Park, a beautiful pleasance, laidwith gravel-walks, furnished with seats and summer-sheds, andwarded by a keeper.  The way there was a little longsome; the twoyounger misses affected an air of genteel weariness that damped mecruelly, the eldest considered me with something that at timesappeared like mirth; and though I thought I did myself more justicethan the day before, it was not without some effort.  Upon ourreaching the park I was launched on a bevy of eight or ten younggentlemen (some of them cockaded officers, the rest chieflyadvocates) who crowded to attend upon these beauties; and though Iwas presented to all of them in very good words, it seemed I was byall immediately forgotten.  Young folk in a company are like tosavage animals:  they fall upon or scorn a stranger withoutcivility, or I may say, humanity; and I am sure, if I had beenamong baboons, they would have shown me quite as much of both.Some of the advocates set up to be wits, and some of the soldiersto be rattles; and I could not tell which of these extremes annoyedme most.  All had a manner of handling their swords and coat-skirts, for the which (in mere black envy) I could have kicked themfrom the park.  I daresay, upon their side, they grudged meextremely the fine company in which I had arrived; and altogether Ihad soon fallen behind, and stepped stiffly in the rear of all thatmerriment with my own thoughts.From these I was recalled by one of the officers, Lieutenant HectorDuncansby, a gawky, leering Highland boy, asking if my name was not"Palfour."I told him it was, not very kindly, for his manner was scant civil."Ha, Palfour," says he, and then, repeating it, "Palfour, Palfour!""I am afraid you do not like my name, sir," says I, annoyed withmyself to be annoyed with such a rustical fellow."No," says he, "but I wass thinking.""I would not advise you to make a practice of that, sir," says I."I feel sure you would not find it to agree with you.""Tit you effer hear where Alan Grigor fand the tangs?" said he.I asked him what he could possibly mean, and he answered, with aheckling laugh, that he thought I must have found the poker in thesame place and swallowed it.There could be no mistake about this, and my cheek burned."Before I went about to put affronts on gentlemen," said I, "Ithink I would learn the English language first."He took me by the sleeve with a nod and a wink and led me quietlyoutside Hope Park.  But no sooner were we beyond the view of thepromenaders, than the fashion of his countenance changed.  "You tamlowland scoon'rel!" cries he, and hit me a buffet on the jaw withhis closed fist.I paid him as good or better on the return; whereupon he stepped alittle back and took off his hat to me decorously."Enough plows I think," says he.  "I will be the offendedshentleman, for who effer heard of such suffeeciency as tell ashentlemans that is the king's officer he cannae speak Cot'sEnglish?  We have swords at our hurdles, and here is the King'sPark at hand.  Will ye walk first, or let me show ye the way?"I returned his bow, told him to go first, and followed him.  As hewent I heard him grumble to himself about COT'S ENGLISH and theKING'S COAT, so that I might have supposed him to be seriouslyoffended.  But his manner at the beginning of our interview wasthere to belie him.  It was manifest he had come prepared to fastena quarrel on me, right or wrong; manifest that I was taken in afresh contrivance of my enemies; and to me (conscious as I was ofmy deficiencies) manifest enough that I should be the one to fallin our encounter.As we came into that rough rocky desert of the King's Park I wastempted half-a-dozen times to take to my heels and run for it, soloath was I to show my ignorance in fencing, and so much averse todie or even to be wounded.  But I considered if their malice wentas far as this, it would likely stick at nothing; and that to fallby the sword, however ungracefully, was still an improvement on thegallows.  I considered besides that by the unguarded pertness of mywords and the quickness of my blow I had put myself quite out ofcourt; and that even if I ran, my adversary would probably pursueand catch me, which would add disgrace to my misfortune.  So that,taking all in all, I continued marching behind him, much as a manfollows the hangman, and certainly with no more hope.We went about the end of the long craigs, and came into theHunter's Bog.  Here, on a piece of fair turf, my adversary drew.There was nobody there to see us but some birds; and no resourcefor me but to follow his example, and stand on guard with the bestface I could display.  It seems it was not good enough for Mr.Dancansby, who spied some flaw in my manoeuvres, paused, lookedupon me sharply, and came off and on, and menaced me with his bladein the air.  As I had seen no such proceedings from Alan, and wasbesides a good deal affected with the proximity of death, I grewquite bewildered, stood helpless, and could have longed to runaway."Fat deil ails her?" cries the lieutenant.And suddenly engaging, he twitched the sword out of my grasp andsent it flying far among the rushes.Twice was this manoeuvre repeated; and the third time when Ibrought back my humiliated weapon, I found he had returned his ownto the scabbard, and stood awaiting me with a face of some anger,and his hands clasped under his skirt."Pe tamned if I touch you!" he cried, and asked me bitterly whatright I had to stand up before "shentlemans" when I did not knowthe back of a sword from the front of it.I answered that was the fault of my upbringing; and would he do methe justice to say I had given him all the satisfaction it wasunfortunately in my power to offer, and had stood up like a man?"And that is the truth," said he.  "I am fery prave myself, andpold as a lions.  But to stand up there--and you ken naething offence!--the way that you did, I declare it was peyond me.  And I amsorry for the plow; though I declare I pelief your own was theelder brother, and my heid still sings with it.  And I declare if Ihad kent what way it wass, I would not put a hand to such a pieceof pusiness.""That is handsomely said," I replied, "and I am sure you will notstand up a second time to be the actor for my private enemies.""Indeed, no, Palfour," said he; "and I think I was used extremelysuffeeciently myself to be set up to fecht with an auld wife, orall the same as a bairn whateffer!  And I will tell the Master so,and fecht him, by Cot, himself!""And if you knew the nature of Mr. Simon's quarrel with me," saidI, "you would be yet the more affronted to be mingled up with suchaffairs."He swore he could well believe it; that all the Lovats were made ofthe same meal and the devil was the miller that ground that; thensuddenly shaking me by the hand, he vowed I was a pretty enoughfellow after all, that it was a thousand pities I had beenneglected, and that if he could find the time, he would give an eyehimself to have me educated."You can do me a better service than even what you propose," saidI; and when he had asked its nature--"Come with me to the house ofone of my enemies, and testify how I have carried myself this day,"I told him.  "That will be the true service.  For though he hassent me a gallant adversary for the first, the thought in Mr.Simon's mind is merely murder.  There will be a second and then athird; and by what you have seen of my cleverness with the coldsteel, you can judge for yourself what is like to be the upshot.""And I would not like it myself, if I was no more of a man thanwhat you wass!" he cried.  "But I will do you right, Palfour.  Leadon!"If I had walked slowly on the way into that accursed park my heelswere light enough on the way out.  They kept time to a very goodold air, that is as ancient as the Bible, and the words of it are:"SURELY THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH IS PASSED."  I mind that I wasextremely thirsty, and had a drink at Saint Margaret's well on theroad down, and the sweetness of that water passed belief.  We wentthrough the sanctuary, up the Canongate, in by the Netherbow, andstraight to Prestongrange's door, talking as we came and arrangingthe details of our affair.  The footman owned his master was athome, but declared him engaged with other gentlemen on very privatebusiness, and his door forbidden."My business is but for three minutes, and it cannot wait," said I."You may say it is by no means private, and I shall be even glad tohave some witnesses."As the man departed unwillingly enough upon this errand, we made sobold as to follow him to the ante-chamber, whence I could hear fora while the murmuring of several voices in the room within.  Thetruth is, they were three at the one table--Prestongrange, SimonFraser, and Mr. Erskine, Sheriff of Perth; and as they were met inconsultation on the very business of the Appin murder, they were alittle disturbed at my appearance, but decided to receive me."Well, well, Mr. Balfour, and what brings you here again? and whois this you bring with you?" says Prestongrange.As for Fraser, he looked before him on the table."He is here to bear a little testimony in my favour, my lord, whichI think it very needful you should hear," said I, and turned toDuncansby."I have only to say this," said the lieutenant, "that I stood upthis day with Palfour in the Hunter's Pog, which I am now ferysorry for, and he behaved himself as pretty as a shentlemans couldask it.  And I have creat respects for Palfour," he added."I thank you for your honest expressions," said I.Whereupon Duncansby made his bow to the company, and left thechamber, as we had agreed upon before."What have I to do with this?" says Prestongrange."I will tell your lordship in two words," said I.  "I have broughtthis gentleman, a King's officer, to do me so much justice.  Now Ithink my character in covered, and until a certain date, which yourlordship can very well supply, it will be quite in vain to despatchagainst me any more officers.  I will not consent to fight my waythrough the garrison of the castle."The veins swelled on Prestongrange's brow, and he regarded me withfury."I think the devil uncoupled this dog of a lad between my legs!" hecried; and then, turning fiercely on his neighbour, "This is someof your work, Simon," he said.  "I spy your hand in the business,and, let me tell you, I resent it.  It is disloyal, when we areagreed upon one expedient, to follow another in the dark.  You aredisloyal to me.  What! you let me send this lad to the place withmy very daughters!  And because I let drop a word to you..... Fy,sir, keep your dishonours to yourself!"Simon was deadly pale.  "I will be a kick-ball between you and theDuke no longer," he exclaimed.  "Either come to an agreement, orcome to a differ, and have it out among yourselves.  But I will nolonger fetch and carry, and get your contrary instructions, and beblamed by both.  For if I were to tell you what I think of all yourHanover business it would make your head sing."But Sheriff Erskine had preserved his temper, and now intervenedsmoothly.  "And in the meantime," says he, "I think we should tellMr. Balfour that his character for valour is quite established.  Hemay sleep in peace.  Until the date he was so good as to refer toit shall be put to the proof no more."His coolness brought the others to their prudence; and they madehaste, with a somewhat distracted civility, to pack me from thehouse.CHAPTER IX--THE HEATHER ON FIREWhen I left Prestongrange that afternoon I was for the first timeangry.  The Advocate had made a mock of me.  He had pretended mytestimony was to be received and myself respected; and in that veryhour, not only was Simon practising against my life by the hands ofthe Highland soldier, but (as appeared from his own language)Prestongrange himself had some design in operation.  I counted myenemies; Prestongrange with all the King's authority behind him;and the Duke with the power of the West Highlands; and the Lovatinterest by their side to help them with so great a force in thenorth, and the whole clan of old Jacobite spies and traffickers.And when I remembered James More, and the red head of Neil the sonof Duncan, I thought there was perhaps a fourth in the confederacy,and what remained of Rob Roy's old desperate sept of caterans wouldbe banded against me with the others.  One thing was requisite--some strong friend or wise adviser.  The country must be full ofsuch, both able and eager to support me, or Lovat and the Duke andPrestongrange had not been nosing for expedients; and it made merage to think that I might brush against my champions in the streetand be no wiser.And just then (like an answer) a gentleman brushed against me goingby, gave me a meaning look, and turned into a close.  I knew himwith the tail of my eye--it was Stewart the Writer; and, blessingmy good fortune, turned in to follow him.  As soon as I had enteredthe close I saw him standing in the mouth of a stair, where he mademe a signal and immediately vanished.  Seven storeys up, there hewas again in a house door, the which he looked behind us after wehad entered.  The house was quite dismantled, with not a stick offurniture; indeed, it was one of which Stewart had the letting inhis hands."We'll have to sit upon the floor," said he; "but we're safe herefor the time being, and I've been wearying to see ye, Mr. Balfour.""How's it with Alan?" I asked."Brawly," said he.  "Andie picks him up at Gillane sands to-morrow,Wednesday.  He was keen to say good-bye to ye, but the way thatthings were going, I was feared the pair of ye was maybe bestapart.  And that brings me to the essential:  how does yourbusiness speed?""Why," said I, "I was told only this morning that my testimony wasaccepted, and I was to travel to Inverary with the Advocate, noless.""Hout awa!" cried Stewart.  "I'll never believe that.""I have maybe a suspicion of my own," says I, "but I would likefine to hear your reasons.""Well, I tell ye fairly, I'm horn-mad," cries Stewart.  "If my onehand could pull their Government down I would pluck it like arotten apple.  I'm doer for Appin and for James of the Glens; and,of course, it's my duty to defend my kinsman for his life.  Hearhow it goes with me, and I'll leave the judgment of it to yourself.The first thing they have to do is to get rid of Alan.  They cannaebring in James as art and part until they've brought in Alan firstas principal; that's sound law:  they could never put the cartbefore the horse.""And how are they to bring in Alan till they can catch him?" saysI."Ah, but there is a way to evite that arrestment," said he.  "Soundlaw, too.  It would be a bonny thing if, by the escape of one ill-doer another was to go scatheless, and the remeid is to summon theprincipal and put him to outlawry for the non-compearance.  Nowthere's four places where a person can be summoned:  at hisdwelling-house; at a place where he has resided forty days; at thehead burgh of the shire where he ordinarily resorts; or lastly (ifthere be ground to think him forth of Scotland) AT THE CROSS OFEDINBURGH, AND THE PIER AND SHORE OF LEITH, FOR SIXTY DAYS.  Thepurpose of which last provision is evident upon its face:  beingthat outgoing ships may have time to carry news of the transaction,and the summonsing be something other than a form.  Now take thecase of Alan.  He has no dwelling-house that ever I could hear of;I would be obliged if anyone would show me where he has lived fortydays together since the '45; there is no shire where he resortswhether ordinarily or extraordinarily; if he has a domicile at all,which I misdoubt, it must be with his regiment in France; and if heis not yet forth of Scotland (as we happen to know and they happento guess) it must be evident to the most dull it's what he's aimingfor.  Where, then, and what way should he be summoned?  I ask it atyourself, a layman.""You have given the very words," said I.  "Here at the cross, andat the pier and shore of Leith, for sixty days.""Ye're a sounder Scots lawyer than Prestongrange, then!" cries theWriter.  "He has had Alan summoned once; that was on the twenty-fifth, the day that we first met.  Once, and done with it.  Andwhere?  Where, but at the cross of Inverary, the head burgh of theCampbells?  A word in your ear, Mr. Balfour--they're not seekingAlan.""What do you mean?" I cried.  "Not seeking him?""By the best that I can make of it," said he.  "Not wanting to findhim, in my poor thought.  They think perhaps he might set up a fairdefence, upon the back of which James, the man they're reallyafter, might climb out.  This is not a case, ye see, it's aconspiracy.""Yet I can tell you Prestongrange asked after Alan keenly," said I;"though, when I come to think of it, he was something of theeasiest put by.""See that!" says he.  "But there!  I may be right or wrong, that'sguesswork at the best, and let me get to my facts again.  It comesto my ears that James and the witnesses--the witnesses, Mr.Balfour!--lay in close dungeons, and shackled forbye, in themilitary prison at Fort William; none allowed in to them, nor theyto write.  The witnesses, Mr. Balfour; heard ye ever the match ofthat?  I assure ye, no old, crooked Stewart of the gang ever out-faced the law more impudently.  It's clean in the two eyes of theAct of Parliament of 1700, anent wrongous imprisonment.  No soonerdid I get the news than I petitioned the Lord Justice Clerk.  Ihave his word to-day.  There's law for ye! here's justice!"He put a paper in my hand, that same mealy-mouthed, false-facedpaper that was printed since in the pamphlet "by a bystander," forbehoof (as the title says) of James's "poor widow and fivechildren.""See," said Stewart, "he couldn't dare to refuse me access to myclient, so he RECOMMENDS THE COMMANDING OFFICER TO LET ME IN.Recommends!--the Lord Justice Clerk of Scotland recommends.  Is notthe purpose of such language plain?  They hope the officer may beso dull, or so very much the reverse, as to refuse therecommendation.  I would have to make the journey back againbetwixt here and Fort William.  Then would follow a fresh delaytill I got fresh authority, and they had disavowed the officer--military man, notoriously ignorant of the law, and that--I ken thecant of it.  Then the journey a third time; and there we should beon the immediate heels of the trial before I had received my firstinstruction.  Am I not right to call this a conspiracy?""It will bear that colour," said I."And I'll go on to prove it you outright," said he.  "They have theright to hold James in prison, yet they cannot deny me to visithim.  They have no right to hold the witnesses; but am I to get asight of them, that should be as free as the Lord Justice Clerkhimself!  See--read:  FOR THE REST, REFUSES TO GIVE ANY ORDERS TOKEEPERS OF PRISONS WHO ARE NOT ACCUSED AS HAVING DONE ANYTHINGCONTRARY TO THE DUTIES OF THEIR OFFICE.  Anything contrary!  Sirs!And the Act of seventeen hunner?  Mr. Balfour, this makes my heartto burst; the heather is on fire inside my wame.""And the plain English of that phrase," said I, "is that thewitnesses are still to lie in prison and you are not to see them?""And I am not to see them until Inverary, when the court is set!"cries he, "and then to hear Prestongrange upon THE ANXIOUSRESPONSIBILITIES OF HIS OFFICE AND THE GREAT FACILITIES AFFORDEDTHE DEFENCE!  But I'll begowk them there, Mr. David.  I have a planto waylay the witnesses upon the road, and see if I cannae get I alittle harle of justice out of the MILITARY MAN NOTORIOUSLYIGNORANT OF THE LAW that shall command the party."It was actually so--it was actually on the wayside near Tynedrum,and by the connivance of a soldier officer, that Mr. Stewart firstsaw the witnesses upon the case."There is nothing that would surprise me in this business," Iremarked."I'll surprise you ere I'm done!" cries he.  "Do ye see this?"--producing a print still wet from the press.  "This is the libel:see, there's Prestongrange's name to the list of witnesses, and Ifind no word of any Balfour.  But here is not the question.  Who doye think paid for the printing of this paper?""I suppose it would likely be King George," said I."But it happens it was me!" he cried.  "Not but it was printed byand for themselves, for the Grants and the Erskines, and yon thiefof the black midnight, Simon Fraser.  But could _I_ win to get acopy!  No!  I was to go blindfold to my defence; I was to hear thecharges for the first time in court alongst the jury.""Is not this against the law?" I asked"I cannot say so much," he replied.  "It was a favour so naturaland so constantly rendered (till this nonesuch business) that thelaw has never looked to it.  And now admire the hand of Providence!A stranger is in Fleming's printing house, spies a proof on thefloor, picks it up, and carries it to me.  Of all things, it wasjust this libel.  Whereupon I had it set again--printed at theexpense of the defence:  sumptibus moesti rei; heard ever man thelike of it?--and here it is for anybody, the muckle secret out--allmay see it now.  But how do you think I would enjoy this, that hasthe life of my kinsman on my conscience?""Troth, I think you would enjoy it ill," said I."And now you see how it is," he concluded, "and why, when you tellme your evidence is to be let in, I laugh aloud in your face."It was now my turn.  I laid before him in brief Mr. Simon's threatsand offers, and the whole incident of the bravo, with thesubsequent scene at Prestongrange's.  Of my first talk, accordingto promise, I said nothing, nor indeed was it necessary.  All thetime I was talking Stewart nodded his head like a mechanicalfigure; and no sooner had my voice ceased, than he opened his mouthand gave me his opinion in two words, dwelling strong on both ofthem."Disappear yourself," said he."I do not take you," said I."Then I'll carry you there," said he.  "By my view of it you're todisappear whatever.  O, that's outside debate.  The Advocate, whois not without some spunks of a remainder decency, has wrung yourlife-safe out of Simon and the Duke.  He has refused to put you onyour trial, and refused to have you killed; and there is the clueto their ill words together, for Simon and the Duke can keep faithwith neither friend nor enemy.  Ye're not to be tried then, andye're not to be murdered; but I'm in bitter error if ye're not tobe kidnapped and carried away like the Lady Grange.  Bet me what yeplease--there was their EXPEDIENT!""You make me think," said I, and told him of the whistle and thered-headed retainer, Neil."Wherever James More is there's one big rogue, never be deceived onthat," said he.  "His father was none so ill a man, though akenning on the wrong side of the law, and no friend to my family,that I should waste my breath to be defending him!  But as forJames he's a brock and a blagyard.  I like the appearance of thisred-headed Neil as little as yourself.  It looks uncanny:  fiegh!it smells bad.  It was old Lovat that managed the Lady Grangeaffair; if young Lovat is to handle yours, it'll be all in thefamily.  What's James More in prison for?  The same offence:abduction.  His men have had practice in the business.  He'll be tolend them to be Simon's instruments; and the next thing we'll behearing, James will have made his peace, or else he'll haveescaped; and you'll be in Benbecula or Applecross.""Ye make a strong case," I admitted."And what I want," he resumed, "is that you should disappearyourself ere they can get their hands upon ye.  Lie quiet untiljust before the trial, and spring upon them at the last of it whenthey'll be looking for you least.  This is always supposing Mr.Balfour, that your evidence is worth so very great a measure ofboth risk and fash.""I will tell you one thing," said I.  "I saw the murderer and itwas not Alan.""Then, by God, my cousin's saved!" cried Stewart.  "You have hislife upon your tongue; and there's neither time, risk, nor money tobe spared to bring you to the trial."  He emptied his pockets onthe floor.  "Here is all that I have by me," he went on, "Take it,ye'll want it ere ye're through.  Go straight down this close,there's a way out by there to the Lang Dykes, and by my will of it!see no more of Edinburgh till the clash is over.""Where am I to go, then?" I inquired."And I wish that I could tell ye!" says he, "but all the placesthat I could send ye to, would be just the places they would seek.No, ye must fend for yourself, and God be your guiding!  Five daysbefore the trial, September the sixteen, get word to me at the KingArms in Stirling; and if ye've managed for yourself as long asthat, I'll see that ye reach Inverary.""One thing more," said I.  "Can I no see Alan?"He seemed boggled.  "Hech, I would rather you wouldnae," said he."But I can never deny that Alan is extremely keen of it, and is tolie this night by Silvermills on purpose.  If you're sure thatyou're not followed, Mr. Balfour--but make sure of that--lie in agood place and watch your road for a clear hour before ye risk it.It would be a dreadful business if both you and him was tomiscarry!"CHAPTER X--THE RED-HEADED MANIt was about half-past three when I came forth on the Lang Dykes.Dean was where I wanted to go.  Since Catriona dwelled there, andher kinsfolk the Glengyle Macgregors appeared almost certainly tobe employed against me, it was just one of the few places I shouldhave kept away from; and being a very young man, and beginning tobe very much in love, I turned my face in that direction withoutpause.  As a slave to my conscience and common sense, however, Itook a measure of precaution.  Coming over the crown of a bit of arise in the road, I clapped down suddenly among the barley and laywaiting.  After a while, a man went by that looked to be aHighlandman, but I had never seen him till that hour.  Presentlyafter came Neil of the red head.  The next to go past was amiller's cart, and after that nothing but manifest country people.Here was enough to have turned the most foolhardy from his purpose,but my inclination ran too strong the other way.  I argued it outthat if Neil was on that road, it was the right road to find himin, leading direct to his chief's daughter; as for the otherHighlandman, if I was to be startled off by every Highlandman Isaw, I would scarce reach anywhere.  And having quite satisfiedmyself with this disingenuous debate, I made the better speed ofit, and came a little after four to Mrs. Drumond-Ogilvy's.Both ladies were within the house; and upon my perceiving themtogether by the open door, I plucked off my hat and said, "Here wasa lad come seeking saxpence," which I thought might please thedowager.Catriona ran out to greet me heartily, and, to my surprise, the oldlady seemed scarce less forward than herself.  I learned longafterwards that she had despatched a horseman by daylight toRankeillor at the Queensferry, whom she knew to be the doer forShaws, and had then in her pocket a letter from that good friend ofmine, presenting, in the most favourable view, my character andprospects.  But had I read it I could scarce have seen more clearin her designs.  Maybe I was COUNTRYFEED; at least, I was not somuch so as she thought; and it was even to my homespun wits, thatshe was bent to hammer up a match between her cousin and abeardless boy that was something of a laird in Lothian."Saxpence had better take his broth with us, Catrine," says she."Run and tell the lasses."And for the little while we were alone was at a good deal of painsto flatter me; always cleverly, always with the appearance of abanter, still calling me Saxpence, but with such a turn that shouldrather uplift me in my own opinion.  When Catriona returned, thedesign became if possible more obvious; and she showed off thegirl's advantages like a horse-couper with a horse.  My face flamedthat she should think me so obtuse.  Now I would fancy the girl wasbeing innocently made a show of, and then I could have beaten theold carline wife with a cudgel; and now, that perhaps these two hadset their heads together to entrap me, and at that I sat andgloomed betwixt them like the very image of ill-will.  At last thematchmaker had a better device, which was to leave the pair of usalone.  When my suspicions are anyway roused it is sometimes alittle the wrong side of easy to allay them.  But though I knewwhat breed she was of, and that was a breed of thieves, I couldnever look in Catriona's face and disbelieve her."I must not ask?" says she, eagerly, the same moment we were leftalone."Ah, but to-day I can talk with a free conscience," I replied.  "Iam lightened of my pledge, and indeed (after what has come and gonesince morning) I would not have renewed it were it asked.""Tell me," she said.  "My cousin will not be so long."So I told her the tale of the lieutenant from the first step to thelast of it, making it as mirthful as I could, and, indeed, therewas matter of mirth in that absurdity."And I think you will be as little fitted for the rudas men as forthe pretty ladies, after all!" says she, when I had done.  "Butwhat was your father that he could not learn you to draw the sword!It is most ungentle; I have not heard the match of that in anyone.""It is most misconvenient at least," said I; "and I think my father(honest man!) must have been wool-gathering to learn me Latin inthe place of it.  But you see I do the best I can, and just standup like Lot's wife and let them hammer at me.""Do you know what makes me smile?" said she.  "Well, it is this.  Iam made this way, that I should have been a man child.  In my ownthoughts it is so I am always; and I go on telling myself aboutthis thing that is to befall and that.  Then it comes to the placeof the fighting, and it comes over me that I am only a girl at allevents, and cannot hold a sword or give one good blow; and then Ihave to twist my story round about, so that the fighting is tostop, and yet me have the best of it, just like you and thelieutenant; and I am the boy that makes the fine speeches allthrough, like Mr. David Balfour.""You are a bloodthirsty maid," said I."Well, I know it is good to sew and spin, and to make samplers,"she said, "but if you were to do nothing else in the great world, Ithink you will say yourself it is a driech business; and it is notthat I want to kill, I think.  Did ever you kill anyone?""That I have, as it chances.  Two, no less, and me still a lad thatshould be at the college," said I.  "But yet, in the look-back, Itake no shame for it.""But how did you feel, then--after it?" she asked.'"Deed, I sat down and grat like a bairn," said I."I know that, too," she cried.  "I feel where these tears shouldcome from.  And at any rate, I would not wish to kill, only to beCatherine Douglas that put her arm through the staples of the bolt,where it was broken.  That is my chief hero.  Would you not love todie so--for your king?" she asked."Troth," said I, "my affection for my king, God bless the puggyface of him, is under more control; and I thought I saw death sonear to me this day already, that I am rather taken up with thenotion of living.""Right," she said, "the right mind of a man!  Only you must learnarms; I would not like to have a friend that cannot strike.  But itwill not have been with the sword that you killed these two?""Indeed, no," said I, "but with a pair of pistols.  And a fortunatething it was the men were so near-hand to me, for I am about asclever with the pistols as I am with the sword."So then she drew from me the story of our battle in the brig, whichI had omitted in my first account of my affairs."Yes," said she, "you are brave.  And your friend, I admire andlove him.""Well, and I think anyone would!" said I.  "He has his faults likeother folk; but he is brave and staunch and kind, God bless him!That will be a strange day when I forget Alan."  And the thought ofhim, and that it was within my choice to speak with him that night,had almost overcome me."And where will my head be gone that I have not told my news!" shecried, and spoke of a letter from her father, bearing that shemight visit him to-morrow in the castle whither he was nowtransferred, and that his affairs were mending.  "You do not liketo hear it," said she.  "Will you judge my father and not knowhim?""I am a thousand miles from judging," I replied.  "And I give youmy word I do rejoice to know your heart is lightened.  If my facefell at all, as I suppose it must, you will allow this is rather anill day for compositions, and the people in power extremely illpersons to be compounding with.  I have Simon Fraser extremelyheavy on my stomach still.""Ah!" she cried, "you will not be evening these two; and you shouldbear in mind that Prestongrange and James More, my father, are ofthe one blood.""I never heard tell of that," said I."It is rather singular how little you are acquainted with," saidshe.  "One part may call themselves Grant, and one Macgregor, butthey are still of the same clan.  They are all the sons of Alpin,from whom, I think, our country has its name.""What country is that?" I asked."My country and yours," said she"This is my day for discovering I think," said I, "for I alwaysthought the name of it was Scotland.""Scotland is the name of what you call Ireland," she replied.  "Butthe old ancient true name of this place that we have our foot-soleson, and that our bones are made of, will be Alban.  It was Albanthey called it when our forefathers will be fighting for it againstRome and Alexander; and it is called so still in your own tonguethat you forget.""Troth," said I, "and that I never learned!"  For I lacked heart totake her up about the Macedonian."But your fathers and mothers talked it, one generation withanother," said she.  "And it was sung about the cradles before youor me were ever dreamed of; and your name remembers it still.  Ah,if you could talk that language you would find me another girl.The heart speaks in that tongue."I had a meal with the two ladies, all very good, served in fine oldplate, and the wine excellent, for it seems that Mrs. Ogilvy wasrich.  Our talk, too, was pleasant enough; but as soon as I saw thesun decline sharply and the shadows to run out long, I rose to takemy leave.  For my mind was now made up to say farewell to Alan; andit was needful I should see the trysting wood, and reconnoitre it,by daylight.  Catriona came with me as far as to the garden gate."It is long till I see you now?" she asked."It is beyond my judging," I replied.  "It will be long, it may benever.""It may be so," said she.  "And you are sorry?"I bowed my head, looking upon her."So am I, at all events," said she.  "I have seen you but a smalltime, but I put you very high.  You are true, you are brave; intime I think you will be more of a man yet.  I will be proud tohear of that.  If you should speed worse, if it will come to fallas we are afraid--O well! think you have the one friend.  Longafter you are dead and me an old wife, I will be telling the bairnsabout David Balfour, and my tears running.  I will be telling howwe parted, and what I said to you, and did to you.  GOD GO WITH YOUAND GUIDE YOU, PRAYS YOUR LITTLE FRIEND:  so I said--I will betelling them--and here is what I did."She took up my hand and kissed it.  This so surprised my spiritsthat I cried out like one hurt.  The colour came strong in herface, and she looked at me and nodded."O yes, Mr. David," said she, "that is what I think of you.  Thehead goes with the lips."I could read in her face high spirit, and a chivalry like a bravechild's; not anything besides.  She kissed my hand, as she hadkissed Prince Charlie's, with a higher passion than the common kindof clay has any sense of.  Nothing before had taught me how deep Iwas her lover, nor how far I had yet to climb to make her think ofme in such a character.  Yet I could tell myself I had advancedsome way, and that her heart had beat and her blood flowed atthoughts of me.After that honour she had done me I could offer no more trivialcivility.  It was even hard for me to speak; a certain lifting inher voice had knocked directly at the door of my own tears."I praise God for your kindness, dear," said I.  "Farewell, mylittle friend!" giving her that name which she had given toherself; with which I bowed and left her.My way was down the glen of the Leith River, towards Stockbridgeand Silvermills.  A path led in the foot of it, the water bickeredand sang in the midst; the sunbeams overhead struck out of the westamong long shadows and (as the valley turned) made like a new sceneand a new world of it at every corner.  With Catriona behind andAlan before me, I was like one lifted up.  The place besides, andthe hour, and the talking of the water, infinitely pleased me; andI lingered in my steps and looked before and behind me as I went.This was the cause, under Providence, that I spied a little in myrear a red head among some bushes.Anger sprang in my heart, and I turned straight about and walked ata stiff pace to where I came from.  The path lay close by thebushes where I had remarked the head.  The cover came to thewayside, and as I passed I was all strung up to meet and to resistan onfall.  No such thing befell, I went by unmeddled with; and atthat fear increased upon me.  It was still day indeed, but theplace exceeding solitary.  If my haunters had let slip that fairoccasion I could but judge they aimed at something more than DavidBalfour.  The lives of Alan and James weighed upon my spirit withthe weight of two grown bullocks.Catriona was yet in the garden walking by herself."Catriona," said I, "you see me back again.""With a changed face," said she."I carry two men's lives besides my own," said I.  "It would be asin and shame not to walk carefully.  I was doubtful whether I didright to come here.  I would like it ill, if it was by that meanswe were brought to harm.""I could tell you one that would be liking it less, and will likelittle enough to hear you talking at this very same time," shecried.  "What have I done, at all events?""O, you I you are not alone," I replied.  "But since I went off Ihave been dogged again, and I can give you the name of him thatfollows me.  It is Neil, son of Duncan, your man or your father's.""To be sure you are mistaken there," she said, with a white face."Neil is in Edinburgh on errands from my father.""It is what I fear," said I, "the last of it.  But for his being inEdinburgh I think I can show you another of that.  For sure youhave some signal, a signal of need, such as would bring him to yourhelp, if he was anywhere within the reach of ears and legs?""Why, how will you know that?" says she."By means of a magical talisman God gave to me when I was born, andthe name they call it by is Common-sense," said I.  "Oblige me sofar as make your signal, and I will show you the red head of Neil."No doubt but I spoke bitter and sharp.  My heart was bitter.  Iblamed myself and the girl and hated both of us:  her for the vilecrew that she was come of, myself for my wanton folly to have stuckmy head in such a byke of wasps.Catriona set her fingers to her lips and whistled once, with anexceeding clear, strong, mounting note, as full as a ploughman's.A while we stood silent; and I was about to ask her to repeat thesame, when I heard the sound of some one bursting through thebushes below on the braeside.  I pointed in that direction with asmile, and presently Neil leaped into the garden.  His eyes burned,and he had a black knife (as they call it on the Highland side)naked in his hand; but, seeing me beside his mistress, stood like aman struck."He has come to your call," said I; "judge how near he was toEdinburgh, or what was the nature of your father's errands.  Askhimself.  If I am to lose my life, or the lives of those that hangby me, through the means of your clan, let me go where I have to gowith my eyes open."She addressed him tremulously in the Gaelic.  Remembering Alan'sanxious civility in that particular, I could have laughed out loudfor bitterness; here, sure, in the midst of these suspicions, wasthe hour she should have stuck by English.Twice or thrice they spoke together, and I could make out that Neil(for all his obsequiousness) was an angry man.Then she turned to me.  "He swears it is not," she said."Catriona," said I, "do you believe the man yourself?"She made a gesture like wringing the hands."How will I can know?" she cried.But I must find some means to know," said I.  "I cannot continue togo dovering round in the black night with two men's lives at mygirdle!  Catriona, try to put yourself in my place, as I vow to GodI try hard to put myself in yours.  This is no kind of talk thatshould ever have fallen between me and you; no kind of talk; myheart is sick with it.  See, keep him here till two of the morning,and I care not.  Try him with that."They spoke together once more in the Gaelic."He says he has James More my father's errand," said she.  She waswhiter than ever, and her voice faltered as she said it."It is pretty plain now," said I, "and may God forgive the wicked!"She said never anything to that, but continued gazing at me withthe same white face."This is a fine business," said I again.  "Am I to fall, then, andthose two along with me?""O, what am I to do?" she cried.  "Could I go against my father'sorders, him in prison, in the danger of his life!""But perhaps we go too fast," said I.  "This may be a lie too.  Hemay have no right orders; all may be contrived by Simon, and yourfather knowing nothing."She burst out weeping between the pair of us; and my heart smote mehard, for I thought this girl was in a dreadful situation."Here," said I, "keep him but the one hour; and I'll chance it, andmay God bless you."She put out her hand to me, "I will he needing one good word," shesobbed."The full hour, then?" said I, keeping her hand in mine.  "Threelives of it, my lass!""The full hour!" she said, and cried aloud on her Redeemer toforgive her.I thought it no fit place for me, and fled.CHAPTER XI--THE WOOD BY SILVERMILLSI lost no time, but down through the valley and by Stockbridge andSilvermills as hard as I could stave.  It was Alan's tryst to beevery night between twelve and two "in a bit scrog of wood by eastof Silvermills and by south the south mill-lade."  This I foundeasy enough, where it grew on a steep brae, with the mill-ladeflowing swift and deep along the foot of it; and here I began towalk slower and to reflect more reasonably on my employment.  I sawI had made but a fool's bargain with Catriona.  It was not to besupposed that Neil was sent alone upon his errand, but perhaps hewas the only man belonging to James More; in which case I shouldhave done all I could to hang Catriona's father, and nothing theleast material to help myself.  To tell the truth, I fanciedneither one of these ideas.  Suppose by holding back Neil, the girlshould have helped to hang her father, I thought she would neverforgive herself this side of time.  And suppose there were otherspursuing me that moment, what kind of a gift was I come bringing toAlan? and how would I like that?I was up with the west end of that wood when these twoconsiderations struck me like a cudgel.  My feet stopped ofthemselves and my heart along with them.  "What wild game is thisthat I have been playing?" thought I; and turned instantly upon myheels to go elsewhere.This brought my face to Silvermills; the path came past the villagewith a crook, but all plainly visible; and, Highland or Lowland,there was nobody stirring.  Here was my advantage, here was justsuch a conjuncture as Stewart had counselled me to profit by, and Iran by the side of the mill-lade, fetched about beyond the eastcorner of the wood, threaded through the midst of it, and returnedto the west selvage, whence I could again command the path, and yetbe myself unseen.  Again it was all empty, and my heart began torise.For more than an hour I sat close in the border of the trees, andno hare or eagle could have kept a more particular watch.  Whenthat hour began the sun was already set, but the sky still allgolden and the daylight clear; before the hour was done it hadfallen to be half mirk, the images and distances of things weremingled, and observation began to be difficult.  All that time nota foot of man had come east from Silvermills, and the few that hadgone west were honest countryfolk and their wives upon the road tobed.  If I were tracked by the most cunning spies in Europe, Ijudged it was beyond the course of nature they could have anyjealousy of where I was:  and going a little further home into thewood I lay down to wait for Alan.The strain of my attention had been great, for I had watched notthe path only, but every bush and field within my vision.  That wasnow at an end.  The moon, which was in her first quarter, glinted alittle in the wood; all round there was a stillness of the country;and as I lay there on my back, the next three or four hours, I hada fine occasion to review my conduct.Two things became plain to me first:  that I had no right to gothat day to Dean, and (having gone there) had now no right to belying where I was.  This (where Alan was to come) was just the onewood in all broad Scotland that was, by every proper feeling,closed against me; I admitted that, and yet stayed on, wondering atmyself.  I thought of the measure with which I had meted toCatriona that same night; how I had prated of the two lives Icarried, and had thus forced her to enjeopardy her father's; andhow I was here exposing them again, it seemed in wantonness.  Agood conscience is eight parts of courage.  No sooner had I lostconceit of my behaviour, than I seemed to stand disarmed amidst athrong of terrors.  Of a sudden I sat up.  How if I went now toPrestongrange, caught him (as I still easily might) before heslept, and made a full submission?  Who could blame me?  NotStewart the Writer; I had but to say that I was followed, despairedof getting clear, and so gave in.  Not Catriona:  here, too, I hadmy answer ready; that I could not bear she should expose herfather.  So, in a moment, I could lay all these troubles by, whichwere after all and truly none of mine; swim clear of the AppinMurder; get forth out of hand-stroke of all the Stewarts andCampbells, all the Whigs and Tories, in the land; and livehenceforth to my own mind, and be able to enjoy and to improve myfortunes, and devote some hours of my youth to courting Catriona,which would be surely a more suitable occupation than to hide andrun and be followed like a hunted thief, and begin over again thedreadful miseries of my escape with Alan.At first I thought no shame of this capitulation; I was only amazedI had not thought upon the thing and done it earlier; and began toinquire into the causes of the change.  These I traced to mylowness of spirits, that back to my late recklessness, and thatagain to the common, old, public, disconsidered sin of self-indulgence.  Instantly the text came in my head, "HOW CAN SATANCAST OUT SATAN?"  What? (I thought) I had, by self-indulgence; andthe following of pleasant paths, and the lure of a young maid, castmyself wholly out of conceit with my own character, and jeopardisedthe lives of James and Alan?  And I was to seek the way out by thesame road as I had entered in?  No; the hurt that had been causedby self-indulgence must be cured by self-denial; the flesh I hadpampered must be crucified.  I looked about me for that coursewhich I least liked to follow:  this was to leave the wood withoutwaiting to see Alan, and go forth again alone, in the dark and inthe midst of my perplexed and dangerous fortunes.I have been the more careful to narrate this passage of myreflections, because I think it is of some utility, and may serveas an example to young men.  But there is reason (they say) inplanting kale, and even in ethic and religion, room for commonsense.  It was already close on Alan's hour, and the moon was down.If I left (as I could not very decently whistle to my spies tofollow me) they might miss me in the dark and tack themselves toAlan by mistake.  If I stayed, I could at the least of it set myfriend upon his guard which might prove his mere salvation.  I hadadventured other peoples' safety in a course of self-indulgence; tohave endangered them again, and now on a mere design of penance,would have been scarce rational.  Accordingly, I had scarce risenfrom my place ere I sat down again, but already in a differentframe of spirits, and equally marvelling at my past weakness andrejoicing in my present composure.Presently after came a crackling in the thicket.  Putting my mouthnear down to the ground, I whistled a note or two, of Alan's air;an answer came in the like guarded tone, and soon we had knockedtogether in the dark."Is this you at last, Davie?" he whispered."Just myself," said I."God, man, but I've been wearying to see ye!" says he.  "I've hadthe longest kind of a time.  A' day, I've had my dwelling into theinside of a stack of hay, where I couldnae see the nebs of my tenfingers; and then two hours of it waiting here for you, and younever coming!  Dod, and ye're none too soon the way it is, with meto sail the morn!  The morn? what am I saying?--the day, I mean.""Ay, Alan, man, the day, sure enough," said I.  "It's past twelvenow, surely, and ye sail the day.  This'll be a long road you havebefore you.""We'll have a long crack of it first," said he."Well, indeed, and I have a good deal it will be telling you tohear," said I.And I told him what behooved, making rather a jumble of it, butclear enough when done.  He heard me out with very few questions,laughing here and there like a man delighted:  and the sound of hislaughing (above all there, in the dark, where neither one of uscould see the other) was extraordinary friendly to my heart."Ay, Davie, ye're a queer character," says he, when I had done:  "aqueer bitch after a', and I have no mind of meeting with the likeof ye.  As for your story, Prestongrange is a Whig like yoursel',so I'll say the less of him; and, dod! I believe he was the bestfriend ye had, if ye could only trust him.  But Simon Fraser andJames More are my ain kind of cattle, and I'll give them the namethat they deserve.  The muckle black deil was father to theFrasers, a'body kens that; and as for the Gregara, I never couldabye the reek of them since I could stotter on two feet.  Ibloodied the nose of one, I mind, when I was still so wambly on mylegs that I cowped upon the top of him.  A proud man was my fatherthat day, God rest him! and I think he had the cause.  I'll nevercan deny but what Robin was something of a piper," he added; "butas for James More, the deil guide him for me!""One thing we have to consider," said I.  "Was Charles Stewartright or wrong?  Is it only me they're after, or the pair of us?""And what's your ain opinion, you that's a man of so muchexperience?" said he."It passes me," said I."And me too," says Alan.  "Do ye think this lass would keep herword to ye?" he asked."I do that," said I."Well, there's nae telling," said he.  "And anyway, that's over anddone:  he'll be joined to the rest of them lang syne.""How many would ye think there would be of them?" I asked."That depends," said Alan.  "If it was only you, they would likelysend two-three lively, brisk young birkies, and if they thoughtthat I was to appear in the employ, I daresay ten or twelve," saidhe.It was no use, I gave a little crack of laughter."And I think your own two eyes will have seen me drive that number,or the double of it, nearer hand!" cries he."It matters the less," said I, "because I am well rid of them forthis time.""Nae doubt that's your opinion," said he; "but I wouldnae be theleast surprised if they were hunkering this wood.  Ye see, Davidman; they'll be Hieland folk.  There'll be some Frasers, I'mthinking, and some of the Gregara; and I would never deny but whatthe both of them, and the Gregara in especial, were cleverexperienced persons.  A man kens little till he's driven a spreaghof neat cattle (say) ten miles through a throng lowland country andthe black soldiers maybe at his tail.  It's there that I learned agreat part of my penetration.  And ye need nae tell me:  it'sbetter than war; which is the next best, however, though generallyrather a bauchle of a business.  Now the Gregara have had grandpractice.""No doubt that's a branch of education that was left out with me,"said I."And I can see the marks of it upon ye constantly," said Alan."But that's the strange thing about you folk of the collegelearning:  ye're ignorat, and ye cannae see 't.  Wae's me for myGreek and Hebrew; but, man, I ken that I dinnae ken them--there'sthe differ of it.  Now, here's you.  Ye lie on your wame a bittiein the bield of this wood, and ye tell me that ye've cuist offthese Frasers and Macgregors.  Why?  BECAUSE I COULDNAE SEE THEM,says you.  Ye blockhead, that's their livelihood.""Take the worst of it," said I, "and what are we to do?""I am thinking of that same," said he.  "We might twine.  Itwouldnae be greatly to my taste; and forbye that, I see reasonsagainst it.  First, it's now unco dark, and it's just humanlypossible we might give them the clean slip.  If we keep together,we make but the ae line of it; if we gang separate, we make twae ofthem:  the more likelihood to stave in upon some of these gentry ofyours.  And then, second, if they keep the track of us, it may cometo a fecht for it yet, Davie; and then, I'll confess I would beblythe to have you at my oxter, and I think you would be none theworse of having me at yours.  So, by my way of it, we should creepout of this wood no further gone than just the inside of nextminute, and hold away east for Gillane, where I'm to find my ship.It'll be like old days while it lasts, Davie; and (come the time)we'll have to think what you should be doing.  I'm wae to leave yehere, wanting me.""Have with ye, then!" says I.  "Do ye gang back where you werestopping?""Deil a fear!" said Alan.  "They were good folks to me, but I thinkthey would be a good deal disappointed if they saw my bonny faceagain.  For (the way times go) I amnae just what ye could call aWalcome Guest.  Which makes me the keener for your company, Mr.David Balfour of the Shaws, and set ye up!  For, leave aside twacracks here in the wood with Charlie Stewart, I have scarce saidblack or white since the day we parted at Corstorphine."With which he rose from his place, and we began to move quietlyeastward through the wood.CHAPTER XII--ON THE MARCH AGAIN WITH ALANIt was likely between one and two; the moon (as I have said) wasdown; a strongish wind, carrying a heavy wrack of cloud, had set insuddenly from the west; and we began our movement in as black anight as ever a fugitive or a murderer wanted.  The whiteness ofthe path guided us into the sleeping town of Broughton, thencethrough Picardy, and beside my old acquaintance the gibbet of thetwo thieves.  A little beyond we made a useful beacon, which was alight in an upper window of Lochend.  Steering by this, but a gooddeal at random, and with some trampling of the harvest, andstumbling and falling down upon the banks, we made our way acrosscountry, and won forth at last upon the linky, boggy muirland thatthey call the Figgate Whins.  Here, under a bush of whin, we laydown the remainder of that night and slumbered.The day called us about five.  A beautiful morning it was, the highwesterly wind still blowing strong, but the clouds all blown awayto Europe.  Alan was already sitting up and smiling to himself.  Itwas my first sight of my friend since we were parted, and I lookedupon him with enjoyment.  He had still the same big great-coat onhis back; but (what was new) he had now a pair of knitted boot-hosedrawn above the knee.  Doubtless these were intended for disguise;but, as the day promised to be warm, he made a most unseasonablefigure."Well, Davie," said he, "is this no a bonny morning?  Here is a daythat looks the way that a day ought to.  This is a great change ofit from the belly of my haystack; and while you were theresottering and sleeping I have done a thing that maybe I do veryseldom.""And what was that?" said I."O, just said my prayers," said he."And where are my gentry, as ye call them?" I asked."Gude kens," says he; "and the short and the long of it is that wemust take our chance of them.  Up with your foot-soles, Davie!Forth, Fortune, once again of it!  And a bonny walk we are like tohave."So we went east by the beach of the sea, towards where the salt-pans were smoking in by the Esk mouth.  No doubt there was a by-ordinary bonny blink of morning sun on Arthur's Seat and the greenPentlands; and the pleasantness of the day appeared to set Alanamong nettles."I feel like a gomeral," says he, "to be leaving Scotland on a daylike this.  It sticks in my head; I would maybe like it better tostay here and hing.""Ay, but ye wouldnae, Alan," said I."No, but what France is a good place too," he explained; "but it'ssome way no the same.  It's brawer I believe, but it's no Scotland.I like it fine when I'm there, man; yet I kind of weary for Scotsdivots and the Scots peat-reek.""If that's all you have to complain of, Alan, it's no such greataffair," said I."And it sets me ill to be complaining, whatever," said he, "and mebut new out of yon deil's haystack.""And so you were unco weary of your haystack?" I asked."Weary's nae word for it," said he.  "I'm not just precisely a manthat's easily cast down; but I do better with caller air and thelift above my head.  I'm like the auld Black Douglas (wasnae't?)that likit better to hear the laverock sing than the mouse cheep.And yon place, ye see, Davie--whilk was a very suitable place tohide in, as I'm free to own--was pit mirk from dawn to gloaming.There were days (or nights, for how would I tell one from other?)that seemed to me as long as a long winter.""How did you know the hour to bide your tryst?" I asked."The goodman brought me my meat and a drop brandy, and a candle-dowp to eat it by, about eleeven," said he.  "So, when I hadswallowed a bit, it would he time to be getting to the wood.  ThereI lay and wearied for ye sore, Davie," says he, laying his hand onmy shoulder "and guessed when the two hours would be about by--unless Charlie Stewart would come and tell me on his watch--andthen back to the dooms haystack.  Na, it was a driech employ, andpraise the Lord that I have warstled through with it!""What did you do with yourself?" I asked."Faith," said he, "the best I could!  Whiles I played at theknucklebones.  I'm an extraordinar good hand at the knucklebones,but it's a poor piece of business playing with naebody to admireye.  And whiles I would make songs.""What were they about?" says I."O, about the deer and the heather," says he, "and about theancient old chiefs that are all by with it lang syne, and justabout what songs are about in general.  And then whiles I wouldmake believe I had a set of pipes and I was playing.  I played somegrand springs, and I thought I played them awful bonny; I vowwhiles that I could hear the squeal of them!  But the great affairis that it's done with."With that he carried me again to my adventures, which he heard allover again with more particularity, and extraordinary approval,swearing at intervals that I was "a queer character of a callant.""So ye were frich'ened of Sim Fraser?" he asked once."In troth was I!" cried I."So would I have been, Davie," said he.  "And that is indeed adriedful man.  But it is only proper to give the deil his due:  andI can tell you he is a most respectable person on the field ofwar.""Is he so brave?" I asked."Brave!" said he.  "He is as brave as my steel sword."The story of my duel set him beside himself."To think of that!" he cried.  "I showed ye the trick inCorrynakiegh too.  And three times--three times disarmed!  It's adisgrace upon my character that learned ye!  Here, stand up, outwith your airn; ye shall walk no step beyond this place upon theroad till ye can do yoursel' and me mair credit.""Alan," said I, "this is midsummer madness.  Here is no time forfencing lessons.""I cannae well say no to that," he admitted.  "But three times,man!  And you standing there like a straw bogle and rinning tofetch your ain sword like a doggie with a pocket-napkin!  David,this man Duncansby must be something altogether by-ordinar!  Hemaun be extraordinar skilly.  If I had the time, I would gangstraight back and try a turn at him mysel'.  The man must be aprovost.""You silly fellow," said I, "you forget it was just me.""Na," said he, "but three times!""When ye ken yourself that I am fair incompetent," I cried."Well, I never heard tell the equal of it," said he."I promise you the one thing, Alan," said I.  "The next time thatwe forgather, I'll be better learned.  You shall not continue tobear the disgrace of a friend that cannot strike.""Ay, the next time!" says he.  "And when will that be, I would liketo ken?""Well, Alan, I have had some thoughts of that, too," said I; "andmy plan is this.  It's my opinion to be called an advocate.""That's but a weary trade, Davie," says Alan, "and rather ablagyard one forby.  Ye would be better in a king's coat thanthat.""And no doubt that would be the way to have us meet," cried I."But as you'll be in King Lewie's coat, and I'll be in KingGeordie's, we'll have a dainty meeting of it.""There's some sense in that," he admitted"An advocate, then, it'll have to be," I continued, "and I think ita more suitable trade for a gentleman that was THREE TIMESdisarmed.  But the beauty of the thing is this:  that one of thebest colleges for that kind of learning--and the one where mykinsman, Pilrig, made his studies--is the college of Leyden inHolland.  Now, what say you, Alan?  Could not a cadet of RoyalEcossais get a furlough, slip over the marches, and call in upon aLeyden student?""Well, and I would think he could!" cried he.  "Ye see, I standwell in with my colonel, Count Drummond-Melfort; and, what's mairto the purpose I have a cousin of mine lieutenant-colonel in aregiment of the Scots-Dutch.  Naething could be mair proper thanwhat I would get a leave to see Lieutenant-Colonel Stewart ofHalkett's.  And Lord Melfort, who is a very scienteefic kind of aman, and writes books like Caesar, would be doubtless very pleasedto have the advantage of my observes.""Is Lord Meloort an author, then?" I asked, for much as Alanthought of soldiers, I thought more of the gentry that write books."The very same, Davie," said he.  "One would think a colonel wouldhave something better to attend to.  But what can I say that makesongs?""Well, then," said I, "it only remains you should give me anaddress to write you at in France; and as soon as I am got toLeyden I will send you mine.""The best will be to write me in the care of my chieftain," saidhe, "Charles Stewart, of Ardsheil, Esquire, at the town of Melons,in the Isle of France.  It might take long, or it might take short,but it would aye get to my hands at the last of it."We had a haddock to our breakfast in Musselburgh, where it amusedme vastly to hear Alan.  His great-coat and boot-hose wereextremely remarkable this warm morning, and perhaps some hint of anexplanation had been wise; but Alan went into that matter like abusiness, or I should rather say, like a diversion.  He engaged thegoodwife of the house with some compliments upon the rizzoring ofour haddocks; and the whole of the rest of our stay held her intalk about a cold he had taken on his stomach, gravely relating allmanner of symptoms and sufferings, and hearing with a vast show ofinterest all the old wives' remedies she could supply him with inreturn.We left Musselburgh before the first ninepenny coach was due fromEdinburgh for (as Alan said) that was a rencounter we might verywell avoid.  The wind although still high, was very mild, the sunshone strong, and Alan began to suffer in proportion.  FromPrestonpans he had me aside to the field of Gladsmuir, where heexerted himself a great deal more than needful to describe thestages of the battle.  Thence, at his old round pace, we travelledto Cockenzie.  Though they were building herring-busses there atMrs. Cadell's, it seemed a desert-like, back-going town, about halffull of ruined houses; but the ale-house was clean, and Alan, whowas now in a glowing heat, must indulge himself with a bottle ofale, and carry on to the new luckie with the old story of the coldupon his stomach, only now the symptoms were all different.I sat listening; and it came in my mind that I had scarce everheard him address three serious words to any woman, but he wasalways drolling and fleering and making a private mock of them, andyet brought to that business a remarkable degree of energy andinterest.  Something to this effect I remarked to him, when thegood-wife (as chanced) was called away."What do ye want?" says he.  "A man should aye put his best footforrit with the womankind; he should aye give them a bit of a storyto divert them, the poor lambs!  It's what ye should learn toattend to, David; ye should get the principles, it's like a trade.Now, if this had been a young lassie, or onyways bonnie, she wouldnever have heard tell of my stomach, Davie.  But aince they're tooold to be seeking joes, they a' set up to be apotecaries.  Why?What do I ken?  They'll be just the way God made them, I suppose.But I think a man would be a gomeral that didnae give his attentionto the same."And here, the luckie coming back, he turned from me as if withimpatience to renew their former conversation.  The lady hadbranched some while before from Alan's stomach to the case of agoodbrother of her own in Aberlady, whose last sickness and demiseshe was describing at extraordinary length.  Sometimes it wasmerely dull, sometimes both dull and awful, for she talked withunction.  The upshot was that I fell in a deep muse, looking forthof the window on the road, and scarce marking what I saw.Presently had any been looking they might have seen me to start."We pit a fomentation to his feet," the good-wife was saying, "anda het stane to his wame, and we gied him hyssop and water ofpennyroyal, and fine, clean balsam of sulphur for the hoast. . . ""Sir," says I, cutting very quietly in, "there's a friend of minegone by the house.""Is that e'en sae?" replies Alan, as though it were a thing ofsmall account.  And then, "Ye were saying, mem?" says he; and thewearyful wife went on.Presently, however, he paid her with a half-crown piece, and shemust go forth after the change."Was it him with the red head?" asked Alan."Ye have it," said I."What did I tell you in the wood?" he cried.  "And yet it's strangehe should be here too!  Was he his lane?""His lee-lane for what I could see," said I."Did he gang by?" he asked."Straight by," said I, "and looked neither to the right nor left.""And that's queerer yet," said Alan.  "It sticks in my mind, Davie,that we should be stirring.  But where to?--deil hae't!  This islike old days fairly," cries he."There is one big differ, though," said I, "that now we have moneyin our pockets.""And another big differ, Mr. Balfour," says he, "that now we havedogs at our tail.  They're on the scent; they're in full cry,David.  It's a bad business and be damned to it."  And he satthinking hard with a look of his that I knew well."I'm saying, Luckie," says he, when the goodwife returned, "have yea back road out of this change house?"She told him there was and where it led to."Then, sir," says he to me, "I think that will be the shortest roadfor us.  And here's good-bye to ye, my braw woman; and I'll noforget thon of the cinnamon water."We went out by way of the woman's kale yard, and up a lane amongfields.  Alan looked sharply to all sides, and seeing we were in alittle hollow place of the country, out of view of men, sat down."Now for a council of war, Davie," said he.  "But first of all, abit lesson to ye.  Suppose that I had been like you, what would yonold wife have minded of the pair of us!  Just that we had gone outby the back gate.  And what does she mind now?  A fine, canty,friendly, cracky man, that suffered with the stomach, poor body!and was real ta'en up about the goodbrother.  O man, David, try andlearn to have some kind of intelligence!""I'll try, Alan," said I."And now for him of the red head," says he; "was he gaun fast orslow?""Betwixt and between," said I."No kind of a hurry about the man?" he asked."Never a sign of it," said I."Nhm!" said Alan, "it looks queer.  We saw nothing of them thismorning on the Whins; he's passed us by, he doesnae seem to belooking, and yet here he is on our road!  Dod, Davie, I begin totake a notion.  I think it's no you they're seeking, I think it'sme; and I think they ken fine where they're gaun.""They ken?" I asked."I think Andie Scougal's sold me--him or his mate wha kent somepart of the affair--or else Charlie's clerk callant, which would bea pity too," says Alan; "and if you askit me for just my inwardprivate conviction, I think there'll be heads cracked on Gillanesands.""Alan," I cried, "if you're at all right there'll be folk there andto spare.  It'll be small service to crack heads.""It would aye be a satisfaction though," says Alan.  But bide abit; bide a bit; I'm thinking--and thanks to this bonny westlandwind, I believe I've still a chance of it.  It's this way, Davie.I'm no trysted with this man Scougal till the gloaming comes.BUT," says he, "IF I CAN GET A BIT OF A WIND OUT OF THE WEST I'LLBE THERE LONG OR THAT," he says, "AND LIE-TO FOR YE BEHIND THE ISLEOF FIDRA.  Now if your gentry kens the place, they ken the timeforbye.  Do ye see me coming, Davie? Thanks to Johnnie Cope andother red-coat gomerals, I should ken this country like the back ofmy hand; and if ye're ready for another bit run with Alan Breck,we'll can cast back inshore, and come to the seaside again byDirleton.  If the ship's there, we'll try and get on board of her.If she's no there, I'll just have to get back to my weary haystack.But either way of it, I think we will leave your gentry whistlingon their thumbs.""I believe there's some chance in it," said I.  "Have on with ye,Alan!"CHAPTER XIII--GILLANE SANDSI did not profit by Alan's pilotage as he had done by his marchingsunder General Cope; for I can scarce tell what way we went.  It ismy excuse that we travelled exceeding fast.  Some part we ran, sometrotted, and the rest walked at a vengeance of a pace.  Twice,while we were at top speed, we ran against country-folk; but thoughwe plumped into the first from round a corner, Alan was as ready asa loaded musket."Has ye seen my horse?" he gasped."Na, man, I haenae seen nae horse the day," replied the countryman.And Alan spared the time to explain to him that we were travelling"ride and tie"; that our charger had escaped, and it was feared hehad gone home to Linton.  Not only that, but he expended somebreath (of which he had not very much left) to curse his ownmisfortune and my stupidity which was said to be its cause."Them that cannae tell the truth," he observed to myself as we wenton again, "should be aye mindful to leave an honest, handy leebehind them.  If folk dinnae ken what ye're doing, Davie, they'reterrible taken up with it; but if they think they ken, they carenae mair for it than what I do for pease porridge."As we had first made inland, so our road came in the end to lievery near due north; the old Kirk of Aberlady for a landmark on theleft; on the right, the top of the Berwick Law; and it was thus westruck the shore again, not far from Dirleton.  From north Berwickwest to Gillane Ness there runs a string of four small islets,Craiglieth, the Lamb, Fidra, and Eyebrough, notable by theirdiversity of size and shape.  Fidra is the most particular, being astrange grey islet of two humps, made the more conspicuous by apiece of ruin; and I mind that (as we drew closer to it) by somedoor or window of these ruins the sea peeped through like a man'seye.  Under the lee of Fidra there is a good anchorage in westerlywinds, and there, from a far way off, we could see the Thistleriding.The shore in face of these islets is altogether waste.  Here is nodwelling of man, and scarce any passage, or at most of vagabondchildren running at their play.  Gillane is a small place on thefar side of the Ness, the folk of Dirleton go to their business inthe inland fields, and those of North Berwick straight to the sea-fishing from their haven; so that few parts of the coast arelonelier.  But I mind, as we crawled upon our bellies into thatmultiplicity of heights and hollows, keeping a bright eye upon allsides, and our hearts hammering at our ribs, there was such ashining of the sun and the sea, such a stir of the wind in the bentgrass, and such a bustle of down-popping rabbits and up-flyinggulls, that the desert seemed to me, like a place alive.  No doubtit was in all ways well chosen for a secret embarcation, if thesecret had been kept; and even now that it was out, and the placewatched, we were able to creep unperceived to the front of thesandhills, where they look down immediately on the beach and sea.But here Alan came to a full stop."Davie," said he, "this is a kittle passage!  As long as we liehere we're safe; but I'm nane sae muckle nearer to my ship or thecoast of France.  And as soon as we stand up and signal the brig,it's another matter.  For where will your gentry be, think ye?""Maybe they're no come yet," said I.  "And even if they are,there's one clear matter in our favour.  They'll be all arranged totake us, that's true.  But they'll have arranged for our comingfrom the east and here we are upon their west.""Ay," says Alan, "I wish we were in some force, and this was abattle, we would have bonnily out-manoeuvred them!  But it isnae,Davit; and the way it is, is a wee thing less inspiring to AlanBreck.  I swither, Davie.""Time flies, Alan," said I."I ken that," said Alan.  "I ken naething else, as the French folksay.  But this is a dreidful case of heids or tails.  O! if I couldbut ken where your gentry were!""Alan," said I, "this is no like you.  It's got to be now ornever.""This is no me, quo' he,"sang Alan, with a queer face betwixt shame and drollery."Neither you nor me, quo' he, neither you nor me.Wow, na, Johnnie man! neither you nor me."And then of a sudden he stood straight up where he was, and with ahandkerchief flying in his right hand, marched down upon the beach.I stood up myself, but lingered behind him, scanning the sand-hillsto the east.  His appearance was at first unremarked:  Scougal notexpecting him so early, and MY GENTRY watching on the other side.Then they awoke on board the Thistle, and it seemed they had all inreadiness, for there was scarce a second's bustle on the deckbefore we saw a skiff put round her stern and begin to pull livelyfor the coast.  Almost at the same moment of time, and perhaps halfa mile away towards Gillane Ness, the figure of a man appeared fora blink upon a sandhill, waving with his arms; and though he wasgone again in the same flash, the gulls in that part continued alittle longer to fly wild.Alan had not seen this, looking straight to seaward at the ship andskiff."It maun be as it will!" said he, when I had told him, "Weel mayyon boatie row, or my craig'll have to thole a raxing."That part of the beach was long and flat, and excellent walkingwhen the tide was down; a little cressy burn flowed over it in oneplace to the sea; and the sandhills ran along the head of it likethe rampart of a town.  No eye of ours could spy what was passingbehind there in the bents, no hurry of ours could mend the speed ofthe boat's coming:  time stood still with us through that uncannyperiod of waiting."There is one thing I would like to ken," say Alan.  "I would liketo ken these gentry's orders.  We're worth four hunner pound thepair of us:  how if they took the guns to us, Davie!  They wouldget a bonny shot from the top of that lang sandy bank.""Morally impossible," said I.  "The point is that they can have noguns.  This thing has been gone about too secret; pistols they mayhave, but never guns.""I believe ye'll be in the right," says Alan.  "For all which I amwearing a good deal for yon boat."And he snapped his fingers and whistled to it like a dog.It was now perhaps a third of the way in, and we ourselves alreadyhard on the margin of the sea, so that the soft sand rose over myshoes.  There was no more to do whatever but to wait, to look asmuch as we were able at the creeping nearer of the boat, and aslittle as we could manage at the long impenetrable front of thesandhills, over which the gulls twinkled and behind which ourenemies were doubtless marshalling."This is a fine, bright, caller place to get shot in," says Alansuddenly; "and, man, I wish that I had your courage!""Alan!" I cried, "what kind of talk is this of it!  You're justmade of courage; it's the character of the man, as I could provemyself if there was nobody else.""And you would be the more mistaken," said he.  "What makes thediffer with me is just my great penetration and knowledge ofaffairs.  But for auld, cauld, dour, deadly courage, I am not fitto hold a candle to yourself.  Look at us two here upon the sands.Here am I, fair hotching to be off; here's you (for all that I ken)in two minds of it whether you'll no stop.  Do you think that Icould do that, or would?  No me!  Firstly, because I havenae gotthe courage and wouldnae daur; and secondly, because I am a man ofso much penetration and would see ye damned first.""It's there ye're coming, is it?" I cried.  "Ah, man Alan, you canwile your old wives, but you never can wile me."Remembrance of my temptation in the wood made me strong as iron."I have a tryst to keep," I continued.  "I am trysted with yourcousin Charlie; I have passed my word.""Braw trysts that you'll can keep," said Alan.  "Ye'll justmistryst aince and for a' with the gentry in the bents.  And whatfor?" he went on with an extreme threatening gravity.  "Just tellme that, my mannie!  Are ye to be speerited away like Lady Grange?Are they to drive a dirk in your inside and bury ye in the bents?Or is it to be the other way, and are they to bring ye in withJames?  Are they folk to be trustit?  Would ye stick your head inthe mouth of Sim Fraser and the ither Whigs?" he added withextraordinary bitterness."Alan," cried I, "they're all rogues and liars, and I'm with yethere.  The more reason there should be one decent man in such aland of thieves!  My word in passed, and I'll stick to it.  I saidlong syne to your kinswoman that I would stumble at no risk.  Do yemind of that?--the night Red Colin fell, it was.  No more I will,then.  Here I stop.  Prestongrange promised me my life:  if he's tobe mansworn, here I'll have to die.""Aweel aweel," said Alan.All this time we had seen or heard no more of our pursuers.  Intruth we had caught them unawares; their whole party (as I was tolearn afterwards) had not yet reached the scene; what there was ofthem was spread among the bents towards Gillane.  It was quite anaffair to call them in and bring them over, and the boat was makingspeed.  They were besides but cowardly fellows:  a mere leash ofHighland cattle-thieves, of several clans, no gentleman there to bethe captain and the more they looked at Alan and me upon the beach,the less (I must suppose) they liked the look of us.Whoever had betrayed Alan it was not the captain:  he was in theskiff himself, steering and stirring up his oarsmen, like a manwith his heart in his employ.  Already he was near in, and the boatsecuring--already Alan's face had flamed crimson with theexcitement of his deliverance, when our friends in the bents,either in their despair to see their prey escape them or with somehope of scaring Andie, raised suddenly a shrill cry of severalvoices.This sound, arising from what appeared to be a quite desertedcoast, was really very daunting, and the men in the boat held waterinstantly."What's this of it?" sings out the captain, for he was come withinan easy hail."Freens o'mine," says Alan, and began immediately to wade forth inthe shallow water towards the boat.  "Davie," he said, pausing,"Davie, are ye no coming?  I am swier to leave ye.""Not a hair of me," said I."He stood part of a second where he was to his knees in the saltwater, hesitating."He that will to Cupar, maun to Cupar," said he, and swashing indeeper than his waist, was hauled into the skiff, which wasimmediately directed for the ship.I stood where he had left me, with my hands behind my back; Alansat with his head turned watching me; and the boat drew smoothlyaway.  Of a sudden I came the nearest hand to shedding tears, andseemed to myself the most deserted solitary lad in Scotland.  Withthat I turned my back upon the sea and faced the sandhills.  Therewas no sight or sound of man; the sun shone on the wet sand and thedry, the wind blew in the bents, the gulls made a dreary piping.As I passed higher up the beach, the sand-lice were hopping nimblyabout the stranded tangles.  The devil any other sight or sound inthat unchancy place.  And yet I knew there were folk there,observing me, upon some secret purpose.  They were no soldiers, orthey would have fallen on and taken us ere now; doubtless they weresome common rogues hired for my undoing, perhaps to kidnap, perhapsto murder me outright.  From the position of those engaged, thefirst was the more likely; from what I knew of their character andardency in this business, I thought the second very possible; andthe blood ran cold about my heart.I had a mad idea to loosen my sword in the scabbard; for though Iwas very unfit to stand up like a gentleman blade to blade, Ithought I could do some scathe in a random combat.  But I perceivedin time the folly of resistance.  This was no doubt the joint"expedient" on which Prestongrange and Fraser were agreed.  Thefirst, I was very sure, had done something to secure my life; thesecond was pretty likely to have slipped in some contrary hintsinto the ears of Neil and his companions; and it I were to showbare steel I might play straight into the hands of my worst enemyand seal my own doom.These thoughts brought me to the head of the beach.  I cast a lookbehind, the boat was nearing the brig, and Alan flew hishandkerchief for a farewell, which I replied to with the waving ofmy hand.  But Alan himself was shrunk to a small thing in my view,alongside of this pass that lay in front of me.  I set my hat hardon my head, clenched my teeth, and went right before me up the faceof the sand-wreath.  It made a hard climb, being steep, and thesand like water underfoot.  But I caught hold at last by the longbent-grass on the brae-top, and pulled myself to a good footing.The same moment men stirred and stood up here and there, six orseven of them, ragged-like knaves, each with a dagger in his hand.The fair truth is, I shut my eyes and prayed.  When I opened themagain, the rogues were crept the least thing nearer without speechor hurry.  Every eye was upon mine, which struck me with a strangesensation of their brightness, and of the fear with which theycontinued to approach me.  I held out my hands empty; whereupon oneasked, with a strong Highland brogue, if I surrendered."Under protest," said I, "if ye ken what that means, which Imisdoubt."At that word, they came all in upon me like a flight of birds upona carrion, seized me, took my sword, and all the money from mypockets, bound me hand and foot with some strong line, and cast meon a tussock of bent.  There they sat about their captive in a partof a circle and gazed upon him silently like something dangerous,perhaps a lion or a tiger on the spring.  Presently this attentionwas relaxed.  They drew nearer together, fell to speech in theGaelic, and very cynically divided my property before my eyes.  Itwas my diversion in this time that I could watch from my place theprogress of my friend's escape.  I saw the boat come to the brigand be hoisted in, the sails fill, and the ship pass out seawardbehind the isles and by North Berwick.In the course of two hours or so, more and more ragged Highlandmenkept collecting.  Neil among the first, until the party must havenumbered near a score.  With each new arrival there was a freshbout of talk, that sounded like complaints and explanations; but Iobserved one thing, none of those who came late had any share inthe division of my spoils.  The last discussion was very violentand eager, so that once I thought they would have quarrelled; onthe heels of which their company parted, the bulk of them returningwestward in a troop, and only three, Neil and two others, remainingsentries on the prisoner."I could name one who would be very ill pleased with your day'swork, Neil Duncanson," said I, when the rest had moved away.He assured me in answer I should be tenderly used, for he knew hewas "acquent wi' the leddy."This was all our talk, nor did any other son of man appear uponthat portion of the coast until the sun had gone down among theHighland mountains, and the gloaming was beginning to grow dark.At which hour I was aware of a long, lean, bony-like Lothian man ofa very swarthy countenance, that came towards us among the bents ona farm horse."Lads," cried he, "has ye a paper like this?" and held up one inhis hand.  Neil produced a second, which the newcomer studiedthrough a pair of horn spectacles, and saying all was right and wewere the folk he was seeking, immediately dismounted.  I was thenset in his place, my feet tied under the horse's belly, and we setforth under the guidance of the Lowlander.  His path must have beenvery well chosen, for we met but one pair--a pair of lovers--thewhole way, and these, perhaps taking us to be free-traders, fled onour approach.  We were at one time close at the foot of Berwick Lawon the south side; at another, as we passed over some open hills, Ispied the lights of a clachan and the old tower of a church amongsome trees not far off, but too far to cry for help, if I haddreamed of it.  At last we came again within sound of the sea.There was moonlight, though not much; and by this I could see thethree huge towers and broken battlements of Tantallon, that oldchief place of the Red Douglases.  The horse was picketed in thebottom of the ditch to graze, and I was led within, and forth intothe court, and thence into the tumble-down stone hall.  Here myconductors built a brisk fire in the midst of the pavement, forthere was a chill in the night.  My hands were loosed, I was set bythe wall in the inner end, and (the Lowlander having producedprovisions) I was given oatmeal bread and a pitcher of Frenchbrandy.  This done, I was left once more alone with my threeHighlandmen.  They sat close by the fire drinking and talking; thewind blew in by the breaches, cast about the smoke and flames, andsang in the tops of the towers; I could hear the sea under thecliffs, and, my mind being reassured as to my life, and my body andspirits wearied with the day's employment, I turned upon one sideand slumbered.I had no means of guessing at what hour I was wakened, only themoon was down and the fire was low.  My feet were now loosed, and Iwas carried through the ruins and down the cliff-side by aprecipitous path to where I found a fisher's boat in a haven of therocks.  This I was had on board of, and we began to put forth fromthe shore in a fine starlightCHAPTER XIV--THE BASSI had no thought where they were taking me; only looked here andthere for the appearance of a ship; and there ran the while in myhead a word of Ransome's--the TWENTY-POUNDERS.  If I were to beexposed a second time to that same former danger of theplantations, I judged it must turn ill with me; there was no secondAlan; and no second shipwreck and spare yard to be expected now;and I saw myself hoe tobacco under the whip's lash.  The thoughtchilled me; the air was sharp upon the water, the stretchers of theboat drenched with a cold dew:  and I shivered in my place besidethe steersman.  This was the dark man whom I have called hithertothe Lowlander; his name was Dale, ordinarily called Black Andie.Feeling the thrill of my shiver, he very kindly handed me a roughjacket full of fish-scales, with which I was glad to cover myself."I thank you for this kindness," said I, "and will make so free asto repay it with a warning.  You take a high responsibility in thisaffair.  You are not like these ignorant, barbarous Highlanders,but know what the law is and the risks of those that break it.""I am no just exactly what ye would ca' an extremist for the law,"says he, "at the best of times; but in this business I act with agood warranty.""What are you going to do with me?" I asked."Nae harm," said he, "nae harm ava'.  Ye'll have strong freens, I'mthinking.  Ye'll be richt eneuch yet."There began to fall a greyness on the face of the sea; little dabsof pink and red, like coals of slow fire, came in the east; and atthe same time the geese awakened, and began crying about the top ofthe Bass.  It is just the one crag of rock, as everybody knows, butgreat enough to carve a city from.  The sea was extremely little,but there went a hollow plowter round the base of it.  With thegrowing of the dawn I could see it clearer and clearer; thestraight crags painted with sea-birds' droppings like a morningfrost, the sloping top of it green with grass, the clan of whitegeese that cried about the sides, and the black, broken buildingsof the prison sitting close on the sea's edge.At the sight the truth came in upon me in a clap."It's there you're taking me!" I cried."Just to the Bass, mannie," said he:  "Whaur the auld saints wereafore ye, and I misdoubt if ye have come so fairly by yourpreeson.""But none dwells there now," I cried; "the place is long a ruin.""It'll be the mair pleisand a change for the solan geese, then,"quoth Andie dryly.The day coming slowly brighter I observed on the bilge, among thebig stones with which fisherfolk ballast their boats, several kegsand baskets, and a provision of fuel.  All these were dischargedupon the crag.  Andie, myself, and my three Highlanders (I callthem mine, although it was the other way about), landed along withthem.  The sun was not yet up when the boat moved away again, thenoise of the oars on the thole-pins echoing from the cliffs, andleft us in our singular reclusion:Andie Dale was the Prefect (as I would jocularly call him) of theBass, being at once the shepherd and the gamekeeper of that smalland rich estate.  He had to mind the dozen or so of sheep that fedand fattened on the grass of the sloping part of it, like beastsgrazing the roof of a cathedral.  He had charge besides of thesolan geese that roosted in the crags; and from these anextraordinary income is derived.  The young are dainty eating, asmuch as two shillings a-piece being a common price, and paidwillingly by epicures; even the grown birds are valuable for theiroil and feathers; and a part of the minister's stipend of NorthBerwick is paid to this day in solan geese, which makes it (in somefolks' eyes) a parish to be coveted.  To perform these severalbusinesses, as well as to protect the geese from poachers, Andiehad frequent occasion to sleep and pass days together on the crag;and we found the man at home there like a farmer in his steading.Bidding us all shoulder some of the packages, a matter in which Imade haste to bear a hand, he led us in by a looked gate, which wasthe only admission to the island, and through the ruins of thefortress, to the governor's house.  There we saw by the ashes inthe chimney and a standing bed-place in one corner, that he madehis usual occupation.This bed he now offered me to use, saying he supposed I would setup to be gentry."My gentrice has nothing to do with where I lie," said I.  "I blessGod I have lain hard ere now, and can do the same again withthankfulness.  While I am here, Mr. Andie, if that be your name, Iwill do my part and take my place beside the rest of you; and I askyou on the other hand to spare me your mockery, which I own I likeill."He grumbled a little at this speech, but seemed upon reflection toapprove it.  Indeed, he was a long-headed, sensible man, and a goodWhig and Presbyterian; read daily in a pocket Bible, and was bothable and eager to converse seriously on religion, leaning more thana little towards the Cameronian extremes.  His morals were of amore doubtful colour.  I found he was deep in the free trade, andused the rains of Tantallon for a magazine of smuggled merchandise.As for a gauger, I do not believe he valued the life of one athalf-a-farthing.  But that part of the coast of Lothian is to thisday as wild a place, and the commons there as rough a crew, as anyin Scotland.One incident of my imprisonment is made memorable by a consequenceit had long after.  There was a warship at this time stationed inthe Firth, the Seahorse, Captain Palliser.  It chanced she wascruising in the month of September, plying between Fife andLothian, and sounding for sunk dangers.  Early one fine morning shewas seen about two miles to east of us, where she lowered a boat,and seemed to examine the Wildfire Rocks and Satan's Bush, famousdangers of that coast.  And presently after having got her boatagain, she came before the wind and was headed directly for theBase.  This was very troublesome to Andie and the Highlanders; thewhole business of my sequestration was designed for privacy, andhere, with a navy captain perhaps blundering ashore, it looked tobecome public enough, if it were nothing worse.  I was in aminority of one, I am no Alan to fall upon so many, and I was farfrom sure that a warship was the least likely to improve mycondition.  All which considered, I gave Andie my parole of goodbehaviour and obedience, and was had briskly to the summit of therock, where we all lay down, at the cliff's edge, in differentplaces of observation and concealment.  The Seahorse came straighton till I thought she would have struck, and we (looking giddilydown) could see the ship's company at their quarters and hear theleadsman singing at the lead.  Then she suddenly wore and let fly avolley of I know not how many great guns.  The rock was shaken withthe thunder of the sound, the smoke flowed over our heads, and thegeese rose in number beyond computation or belief.  To hear theirscreaming and to see the twinkling of their wings, made a mostinimitable curiosity; and I suppose it was after this somewhatchildish pleasure that Captain Palliser had come so near the Bass.He was to pay dear for it in time.  During his approach I had theopportunity to make a remark upon the rigging of that ship by whichI ever after knew it miles away; and this was a means (underProvidence) of my averting from a friend a great calamity, andinflicting on Captain Palliser himself a sensible disappointment.All the time of my stay on the rock we lived well.  We had smallale and brandy, and oatmeal, of which we made our porridge nightand morning.  At times a boat came from the Castleton and broughtus a quarter of mutton, for the sheep upon the rock we must nottouch, these being specially fed to market.  The geese wereunfortunately out of season, and we let them be.  We fishedourselves, and yet more often made the geese to fish for us:observing one when he had made a capture and searing him from hisprey ere he had swallowed it.The strange nature of this place, and the curiosities with which itabounded, held me busy and amused.  Escape being impossible, I wasallowed my entire liberty, and continually explored the surface ofthe isle wherever it might support the foot of man.  The old gardenof the prison was still to be observed, with flowers and pot-herbsrunning wild, and some ripe cherries on a bush.  A little lowerstood a chapel or a hermit's cell; who built or dwelt in it, nonemay know, and the thought of its age made a ground of manymeditations.  The prison, too, where I now bivouacked with Highlandcattle-thieves, was a place full of history, both human and divine.I thought it strange so many saints and martyrs should have gone bythere so recently, and left not so much as a leaf out of theirBibles, or a name carved upon the wall, while the rough soldierlads that mounted guard upon the battlements had filled theneighbourhood with their mementoes--broken tobacco-pipes for themost part, and that in a surprising plenty, but also metal buttonsfrom their coats.  There were times when I thought I could haveheard the pious sound of psalms out of the martyr's dungeons, andseen the soldiers tramp the ramparts with their glinting pipes, andthe dawn rising behind them out of the North Sea.No doubt it was a good deal Andie and his tales that put thesefancies in my head.  He was extraordinarily well acquainted withthe story of the rock in all particulars, down to the names ofprivate soldiers, his father having served there in that samecapacity.  He was gifted besides with a natural genius fornarration, so that the people seemed to speak and the things to bedone before your face.  This gift of his and my assiduity to listenbrought us the more close together.  I could not honestly deny butwhat I liked him; I soon saw that he liked me; and indeed, from thefirst I had set myself out to capture his good-will.  An oddcircumstance (to be told presently) effected this beyond myexpectation; but even in early days we made a friendly pair to be aprisoner and his gaoler.I should trifle with my conscience if I pretended my stay upon theBass was wholly disagreeable.  It seemed to me a safe place, asthough I was escaped there out of my troubles.  No harm was to beoffered me; a material impossibility, rock and the deep sea,prevented me from fresh attempts; I felt I had my life safe and myhonour safe, and there were times when I allowed myself to gloat onthem like stolen waters.  At other times my thoughts were verydifferent, I recalled how strong I had expressed myself both toRankeillor and to Stewart; I reflected that my captivity upon theBass, in view of a great part of the coasts of Fife and Lothian,was a thing I should be thought more likely to have invented thanendured; and in the eyes of these two gentlemen, at least, I mustpass for a boaster and a coward.  Now I would take this lightlyenough; tell myself that so long as I stood well with CatrionaDrummond, the opinion of the rest of man was but moonshine andspilled water; and thence pass off into those meditations of alover which are so delightful to himself and must always appear sosurprisingly idle to a reader.  But anon the fear would take meotherwise; I would be shaken with a perfect panic of self-esteem,and these supposed hard judgments appear an injustice impossible tobe supported.  With that another train of thought would hepresented, and I had scarce begun to be concerned about men'sjudgments of myself, than I was haunted with the remembrance ofJames Stewart in his dungeon and the lamentations of his wife.Then, indeed, passion began to work in me; I could not forgivemyself to sit there idle:  it seemed (if I were a man at all) thatI could fly or swim out of my place of safety; and it was in suchhumours and to amuse my self-reproaches that I would set the moreparticularly to win the good side of Andie Dale.At last, when we two were alone on the summit of the rock on abright morning, I put in some hint about a bribe.  He looked at me,cast back his head, and laughed out loud."Ay, you're funny, Mr. Dale," said I, "but perhaps if you'll glancean eye upon that paper you may change your note."The stupid Highlanders had taken from me at the time of my seizurenothing but hard money, and the paper I now showed Andie was anacknowledgment from the British Linen Company for a considerablesum.He read it.  "Troth, and ye're nane sae ill aff," said he."I thought that would maybe vary your opinions," said I."Hout!" said he.  "It shows me ye can bribe; but I'm no to bebribit.""We'll see about that yet a while," says I.  "And first, I'll showyou that I know what I am talking.  You have orders to detain mehere till after Thursday, 21st September.""Ye're no a'thegether wrong either," says Andie.  "I'm to let yougang, bar orders contrair, on Saturday, the 23rd."I could not but feel there was something extremely insidious inthis arrangement.  That I was to re-appear precisely in time to betoo late would cast the more discredit on my tale, if I were mindedto tell one; and this screwed me to fighting point."Now then, Andie, you that kens the world, listen to me, and thinkwhile ye listen," said I.  "I know there are great folks in thebusiness, and I make no doubt you have their names to go upon.  Ihave seen some of them myself since this affair began, and said mysay into their faces too.  But what kind of a crime would this bethat I had committed? or what kind of a process is this that I amfallen under?  To be apprehended by some ragged John-Hielandman onAugust 30th, carried to a rickle of old stones that is now neitherfort nor gaol (whatever it once was) but just the gamekeeper'slodge of the Bass Rock, and set free again, September 23rd, assecretly as I was first arrested--does that sound like law to you?or does it sound like justice? or does it not sound honestly like apiece of some low dirty intrigue, of which the very folk thatmeddle with it are ashamed?""I canna gainsay ye, Shaws.  It looks unco underhand," says Andie."And werenae the folk guid sound Whigs and true-blue PresbyteriansI would has seen them ayont Jordan and Jeroozlem or I would haveset hand to it.""The Master of Lovat'll be a braw Whig," says I, "and a grandPresbyterian.""I ken naething by him," said he.  "I hae nae trokings wi' Lovats.""No, it'll be Prestongrange that you'll be dealing with," said I."Ah, but I'll no tell ye that," said Andie."Little need when I ken," was my retort."There's just the ae thing ye can be fairly sure of, Shaws," saysAndie.  "And that is that (try as ye please) I'm no dealing wi'yoursel'; nor yet I amnae goin' to," he added."Well, Andie, I see I'll have to be speak out plain with you," Ireplied.  And told him so much as I thought needful of the facts.He heard me out with some serious interest, and when I had done,seemed to consider a little with himself."Shaws," said he at last, "I'll deal with the naked hand.  It's aqueer tale, and no very creditable, the way you tell it; and I'mfar frae minting that is other than the way that ye believe it.  Asfor yoursel', ye seem to me rather a dacent-like young man.  Butme, that's aulder and mair judeecious, see perhaps a wee bitfurther forrit in the job than what ye can dae.  And here themaitter clear and plain to ye.  There'll be nae skaith to yoursel'if I keep ye here; far free that, I think ye'll be a hantle betterby it.  There'll be nae skaith to the kintry--just ae mairHielantman hangit--Gude kens, a guid riddance!  On the ither hand,it would be considerable skaith to me if I would let you free.Sae, speakin' as a guid Whig, an honest freen' to you, and ananxious freen' to my ainsel', the plain fact is that I think ye'lljust have to bide here wi' Andie an' the solans.""Andie," said I, laying my hand upon his knee, "this Hielantman'sinnocent.""Ay, it's a peety about that," said he.  "But ye see, in thiswarld, the way God made it, we cannae just get a'thing that wewant."CHAPTER XV--BLACK ANDIE'S TALE OF TOD LAPRAIKI have yet said little of the Highlanders.  They were all three ofthe followers of James More, which bound the accusation very tightabout their master's neck.  All understood a word or two ofEnglish, but Neil was the only one who judged he had enough of itfor general converse, in which (when once he got embarked) hiscompany was often tempted to the contrary opinion.  They weretractable, simple creatures; showed much more courtesy than mighthave been expected from their raggedness and their uncouthappearance, and fell spontaneously to be like three servants forAndie and myself.Dwelling in that isolated place, in the old falling ruins of aprison, and among endless strange sounds of the sea and the sea-birds, I thought I perceived in them early the effects ofsuperstitious fear.  When there was nothing doing they would eitherlie and sleep, for which their appetite appeared insatiable, orNeil would entertain the others with stories which seemed always ofa terrifying strain.  If neither of these delights were withinreach--if perhaps two were sleeping and the third could find nomeans to follow their example--I would see him sit and listen andlook about him in a progression of uneasiness, starting, his faceblenching, his hands clutched, a man strung like a bow.  The natureof these fears I had never an occasion to find out, but the sightof them was catching, and the nature of the place that we were infavourable to alarms.  I can find no word for it in the English,but Andie had an expression for it in the Scots from which he nevervaried."Ay," he would say, "ITS AN UNCO PLACE, THE BASS."It is so I always think of it.  It was an unco place by night, uncoby day; and these were unco sounds, of the calling of the solans,and the plash of the sea and the rock echoes, that hung continuallyin our ears.  It was chiefly so in moderate weather.  When thewaves were anyway great they roared about the rock like thunder andthe drums of armies, dreadful but merry to hear; and it was in thecalm days that a man could daunt himself with listening--not aHighlandman only, as I several times experimented on myself, somany still, hollow noises haunted and reverberated in the porchesof the rock.This brings me to a story I heard, and a scene I took part in,which quite changed our terms of living, and had a great effect onmy departure.  It chanced one night I fell in a muse beside thefire and (that little air of Alan's coming back to my memory) beganto whistle.  A hand was laid upon my arm, and the voice of Neilbade me to stop, for it was not "canny musics.""Not canny?" I asked.  "How can that be?""Na," said he; "it will be made by a bogle and her wanting ta heidupon his body." {13}"Well," said I, "there can be no bogles here, Neil; for it's notlikely they would fash themselves to frighten geese.""Ay?" says Andie, "is that what ye think of it!  But I'll can tellye there's been waur nor bogles here.""What's waur than bogles, Andie?" said I."Warlocks," said he.  "Or a warlock at the least of it.  And that'sa queer tale, too," he added.  "And if ye would like, I'll tell itye."To be sure we were all of the one mind, and even the Highlanderthat had the least English of the three set himself to listen withall his might.THE TALE OF TOD LAPRAIKMY faither, Tam Dale, peace to his banes, was a wild, sploring ladin his young days, wi' little wisdom and little grace.  He was fondof a lass and fond of a glass, and fond of a ran-dan; but I couldnever hear tell that he was muckle use for honest employment.  Fraeae thing to anither, he listed at last for a sodger and was in thegarrison of this fort, which was the first way that ony of theDales cam to set foot upon the Bass.  Sorrow upon that service!The governor brewed his ain ale; it seems it was the warstconceivable.  The rock was proveesioned free the shore with vivers,the thing was ill-guided, and there were whiles when they but tofish and shoot solans for their diet.  To crown a', thir was theDays of the Persecution.  The perishin' cauld chalmers were alloccupeed wi' sants and martyrs, the saut of the yearth, of which itwasnae worthy.  And though Tam Dale carried a firelock there, asingle sodger, and liked a lass and a glass, as I was sayin,' themind of the man was mair just than set with his position.  He hadglints of the glory of the kirk; there were whiles when his danderrase to see the Lord's sants misguided, and shame covered him thathe should be haulding a can'le (or carrying a firelock) in so blacka business.  There were nights of it when he was here on sentry,the place a' wheesht, the frosts o' winter maybe riving in thewa's, and he would hear ane o' the prisoners strike up a psalm, andthe rest join in, and the blessed sounds rising from the differentchalmers--or dungeons, I would raither say--so that this auld craigin the sea was like a pairt of Heev'n.  Black shame was on hissaul; his sins hove up before him muckle as the Bass, and above a',that chief sin, that he should have a hand in hagging and hashingat Christ's Kirk.  But the truth is that he resisted the spirit.Day cam, there were the rousing compainions, and his guid resolvesdepairtit.In thir days, dwalled upon the Bass a man of God, Peden the Prophetwas his name.  Ye'll have heard tell of Prophet Peden.  There wasnever the wale of him sinsyne, and it's a question wi' mony ifthere ever was his like afore.  He was wild's a peat-hag, fearsometo look at, fearsome to hear, his face like the day of judgment.The voice of him was like a solan's and dinnle'd in folks' lugs,and the words of him like coals of fire.Now there was a lass on the rock, and I think she had little to do,for it was nae place far decent weemen; but it seems she was bonny,and her and Tam Dale were very well agreed.  It befell that Pedenwas in the gairden his lane at the praying when Tam and the lasscam by; and what should the lassie do but mock with laughter at thesant's devotions?  He rose and lookit at the twa o' them, and Tam'sknees knoitered thegether at the look of him.  But whan he spak, itwas mair in sorrow than in anger.  'Poor thing, poor thing!" sayshe, and it was the lass he lookit at, "I hear you skirl and laugh,"he says, "but the Lord has a deid shot prepared for you, and atthat surprising judgment ye shall skirl but the ae time!"  Shortlythereafter she was daundering on the craigs wi' twa-three sodgers,and it was a blawy day.  There cam a gowst of wind, claught her bythe coats, and awa' wi' her bag and baggage.  And it was remarkedby the sodgers that she gied but the ae skirl.Nae doubt this judgment had some weicht upon Tam Dale; but itpassed again and him none the better.  Ae day he was flyting wi'anither sodger-lad.  "Deil hae me!" quo' Tam, for he was a profaneswearer.  And there was Peden glowering at him, gash an' waefu';Peden wi' his lang chafts an' luntin' een, the maud happed abouthis kist, and the hand of him held out wi' the black nails upon thefinger-nebs--for he had nae care of the body.  "Fy, fy, poor man!"cries he, "the poor fool man!  DEIL HAE ME, quo' he; an' I see thedeil at his oxter."  The conviction of guilt and grace cam in onTam like the deep sea; he flang doun the pike that was in hishands--"I will nae mair lift arms against the cause o' Christ!"says he, and was as gude's word.  There was a sair fyke in thebeginning, but the governor, seeing him resolved, gied him hisdischarge, and he went and dwallt and merried in North Berwick, andhad aye a gude name with honest folk free that day on.It was in the year seeventeen hunner and sax that the Bass cam inthe hands o' the Da'rymples, and there was twa men soucht thechairge of it.  Baith were weel qualified, for they had baith beensodgers in the garrison, and kent the gate to handle solans, andthe seasons and values of them.  Forby that they were baith--orthey baith seemed--earnest professors and men of comelyconversation.  The first of them was just Tam Dale, my faither.The second was ane Lapraik, whom the folk ca'd Tod Lapraik maistly,but whether for his name or his nature I could never hear tell.Weel, Tam gaed to see Lapraik upon this business, and took me, thatwas a toddlin' laddie, by the hand.  Tod had his dwallin' in thelang loan benorth the kirkyaird.  It's a dark uncanny loan, forbythat the kirk has aye had an ill name since the days o' James theSaxt and the deevil's cantrips played therein when the Queen was onthe seas; and as for Tod's house, it was in the mirkest end, andwas little liked by some that kenned the best.  The door was on thesneck that day, and me and my faither gaed straucht in.  Tod was awabster to his trade; his loom stood in the but.  There he sat, amuckle fat, white hash of a man like creish, wi' a kind of a holysmile that gart me scunner.  The hand of him aye cawed the shuttle,but his een was steeked.  We cried to him by his name, we skirtedin the deid lug of him, we shook him by the shou'ther.  Nae mainnero' service!  There he sat on his dowp, an' cawed the shuttle andsmiled like creish."God be guid to us," says Tam Dale, "this is no canny?"He had jimp said the word, when Tod Lapraik cam to himsel'."Is this you, Tam?" says he.  "Haith, man!  I'm blythe to see ye.I whiles fa' into a bit dwam like this," he says; "its frae thestamach."Weel, they began to crack about the Bass and which of them twa wasto get the warding o't, and little by little cam to very ill words,and twined in anger.  I mind weel that as my faither and me gaedhame again, he cam ower and ower the same expression, how little helikit Tod Lapraik and his dwams."Dwam!" says he.  "I think folk hae brunt for dwams like yon."Aweel, my faither got the Bass and Tod had to go wantin'.  It wasremembered sinsyne what way he had ta'en the thing.  "Tam," sayshe, "ye hae gotten the better o' me aince mair, and I hope," sayshe, "ye'll find at least a' that ye expeckit at the Bass."  Whichhave since been thought remarkable expressions.  At last the timecame for Tam Dale to take young solans.  This was a business he wasweel used wi', he had been a craigsman frae a laddie, and trustitnane but himsel'.  So there was he hingin' by a line an' spelderingon the craig face, whaur its hieest and steighest.  Fower tentylads were on the tap, hauldin' the line and mindin' for hissignals.  But whaur Tam hung there was naething but the craig, andthe sea belaw, and the solans skirlin and flying.  It was a brawspring morn, and Tam whustled as he claught in the young geese.Mony's the time I've heard him tell of this experience, and aye theswat ran upon the man.It chanced, ye see, that Tam keeked up, and he was awaur of amuckle solan, and the solan pyking at the line.  He thocht this by-ordinar and outside the creature's habits.  He minded that ropeswas unco saft things, and the solan's neb and the Bass Rock uncohard, and that twa hunner feet were raither mair than he would careto fa'."Shoo!" says Tam.  "Awa', bird!  Shoo, awa' wi' ye!" says he.The solan keekit doon into Tam's face, and there was something uncoin the creature's ee.  Just the ae keek it gied, and back to therope.  But now it wroucht and warstl't like a thing dementit.There never was the solan made that wroucht as that solan wroucht;and it seemed to understand its employ brawly, birzing the saftrope between the neb of it and a crunkled jag o' stane.There gaed a cauld stend o' fear into Tam's heart.  "This thing isnae bird," thinks he.  His een turnt backward in his heid and theday gaed black aboot him.  "If I get a dwam here," he toucht, "it'sby wi' Tam Dale."  And he signalled for the lads to pu' him up.And it seemed the solan understood about signals.  For nae soonerwas the signal made than he let be the rope, spried his wings,squawked out loud, took a turn flying, and dashed straucht at TamDale's een.  Tam had a knife, he gart the cauld steel glitter.  Andit seemed the solan understood about knives, for nae suner did thesteel glint in the sun than he gied the ae squawk, but laighter,like a body disappointit, and flegged aff about the roundness ofthe craig, and Tam saw him nae mair.  And as sune as that thing wasgane, Tam's heid drapt upon his shouther, and they pu'd him up likea deid corp, dadding on the craig.A dram of brandy (which he went never without) broucht him to hismind, or what was left of it.  Up he sat."Rin, Geordie, rin to the boat, mak' sure of the boat, man--rin!"he cries, "or yon solan'll have it awa'," says he.The fower lads stared at ither, an' tried to whilly-wha him to bequiet.  But naething would satisfy Tam Dale, till ane o' them hadstartit on aheid to stand sentry on the boat.  The ithers askit ifhe was for down again."Na," says he, "and niether you nor me," says he, "and as sune as Ican win to stand on my twa feet we'll be aff frae this craig o'Sawtan."Sure eneuch, nae time was lost, and that was ower muckle; forbefore they won to North Berwick Tam was in a crying fever.  He laya' the simmer; and wha was sae kind as come speiring for him, butTod Lapraik!  Folk thocht afterwards that ilka time Tod cam nearthe house the fever had worsened.  I kenna for that; but what I kenthe best, that was the end of it.It was about this time o' the year; my grandfaither was out at thewhite fishing; and like a bairn, I but to gang wi' him.  We had agrand take, I mind, and the way that the fish lay broucht us nearin by the Bass, whaur we foregaithered wi' anither boat thatbelanged to a man Sandie Fletcher in Castleton.  He's no lang deidneither, or ye could speir at himsel'.  Weel, Sandie hailed."What's yon on the Bass?" says he."On the Bass?" says grandfaither."Ay," says Sandie, "on the green side o't.""Whatten kind of a thing?" says grandfaither.  "There cannae benaething on the Bass but just the sheep.""It looks unco like a body," quo' Sandie, who was nearer in."A body!" says we, and we none of us likit that.  For there was naeboat that could have brought a man, and the key o' the prison yetthung ower my faither's at hame in the press bed.We keept the twa boats close for company, and crap in nearer hand.Grandfaither had a gless, for he had been a sailor, and the captainof a smack, and had lost her on the sands of Tay.  And when we tookthe glass to it, sure eneuch there was a man.  He was in a crunkleo' green brae, a wee below the chaipel, a' by his lee lane, andlowped and flang and danced like a daft quean at a waddin'."It's Tod," says grandfather, and passed the gless to Sandie."Ay, it's him," says Sandie."Or ane in the likeness o' him," says grandfaither."Sma' is the differ," quo' Sandie.  "De'il or warlock, I'll try thegun at him," quo' he, and broucht up a fowling-piece that he ayecarried, for Sandie was a notable famous shot in all that country."Haud your hand, Sandie," says grandfaither; "we maun see clearerfirst," says he, "or this may be a dear day's wark to the baith ofus.""Hout!" says Sandie, "this is the Lord's judgment surely, and bedamned to it," says he."Maybe ay, and maybe no," says my grandfaither, worthy man!  "Buthave you a mind of the Procurator Fiscal, that I think ye'll haveforegaithered wi' before," says he.This was ower true, and Sandie was a wee thing set ajee.  "Aweel,Edie," says he, "and what would be your way of it?""Ou, just this," says grandfaither.  "Let me that has the fastestboat gang back to North Berwick, and let you bide here and keep aneye on Thon.  If I cannae find Lapraik, I'll join ye and the twa ofus'll have a crack wi' him.  But if Lapraik's at hame, I'll rin upthe flag at the harbour, and ye can try Thon Thing wi' the gun."Aweel, so it was agreed between them twa.  I was just a bairn, an'clum in Sandie's boat, whaur I thoucht I would see the best of theemploy.  My grandsire gied Sandie a siller tester to pit in his gunwi' the leid draps, bein mair deidly again bogles.  And then the asboat set aff for North Berwick, an' the tither lay whaur it was andwatched the wanchancy thing on the brae-side.A' the time we lay there it lowped and flang and capered and spanlike a teetotum, and whiles we could hear it skelloch as it span.I hae seen lassies, the daft queans, that would lowp and dance awinter's nicht, and still be lowping and dancing when the winter'sday cam in.  But there would be fowk there to hauld them company,and the lads to egg them on; and this thing was its lee-lane.  Andthere would be a fiddler diddling his elbock in the chimney-side;and this thing had nae music but the skirling of the solans.  Andthe lassies were bits o' young things wi' the reid life dinnlingand stending in their members; and this was a muckle, fat, creishyman, and him fa'n in the vale o' years.  Say what ye like, I maunsay what I believe.  It was joy was in the creature's heart, thejoy o' hell, I daursay:  joy whatever.  Mony a time I have askitmysel' why witches and warlocks should sell their sauls (whilk aretheir maist dear possessions) and be auld, duddy, wrunkl't wives orauld, feckless, doddered men; and then I mind upon Tod Lapraikdancing a' the hours by his lane in the black glory of his heart.Nae doubt they burn for it muckle in hell, but they have a grandtime here of it, whatever!--and the Lord forgie us!Weel, at the hinder end, we saw the wee flag yirk up to the mast-heid upon the harbour rocks.  That was a' Sandie waited for.  He upwi' the gun, took a deleeberate aim, an' pu'd the trigger.  Therecam' a bang and then ae waefu' skirl frae the Bass.  And there werewe rubbin' our een and lookin' at ither like daft folk.  For wi'the bang and the skirl the thing had clean disappeared.  The sunglintit, the wund blew, and there was the bare yaird whaur theWonder had been lowping and flinging but ae second syne.The hale way hame I roared and grat wi' the terror o' thatdispensation.  The grawn folk were nane sae muckle better; therewas little said in Sandie's boat but just the name of God; and whenwe won in by the pier, the harbour rocks were fair black wi' thefolk waitin' us.  It seems they had fund Lapraik in ane of hisdwams, cawing the shuttle and smiling.  Ae lad they sent to hoistthe flag, and the rest abode there in the wabster's house.  You maybe sure they liked it little; but it was a means of grace toseverals that stood there praying in to themsel's (for nane caredto pray out loud) and looking on thon awesome thing as it cawed theshuttle.  Syne, upon a suddenty, and wi' the ae dreidfu' skelloch,Tod sprang up frae his hinderlands and fell forrit on the wab, abluidy corp.When the corp was examined the leid draps hadnae played buff uponthe warlock's body; sorrow a leid drap was to be fund! but therewas grandfaither's siller tester in the puddock's heart of him.Andie had scarce done when there befell a mighty silly affair thathad its consequence.  Neil, as I have said, was himself a greatnarrator.  I have heard since that he knew all the stories in theHighlands; and thought much of himself, and was thought much of byothers on the strength of it.  Now Andie's tale reminded him of onehe had already heard."She would ken that story afore," he said.  "She was the story ofUistean More M'Gillie Phadrig and the Gavar Vore.""It is no sic a thing," cried Andie.  "It is the story of myfaither (now wi' God) and Tod Lapraik.  And the same in yourbeard," says he; "and keep the tongue of ye inside your Hielantchafts!"In dealing with Highlanders it will be found, and has been shown inhistory, how well it goes with Lowland gentlefolk; but the thingappears scarce feasible for Lowland commons.  I had alreadyremarked that Andie was continually on the point of quarrellingwith our three MacGregors, and now, sure enough, it was to come."Thir will be no words to use to shentlemans," says Neil."Shentlemans!" cries Andie.  "Shentlemans, ye hielant stot!  If Godwould give ye the grace to see yoursel' the way that ithers see ye,ye would throw your denner up."There came some kind of a Gaelic oath from Neil, and the blackknife was in his hand that moment.There was no time to think; and I caught the Highlander by the leg,and had him down, and his armed hand pinned out, before I knew whatI was doing.  His comrades sprang to rescue him, Andie and I werewithout weapons, the Gregara three to two.  It seemed we werebeyond salvation, when Neil screamed in his own tongue, orderingthe others back, and made his submission to myself in a manner themost abject, even giving me up his knife which (upon a repetitionof his promises) I returned to him on the morrow.Two things I saw plain:  the first, that I must not build too highon Andie, who had shrunk against the wall and stood there, as paleas death, till the affair was over; the second, the strength of myown position with the Highlanders, who must have receivedextraordinary charges to be tender of my safety.  But if I thoughtAndie came not very well out in courage, I had no fault to findwith him upon the account of gratitude.  It was not so much that hetroubled me with thanks, as that his whole mind and manner appearedchanged; and as he preserved ever after a great timidity of ourcompanions, he and I were yet more constantly together.CHAPTER XVI--THE MISSING WITNESSOn the seventeenth, the day I was trysted with the Writer, I hadmuch rebellion against fate.  The thought of him waiting in theKing's Arms, and of what he would think, and what he would say whennext we met, tormented and oppressed me. The truth wasunbelievable, so much I had to grant, and it seemed cruel hard Ishould be posted as a liar and a coward, and have never consciouslyomitted what it was possible that I should do.  I repeated thisform of words with a kind of bitter relish, and re-examined in thatlight the steps of my behaviour.  It seemed I had behaved to JamesStewart as a brother might; all the past was a picture that I couldbe proud of, and there was only the present to consider.  I couldnot swim the sea, nor yet fly in the air, but there was alwaysAndie.  I had done him a service, he liked me; I had a lever thereto work on; if it were just for decency, I must try once more withAndie.It was late afternoon; there was no sound in all the Bass but thelap and bubble of a very quiet sea; and my four companions were allcrept apart, the three Macgregors higher on the rock, and Andiewith his Bible to a sunny place among the ruins; there I found himin deep sleep, and, as soon as he was awake, appealed to him withsome fervour of manner and a good show of argument."If I thoucht it was to do guid to ye, Shaws!" said he, staring atme over his spectacles."It's to save another," said I, "and to redeem my word.  What wouldbe more good than that?  Do ye no mind the scripture, Andie?  Andyou with the Book upon your lap!  WHAT SHALL IT PROFIT A MAN IF HEGAIN THE WHOLE WORLD?""Ay," said he, "that's grand for you.  But where do I come in!  Ihave my word to redeem the same's yoursel'.  And what are ye askingme to do, but just to sell it ye for siller?""Andie! have I named the name of siller?" cried I."Ou, the name's naething", said he; "the thing is there, whatever.It just comes to this; if I am to service ye the way that youpropose, I'll lose my lifelihood.  Then it's clear ye'll have tomake it up to me, and a pickle mair, for your ain credit like.  Andwhat's that but just a bribe?  And if even I was certain of thebribe!  But by a' that I can learn, it's far frae that; and if YOUwere to hang, where would _I_ be?  Na:  the thing's no possible.And just awa' wi' ye like a bonny lad! and let Andie read hischapter."I remember I was at bottom a good deal gratified with this result;and the next humour I fell into was one (I had near said) ofgratitude to Prestongrange, who had saved me, in this violent,illegal manner, out of the midst of my dangers, temptations, andperplexities.  But this was both too flimsy and too cowardly tolast me long, and the remembrance of James began to succeed to thepossession of my spirits.  The 21st, the day set for the trial, Ipassed in such misery of mind as I can scarce recall to haveendured, save perhaps upon Isle Earraid only.  Much of the time Ilay on a brae-side betwixt sleep and waking, my body motionless, mymind full of violent thoughts.  Sometimes I slept indeed; but thecourt-house of Inverary and the prisoner glancing on all sides tofind his missing witness, followed me in slumber; and I would wakeagain with a start to darkness of spirit and distress of body.  Ithought Andie seemed to observe me, but I paid him little heed.Verily, my bread was bitter to me, and my days a burthen.Early the next morning (Friday, 22nd) a boat came with provisions,and Andie placed a packet in my hand.  The cover was withoutaddress but sealed with a Government seal.  It enclosed two notes."Mr. Balfour can now see for himself it is too late to meddle.  Hisconduct will be observed and his discretion rewarded."  So ran thefirst, which seemed to be laboriously writ with the left hand.There was certainly nothing in these expressions to compromise thewriter, even if that person could be found; the seal, whichformidably served instead of signature, was affixed to a separatesheet on which there was no scratch of writing; and I had toconfess that (so far) my adversaries knew what they were doing, andto digest as well as I was able the threat that peeped under thepromise.But the second enclosure was by far the more surprising.  It was ina lady's hand of writ.  "MAISTER DAUVIT BALFOUR IS INFORMED AFRIEND WAS SPEIRING FOR HIM AND HER EYES WERE OF THE GREY," it ran--and seemed so extraordinary a piece to come to my hands at such amoment and under cover of a Government seal, that I stood stupid.Catriona's grey eyes shone in my remembrance.  I thought, with abound of pleasure, she must be the friend.  But who should thewriter be, to have her billet thus enclosed with Prestongrange's?And of all wonders, why was it thought needful to give me thispleasing but most inconsequent intelligence upon the Bass?  For thewriter, I could hit upon none possible except Miss Grant.  Herfamily, I remembered, had remarked on Catriona's eyes and evennamed her for their colour; and she herself had been much in thehabit to address me with a broad pronunciation, by way of a sniff,I supposed, at my rusticity.  No doubt, besides, but she lived inthe same house as this letter came from.  So there remained but onestep to be accounted for; and that was how Prestongrange shouldhave permitted her at all in an affair so secret, or let her daft-like billet go in the same cover with his own.  But even here I hada glimmering.  For, first of all, there was something ratheralarming about the young lady, and papa might be more under herdomination than I knew.  And, second, there was the man's continualpolicy to be remembered, how his conduct had been continuallymingled with caresses, and he had scarce ever, in the midst of somuch contention, laid aside a mask of friendship.  He must conceivethat my imprisonment had incensed me.  Perhaps this little jesting,friendly message was intended to disarm my rancour?I will be honest--and I think it did.  I felt a sudden warmthtowards that beautiful Miss Grant, that she should stoop to so muchinterest in my affairs.  The summoning up of Catriona moved me ofitself to milder and more cowardly counsels.  If the Advocate knewof her and our acquaintance--if I should please him by some of that"discretion" at which his letter pointed--to what might not thislead!  IN VAIN IS THE NET PREPARED IN THE SIGHT OF ANY FOWL, theScripture says.  Well, fowls must be wiser than folk!  For Ithought I perceived the policy, and yet fell in with it.I was in this frame, my heart beating, the grey eyes plain beforeme like two stars, when Andie broke in upon my musing."I see ye has gotten guid news," said he.I found him looking curiously in my face; with that there camebefore me like a vision of James Stewart and the court of Inverary;and my mind turned at once like a door upon its hinges.  Trials, Ireflected, sometimes draw out longer than is looked for.  Even if Icame to Inverary just too late, something might yet be attempted inthe interests of James--and in those of my own character, the bestwould be accomplished.  In a moment, it seemed without thought, Ihad a plan devised."Andie," said I, "is it still to be to-morrow?"He told me nothing was changed."Was anything said about the hour?" I asked.He told me it was to be two o'clock afternoon."And about the place?" I pursued."Whatten place?" says Andie."The place I am to be landed at?" said I.He owned there was nothing as to that."Very well, then," I said, "this shall be mine to arrange.  Thewind is in the east, my road lies westward:  keep your boat, I hireit; let us work up the Forth all day; and land me at two o'clockto-morrow at the westmost we'll can have reached.""Ye daft callant!" he cried; "ye would try for Inverary after a'!""Just that, Andie," says I."Weel, ye're ill to beat!" says he.  "And I was a kind o' sorry forye a' day yesterday," he added.  "Ye see, I was never entirely suretill then, which way of it ye really wantit."Here was a spur to a lame horse!"A word in your ear, Andie," said I.  "This plan of mine hasanother advantage yet.  We can leave these Hielandman behind us onthe rock, and one of your boats from the Castleton can bring themoff to-morrow.  Yon Neil has a queer eye when he regards you;maybe, if I was once out of the gate there might be knives again;these red-shanks are unco grudgeful.  And if there should come tobe any question, here is your excuse.  Our lives were in danger bythese savages; being answerable for my safety, you chose the partto bring me from their neighbourhood and detain me the rest of thetime on board your boat:  and do you know, Andie?" says I, with asmile, "I think it was very wisely chosen,""The truth is I have nae goo for Neil," says Andie, "nor he for me,I'm thinking; and I would like ill to come to my hands wi' the man.Tam Anster will make a better hand of it with the cattle onyway."(For this man, Anster, came from Fife, where the Gaelic is stillspoken.)  "Ay, ay!" says Andie, "Tam'll can deal with them thebest.  And troth! the mair I think of it, the less I see we wouldbe required.  The place--ay, feggs! they had forgot the place.  Eh,Shaws, ye're a lang-heided chield when ye like!  Forby that I'mawing ye my life," he added, with more solemnity, and offered mehis hand upon the bargain.Whereupon, with scarce more words, we stepped suddenly on board theboat, cast off, and set the lug.  The Gregara were then busy uponbreakfast, for the cookery was their usual part; but, one of themstepping to the battlements, our flight was observed before we weretwenty fathoms from the rock; and the three of them ran about theruins and the landing-shelf, for all the world like ants about abroken nest, hailing and crying on us to return.  We were still inboth the lee and the shadow of the rock, which last lay broad uponthe waters, but presently came forth in almost the same moment intothe wind and sunshine; the sail filled, the boat heeled to thegunwale, and we swept immediately beyond sound of the men's voices.To what terrors they endured upon the rock, where they were nowdeserted without the countenance of any civilised person or so muchas the protection of a Bible, no limit can be set; nor had they anybrandy left to be their consolation, for even in the haste andsecrecy of our departure Andie had managed to remove it.It was our first care to set Anster ashore in a cove by theGlenteithy Rocks, so that the deliverance of our maroons might beduly seen to the next day.  Thence we kept away up Firth.  Thebreeze, which was then so spirited, swiftly declined, but neverwholly failed us.  All day we kept moving, though often not muchmore; and it was after dark ere we were up with the Queensferry.To keep the letter of Andie's engagement (or what was left of it) Imust remain on board, but I thought no harm to communicate with theshore in writing.  On Prestongrange's cover, where the Governmentseal must have a good deal surprised my correspondent, I writ, bythe boat's lantern, a few necessary words, aboard and Andie carriedthem to Rankeillor.  In about an hour he came again, with a purseof money and the assurance that a good horse should be standingsaddled for me by two to-morrow at Clackmannan Pool.  This done,and the boat riding by her stone anchor, we lay down to sleep underthe sail.We were in the Pool the next day long ere two; and there wasnothing left for me but to sit and wait.  I felt little alacrityupon my errand.  I would have been glad of any passable excuse tolay it down; but none being to be found, my uneasiness was no lessgreat than if I had been running to some desired pleasure.  Byshortly after one the horse was at the waterside, and I could see aman walking it to and fro till I should land, which vastly swelledmy impatience.  Andie ran the moment of my liberation very fine,showing himself a man of his bare word, but scarce serving hisemployers with a heaped measure; and by about fifty seconds aftertwo I was in the saddle and on the full stretch for Stirling.  In alittle more than an hour I had passed that town, and was alreadymounting Alan Water side, when the weather broke in a smalltempest.  The rain blinded me, the wind had nearly beat me from thesaddle, and the first darkness of the night surprised me in awilderness still some way east of Balwhidder, not very sure of mydirection and mounted on a horse that began already to be weary.In the press of my hurry, and to be spared the delay and annoyanceof a guide, I had followed (so far as it was possible for anyhorseman) the line of my journey with Alan.  This I did with openeyes, foreseeing a great risk in it, which the tempest had nowbrought to a reality.  The last that I knew of where I was, I thinkit must have been about Uam Var; the hour perhaps six at night.  Imust still think it great good fortune that I got about eleven tomy destination, the house of Duncan Dhu.  Where I had wandered inthe interval perhaps the horse could tell.  I know we were twicedown, and once over the saddle and for a moment carried away in aroaring burn.  Steed and rider were bemired up to the eyes.From Duncan I had news of the trial.  It was followed in all theseHighland regions with religious interest; news of it spread fromInverary as swift as men could travel; and I was rejoiced to learnthat, up to a late hour that Saturday it was not yet concluded; andall men began to suppose it must spread over the Monday.  Under thespur of this intelligence I would not sit to eat; but, Duncanhaving agreed to be my guide, took the road again on foot, with thepiece in my hand and munching as I went.  Duncan brought with him aflask of usquebaugh and a hand-lantern; which last enlightened usjust so long as we could find houses where to rekindle it, for thething leaked outrageously and blew out with every gust.  The morepart of the night we walked blindfold among sheets of rain, and dayfound us aimless on the mountains.  Hard by we struck a hut on aburn-side, where we got bite and a direction; and, a little beforethe end of the sermon, came to the kirk doors of Inverary.The rain had somewhat washed the upper parts of me, but I was stillbogged as high as to the knees; I streamed water; I was so weary Icould hardly limp, and my face was like a ghost's.  I stoodcertainly more in need of a change of raiment and a bed to lie on,than of all the benefits in Christianity.  For all which (beingpersuaded the chief point for me was to make myself immediatelypublic) I set the door of the church with the dirty Duncan at mytails, and finding a vacant place sat down."Thirteently, my brethren, and in parenthesis, the law itself mustbe regarded as a means of grace," the minister was saying, in thevoice of one delighting to pursue an argument.The sermon was in English on account of the assize.  The judgeswere present with their armed attendants, the halberts glittered ina corner by the door, and the seats were thronged beyond customwith the array of lawyers.  The text was in Romans 5th and 13th--the minister a skilled hand; and the whole of that able churchful--from Argyle, and my Lords Elchies and Kilkerran, down to thehalbertmen that came in their attendance--was sunk with gatheredbrows in a profound critical attention.  The minister himself and asprinkling of those about the door observed our entrance at themoment and immediately forgot the same; the rest either did nothear or would not hear or would not be heard; and I sat amongst myfriends and enemies unremarked.The first that I singled out was Prestongrange.  He sat wellforward, like an eager horseman in the saddle, his lips moving withrelish, his eyes glued on the minister; the doctrine was clearly tohis mind.  Charles Stewart, on the other hand, was half asleep, andlooked harassed and pale.  As for Simon Fraser, he appeared like ablot, and almost a scandal, in the midst of that attentivecongregation, digging his hands in his pockets, shifting his legs,clearing his throat, and rolling up his bald eyebrows and shootingout his eyes to right and left, now with a yawn, now with a secretsmile.  At times, too, he would take the Bible in front of him, runit through, seem to read a bit, run it through again, and stop andyawn prodigiously:  the whole as if for exercise.In the course of this restlessness his eye alighted on myself.  Hesat a second stupefied, then tore a half-leaf out of the Bible,scrawled upon it with a pencil, and passed it with a whispered wordto his next neighbour.  The note came to Prestongrange, who gave mebut the one look; thence it voyaged to the hands of Mr. Erskine;thence again to Argyle, where he sat between the other two lords ofsession, and his Grace turned and fixed me with an arrogant eye.The last of those interested in my presence was Charlie Stewart,and he too began to pencil and hand about dispatches, none of whichI was able to trace to their destination in the crowd.But the passage of these notes had aroused notice; all who were inthe secret (or supposed themselves to be so) were whisperinginformation--the rest questions; and the minister himself seemedquite discountenanced by the flutter in the church and sudden stirand whispering.  His voice changed, he plainly faltered, nor did heagain recover the easy conviction and full tones of his delivery.It would be a puzzle to him till his dying day, why a sermon thathad gone with triumph through four parts, should this miscarry inthe fifth.As for me, I continued to sit there, very wet and weary, and a gooddeal anxious as to what should happen next, but greatly exulting inmy success.CHAPTER XVII--THE MEMORIALThe last word of the blessing was scarce out of the minister'smouth before Stewart had me by the arm.  We were the first to beforth of the church, and he made such extraordinary expedition thatwe were safe within the four walls of a house before the street hadbegun to be thronged with the home-going congregation."Am I yet in time?" I asked."Ay and no," said he.  "The case is over; the jury is enclosed, andwill so kind as let us ken their view of it to-morrow in themorning, the same as I could have told it my own self three daysago before the play began.  The thing has been public from thestart.  The panel kent it, 'YE MAY DO WHAT YE WILL FOR ME,'whispers he two days ago.  'YE KEN MY FATE BY WHAT THE DUKE OFARGYLE HAS JUST SAID TO MR. MACINTOSH.'  O, it's been a scandal!"The great Agyle he gaed before,He gart the cannons and guns to roar,"and the very macer cried 'Cruachan!'  But now that I have got youagain I'll never despair.  The oak shall go over the myrtle yet;we'll ding the Campbells yet in their own town.  Praise God that Ishould see the day!"He was leaping with excitement, emptied out his mails upon thefloor that I might have a change of clothes, and incommoded me withhis assistance as I changed.  What remained to be done, or how Iwas to do it, was what he never told me nor, I believe, so much asthought of.  "We'll ding the Campbells yet!" that was still hisovercome.  And it was forced home upon my mind how this, that hadthe externals of a sober process of law, was in its essence a clanbattle between savage clans.  I thought my friend the Writer noneof the least savage.  Who that had only seen him at a counsel'sback before the Lord Ordinary or following a golf ball and layingdown his clubs on Bruntsfield links, could have recognised for thesame person this voluble and violent clansman?James Stewart's counsel were four in number--Sheriffs Brown ofColstoun and Miller, Mr. Robert Macintosh, and Mr. Stewart youngerof Stewart Hall.  These were covenanted to dine with the Writerafter sermon, and I was very obligingly included of the party.  Nosooner the cloth lifted, and the first bowl very artfullycompounded by Sheriff Miller, than we fell to the subject in hand.I made a short narration of my seizure and captivity, and was thenexamined and re-examined upon the circumstances of the murder.  Itwill be remembered this was the first time I had had my say out, orthe matter at all handled, among lawyers; and the consequence wasvery dispiriting to the others and (I must own) disappointing tomyself."To sum up," said Colstoun, "you prove that Alan was on the spot;you have heard him proffer menaces against Glenure; and though youassure us he was not the man who fired, you leave a strongimpression that he was in league with him, and consenting, perhapsimmediately assisting, in the act.  You show him besides, at therisk of his own liberty, actively furthering the criminal's escape.And the rest of your testimony (so far as the least material)depends on the bare word of Alan or of James, the two accused.  Inshort, you do not at all break, but only lengthen by one personage,the chain that binds our client to the murderer; and I needscarcely say that the introduction of a third accomplice ratheraggravates that appearance of a conspiracy which has been ourstumbling block from the beginning.""I am of the same opinion," said Sheriff Miller.  "I think we mayall be very much obliged to Prestongrange for taking a mostuncomfortable witness out of our way.  And chiefly, I think, Mr.Balfour himself might be obliged.  For you talk of a thirdaccomplice, but Mr. Balfour (in my view) has very much theappearance of a fourth.""Allow me, sirs!" interposed Stewart the Writer.  "There is anotherview.  Here we have a witness--never fash whether material or not--a witness in this cause, kidnapped by that old, lawless, banditcrew of the Glengyle Macgregors, and sequestered for near upon amonth in a bourock of old ruins on the Bass.  Move that and seewhat dirt you fling on the proceedings!  Sirs, this is a tale tomake the world ring with!  It would be strange, with such a grip asthis, if we couldnae squeeze out a pardon for my client.""And suppose we took up Mr. Balfour's cause to-morrow?" saidStewart Hall.  "I am much deceived or we should find so manyimpediments thrown in our path, as that James should have beenhanged before we had found a court to hear us.  This is a greatscandal, but I suppose we have none of us forgot a greater still, Imean the matter of the Lady Grange.  The woman was still indurance; my friend Mr. Hope of Rankeillor did what was humanlypossible; and how did he speed? He never got a warrant!  Well,it'll be the same now; the same weapons will be used.  This is ascene, gentleman, of clan animosity.  The hatred of the name whichI have the honour to bear, rages in high quarters.  There isnothing here to be viewed but naked Campbell spite and scurvyCampbell intrigue."You may be sure this was to touch a welcome topic, and I sat forsome time in the midst of my learned counsel, almost deaved withtheir talk but extremely little the wiser for its purport.  TheWriter was led into some hot expressions; Colstoun must take him upand set him right; the rest joined in on different sides, but allpretty noisy; the Duke of Argyle was beaten like a blanket; KingGeorge came in for a few digs in the by-going and a great deal ofrather elaborate defence; and there was only one person that seemedto be forgotten, and that was James of the Glens.Through all this Mr. Miller sat quiet.  He was a slip of an oldishgentleman, ruddy and twinkling; he spoke in a smooth rich voice,with an infinite effect of pawkiness, dealing out each word the wayan actor does, to give the most expression possible; and even now,when he was silent, and sat there with his wig laid aside, hisglass in both hands, his mouth funnily pursed, and his chin out, heseemed the mere picture of a merry slyness.  It was plain he had aword to say, and waited for the fit occasion.It came presently.  Colstoun had wound up one of his speeches withsome expression of their duty to their client.  His brother sheriffwas pleased, I suppose, with the transition.  He took the table inhis confidence with a gesture and a look."That suggests to me a consideration which seems overlooked," saidhe.  "The interest of our client goes certainly before all, but theworld does not come to an end with James Stewart."  Whereat hecocked his eye.  "I might condescend, exempli gratia, upon a Mr.George Brown, a Mr. Thomas Miller, and a Mr. David Balfour.  Mr.David Balfour has a very good ground of complaint, and I think,gentlemen--if his story was properly redd out--I think there wouldbe a number of wigs on the green."The whole table turned to him with a common movement."Properly handled and carefully redd out, his is a story that couldscarcely fail to have some consequence," he continued.  "The wholeadministration of justice, from its highest officer downward, wouldbe totally discredited; and it looks to me as if they would need tobe replaced."  He seemed to shine with cunning as he said it.  "AndI need not point out to ye that this of Mr. Balfour's would be aremarkable bonny cause to appear in," he added.Well, there they all were started on another hare; Mr. Balfour'scause, and what kind of speeches could be there delivered, and whatofficials could be thus turned out, and who would succeed to theirpositions.  I shall give but the two specimens.  It was proposed toapproach Simon Fraser, whose testimony, if it could be obtained,would prove certainly fatal to Argyle and to Prestongrange.  Millerhighly approved of the attempt.  "We have here before us a dreepingroast," said he, "here is cut-and-come-again for all."  Andmethought all licked their lips.  The other was already near theend.  Stewart the Writer was out of the body with delight, smellingvengeance on his chief enemy, the Duke."Gentlemen," cried he, charging his glass, "here is to SheriffMiller.  His legal abilities are known to all.  His culinary, thisbowl in front of us is here to speak for.  But when it comes to thepoleetical!"--cries he, and drains the glass."Ay, but it will hardly prove politics in your meaning, my friend,"said the gratified Miller.  "A revolution, if you like, and I thinkI can promise you that historical writers shall date from Mr.Balfour's cause.  But properly guided, Mr. Stewart, tenderlyguided, it shall prove a peaceful revolution.""And if the damned Campbells get their ears rubbed, what care I?"cries Stewart, smiting down his fist.It will be thought I was not very well pleased with all this,though I could scarce forbear smiling at a kind of innocency inthese old intriguers.  But it was not my view to have undergone somany sorrows for the advancement of Sheriff Miller or to make arevolution in the Parliament House:  and I interposed accordinglywith as much simplicity of manner as I could assume."I have to thank you, gentlemen, for your advice," said I.  "Andnow I would like, by your leave, to set you two or three questions.There is one thing that has fallen rather on one aide, forinstance:  Will this cause do any good to our friend James of theGlens?"They seemed all a hair set back, and gave various answers, butconcurring practically in one point, that James had now no hope butin the King's mercy."To proceed, then," said I, "will it do any good to Scotland?  Wehave a saying that it is an ill bird that fouls his own nest.  Iremember hearing we had a riot in Edinburgh when I was an infantchild, which gave occasion to the late Queen to call this countrybarbarous; and I always understood that we had rather lost thangained by that.  Then came the year 'Forty-five, which madeScotland to be talked of everywhere; but I never heard it said wehad anyway gained by the 'Forty-five.  And now we come to thiscause of Mr. Balfour's, as you call it.  Sheriff Miller tells ushistorical writers are to date from it, and I would not wonder.  Itis only my fear they would date from it as a period of calamity andpublic reproach."The nimble-witted Miller had already smelt where I was travellingto, and made haste to get on the same road.  "Forcibly put, Mr.Balfour," says he.  "A weighty observe, sir.""We have next to ask ourselves if it will be good for King George,"I pursued.  "Sheriff Miller appears pretty easy upon this; but Idoubt you will scarce be able to pull down the house from underhim, without his Majesty coming by a knock or two, one of whichmight easily prove fatal."I have them a chance to answer, but none volunteered."Of those for whom the case was to be profitable," I went on,"Sheriff Miller gave us the names of several, among the which hewas good enough to mention mine.  I hope he will pardon me if Ithink otherwise.  I believe I hung not the least back in thisaffair while there was life to be saved; but I own I thought myselfextremely hazarded, and I own I think it would be a pity for ayoung man, with some idea of coming to the Bar, to ingrain uponhimself the character of a turbulent, factious fellow before he wasyet twenty.  As for James, it seems--at this date of theproceedings, with the sentence as good as pronounced--he has nohope but in the King's mercy.  May not his Majesty, then, be morepointedly addressed, the characters of these high officerssheltered from the public, and myself kept out of a position whichI think spells ruin for me?"They all sat and gazed into their glasses, and I could see theyfound my attitude on the affair unpalatable.  But Miller was readyat all events."If I may be allowed to put my young friend's notion in more formalshape," says he, "I understand him to propose that we should embodythe fact of his sequestration, and perhaps some heads of thetestimony he was prepared to offer, in a memorial to the Crown.This plan has elements of success.  It is as likely as any other(and perhaps likelier) to help our client.  Perhaps his Majestywould have the goodness to feel a certain gratitude to allconcerned in such a memorial, which might be construed into anexpression of a very delicate loyalty; and I think, in the draftingof the same, this view might be brought forward."They all nodded to each other, not without sighs, for the formeralternative was doubtless more after their inclination."Paper, then, Mr. Stewart, if you please," pursued Miller; "and Ithink it might very fittingly be signed by the five of us herepresent, as procurators for the condemned man."'"It can do none of us any harm, at least," says Colstoun, heavinganother sigh, for he had seen himself Lord Advocate the last tenminutes.Thereupon they set themselves, not very enthusiastically, to draftthe memorial--a process in the course of which they soon caughtfire; and I had no more ado but to sit looking on and answer anoccasional question.  The paper was very well expressed; beginningwith a recitation of the facts about myself, the reward offered formy apprehension, my surrender, the pressure brought to bear uponme; my sequestration; and my arrival at Inverary in time to be toolate; going on to explain the reasons of loyalty and publicinterest for which it was agreed to waive any right of action; andwinding up with a forcible appeal to the King's mercy on behalf ofJames.Methought I was a good deal sacrificed, and rather represented inthe light of a firebrand of a fellow whom my cloud of lawyers hadrestrained with difficulty from extremes.  But I let it pass, andmade but the one suggestion, that I should be described as ready todeliver my own evidence and adduce that of others before anycommission of inquiry--and the one demand, that I should beimmediately furnished with a copy.Colstoun hummed and hawed.  "This is a very confidential document,"said he."And my position towards Prestongrange is highly peculiar," Ireplied.  "No question but I must have touched his heart at ourfirst interview, so that he has since stood my friend consistently.But for him, gentlemen, I must now be lying dead or awaiting mysentence alongside poor James.  For which reason I choose tocommunicate to him the fact of this memorial as soon as it iscopied.  You are to consider also that this step will make for myprotection.  I have enemies here accustomed to drive hard; hisGrace is in his own country, Lovat by his side; and if there shouldhang any ambiguity over our proceedings I think I might very wellawake in gaol."Not finding any very ready answer to these considerations, mycompany of advisers were at the last persuaded to consent, and madeonly this condition that I was to lay the paper beforePrestongrange with the express compliments of all concerned.The Advocate was at the castle dining with his Grace.  By the handof one of Colstoun's servants I sent him a billet asking for aninterview, and received a summons to meet him at once in a privatehouse of the town.  Here I found him alone in a chamber; from hisface there was nothing to be gleaned; yet I was not so unobservantbut what I spied some halberts in the hall, and not so stupid butwhat I could gather he was prepared to arrest me there and then,should it appear advisable."So, Mr. David, this is you?" said he."Where I fear I am not overly welcome, my lord," said I.  "And Iwould like before I go further to express my sense of yourlordship's good offices, even should they now cease.""I have heard of your gratitude before," he replied drily, "and Ithink this can scarce be the matter you called me from my wine tolisten to.  I would remember also, if I were you, that you stillstand on a very boggy foundation.""Not now, my lord, I think," said I; "and if your lordship will butglance an eye along this, you will perhaps think as I do."He read it sedulously through, frowning heavily; then turned backto one part and another which he seemed to weigh and compare theeffect of.  His face a little lightened."This is not so bad but what it might be worse," said he; "though Iam still likely to pay dear for my acquaintance with Mr. DavidBalfour.""Rather for your indulgence to that unlucky young man, my lord,"said I.He still skimmed the paper, and all the while his spirits seemed tomend."And to whom am I indebted for this?" he asked presently.  "Othercounsels must have been discussed, I think.  Who was it proposedthis private method?  Was it Miller?""My lord, it was myself," said I.  "These gentlemen have shown meno such consideration, as that I should deny myself any credit Ican fairly claim, or spare them any responsibility they shouldproperly bear.  And the mere truth is, that they were all in favourof a process which should have remarkable consequences in theParliament House, and prove for them (in one of their ownexpressions) a dripping roast.  Before I intervened, I think theywere on the point of sharing out the different law appointments.Our friend Mr. Simon was to be taken in upon some composition."Prestongrange smiled.  "These are our friends," said he.  "And whatwere your reasons for dissenting, Mr. David?"I told them without concealment, expressing, however, with moreforce and volume those which regarded Prestongrange himself."You do me no more than justice," said he.  "I have fought as hardin your interest as you have fought against mine.  And how came youhere to-day?" he asked.  "As the case drew out, I began to growuneasy that I had clipped the period so fine, and I was evenexpecting you to-morrow.  But to-day--I never dreamed of it."I was not of course, going to betray Andie."I suspect there is some very weary cattle by the road," said I"If I had known you were such a mosstrooper you should have tastedlonger of the Bass," says he."Speaking of which, my lord, I return your letter."  And I gave himthe enclosure in the counterfeit hand."There was the cover also with the seal," said he."I have it not," said I.  "It bore not even an address, and couldnot compromise a cat.  The second enclosure I have, and with yourpermission, I desire to keep it."I thought he winced a little, but he said nothing to the point."To-morrow," he resumed, "our business here is to be finished, andI proceed by Glasgow.  I would be very glad to have you of myparty, Mr David.""My lord . . ." I began."I do not deny it will be of service to me," he interrupted.  "Idesire even that, when we shall come to Edinburgh, you shouldalight at my house.  You have very warm friends in the Miss Grants,who will be overjoyed to have you to themselves.  If you think Ihave been of use to you, you can thus easily repay me, and so farfrom losing, may reap some advantage by the way.  It is not everystrange young man who is presented in society by the King'sAdvocate."Often enough already (in our brief relations) this gentleman hadcaused my head to spin; no doubt but what for a moment he did soagain now.  Here was the old fiction still maintained of myparticular favour with his daughters, one of whom had been so goodas to laugh at me, while the other two had scarce deigned to remarkthe fact of my existence.  And now I was to ride with my lord toGlasgow; I was to dwell with him in Edinburgh; I was to be broughtinto society under his protection!  That he should have so muchgood-nature as to forgive me was surprising enough; that he couldwish to take me up and serve me seemed impossible; and I began toseek some ulterior meaning.  One was plain.  If I became his guest,repentance was excluded; I could never think better of my presentdesign and bring any action.  And besides, would not my presence inhis house draw out the whole pungency of the memorial?  For thatcomplaint could not be very seriously regarded, if the personchiefly injured was the guest of the official most incriminated.As I thought upon this I could not quite refrain from smiling."This is in the nature of a countercheck to the memorial?" said I."You are cunning, Mr. David," said he, "and you do not wholly guesswrong the fact will be of use to me in my defence.  Perhaps,however, you underrate friendly sentiments, which are perfectlygenuine.  I have a respect for you, David, mingled with awe," sayshe, smiling."I am more than willing, I am earnestly desirous to meet yourwishes," said I.  "It is my design to be called to the Bar, whereyour lordship's countenance would be invaluable; and I am besidessincerely grateful to yourself and family for different marks ofinterest and of indulgence.  The difficulty is here.  There is onepoint in which we pull two ways.  You are trying to hang JamesStewart, I am trying to save him.  In so far as my riding with youwould better your lordship's defence, I am at your lordshipsorders; but in so far as it would help to hang James Stewart, yousee me at a stick."I thought he swore to himself.  "You should certainly be called;the Bar is the true scene for your talents," says he, bitterly, andthen fell a while silent.  "I will tell you," he presently resumed,"there is no question of James Stewart, for or against, James is adead man; his life is given and taken--bought (if you like itbetter) and sold; no memorial can help--no defalcation of afaithful Mr. David hurt him.  Blow high, blow low, there will be nopardon for James Stewart:  and take that for said!  The question isnow of myself:  am I to stand or fall? and I do not deny to youthat I am in some danger.  But will Mr. David Balfour consider why?It is not because I pushed the case unduly against James; for that,I am sure of condonation.  And it is not because I have sequesteredMr. David on a rock, though it will pass under that colour; butbecause I did not take the ready and plain path, to which I waspressed repeatedly, and send Mr. David to his grave or to thegallows.  Hence the scandal--hence this damned memorial," strikingthe paper on his leg.  "My tenderness for you has brought me inthis difficulty.  I wish to know if your tenderness to your ownconscience is too great to let you help me out of it."No doubt but there was much of the truth in what he said; if Jameswas past helping, whom was it more natural that I should turn tohelp than just the man before me, who had helped myself so often,and was even now setting me a pattern of patience?  I was besidesnot only weary, but beginning to be ashamed, of my perpetualattitude of suspicion and refusal"If you will name the time and place, I will be punctually ready toattend your lordship," said I.He shook hands with me.  "And I think my misses have some news foryou," says he, dismissing me.I came away, vastly pleased to have my peace made, yet a littleconcerned in conscience; nor could I help wondering, as I wentback, whether, perhaps, I had not been a scruple too good-natured.But there was the fact, that this was a man that might have been myfather, an able man, a great dignitary, and one that, in the hourof my need, had reached a hand to my assistance.  I was in thebetter humour to enjoy the remainder of that evening, which Ipassed with the advocates, in excellent company no doubt, butperhaps with rather more than a sufficiency of punch:  for though Iwent early to bed I have no clear mind of how I got there.CHAPTER XVIII--THE TEE'D BALLOn the morrow, from the justices' private room, where none couldsee me, I heard the verdict given in and judgment rendered uponJames.  The Duke's words I am quite sure I have correctly; andsince that famous passage has been made a subject of dispute, I mayas well commemorate my version.  Having referred to the year '45,the chief of the Campbells, sitting as Justice-General upon thebench, thus addressed the unfortunate Stewart before him:  "If youhad been successful in that rebellion, you might have been givingthe law where you have now received the judgment of it; we, who arethis day your judges, might have been tried before one of your mockcourts of judicature; and then you might have been satiated withthe blood of any name or clan to which you had an aversion.""This is to let the cat out of the bag, indeed," thought I.  Andthat was the general impression.  It was extraordinary how theyoung advocate lads took hold and made a mock of this speech, andhow scarce a meal passed but what someone would get in the words:"And then you might have been satiated."  Many songs were made intime for the hour's diversion, and are near all forgot.  I rememberone began:"What do ye want the bluid of, bluid of?Is it a name, or is it a clan,Or is it an aefauld Hielandman,That ye want the bluid of, bluid of?"Another went to my old favourite air, The House of Airlie, andbegan thus:"It fell on a day when Argyle was on the bench,That they served him a Stewart for his denner."And one of the verses ran:"Then up and spak' the Duke, and flyted on his cook,I regard it as a sensible aspersion,That I would sup ava', an' satiate my maw,With the bluid of ony clan of my aversion."James was as fairly murdered as though the Duke had got a fowling-piece and stalked him.  So much of course I knew:  but others knewnot so much, and were more affected by the items of scandal thatcame to light in the progress of the cause.  One of the chief wascertainly this sally of the justice's.  It was run hard by anotherof a juryman, who had struck into the midst of Coulston's speechfor the defence with a "Pray, sir, cut it short, we are quiteweary," which seemed the very excess of impudence and simplicity.But some of my new lawyer friends were still more staggered with aninnovation that had disgraced and even vitiated the proceedings.One witness was never called.  His name, indeed, was printed, whereit may still be seen on the fourth page of the list:  "JamesDrummond, alias Macgregor, alias James More, late tenant inInveronachile"; and his precognition had been taken, as the manneris, in writing.  He had remembered or invented (God help him)matter which was lead in James Stewart's shoes, and I saw was liketo prove wings to his own.  This testimony it was highly desirableto bring to the notice of the jury, without exposing the manhimself to the perils of cross-examination; and the way it wasbrought about was a matter of surprise to all.  For the paper washanded round (like a curiosity) in court; passed through the jury-box, where it did its work; and disappeared again (as though byaccident) before it reached the counsel for the prisoner.  This wascounted a most insidious device; and that the name of James Moreshould be mingled up with it filled me with shame for Catriona andconcern for myself.The following day, Prestongrange and I, with a considerablecompany, set out for Glasgow, where (to my impatience) we continuedto linger some time in a mixture of pleasure and affairs.  I lodgedwith my lord, with whom I was encouraged to familiarity; had myplace at entertainments; was presented to the chief guests; andaltogether made more of than I thought accorded either with myparts or station; so that, on strangers being present, I wouldoften blush for Prestongrange.  It must be owned the view I hadtaken of the world in these last months was fit to cast a gloomupon my character.  I had met many men, some of them leaders inIsrael whether by their birth or talents; and who among them allhad shown clean hands?  As for the Browns and Millers, I had seentheir self-seeking, I could never again respect them.Prestongrange was the best yet; he had saved me, spared me rather,when others had it in their minds to murder me outright; but theblood of James lay at his door; and I thought his presentdissimulation with myself a thing below pardon.  That he shouldaffect to find pleasure in my discourse almost surprised me out ofmy patience.  I would sit and watch him with a kind of a slow fireof anger in my bowels.  "Ah, friend, friend," I would think tomyself, "if you were but through with this affair of the memorial,would you not kick me in the streets?"  Here I did him, as eventshave proved, the most grave injustice; and I think he was at oncefar more sincere, and a far more artful performer, than I supposed.But I had some warrant for my incredulity in the behaviour of thatcourt of young advocates that hung about in the hope of patronage.The sudden favour of a lad not previously heard of troubled them atfirst out of measure; but two days were not gone by before I foundmyself surrounded with flattery and attention.  I was the sameyoung man, and neither better nor bonnier, that they had rejected amonth before; and now there was no civility too fine for me!  Thesame, do I say?  It was not so; and the by-name by which I wentbehind my back confirmed it.  Seeing me so firm with the Advocate,and persuaded that I was to fly high and far, they had taken a wordfrom the golfing green, and called me THE TEE'D BALL. {14}  I wastold I was now "one of themselves"; I was to taste of their softlining, who had already made my own experience of the roughness ofthe outer husk; and one, to whom I had been presented in Hope Park,was so aspired as even to remind me of that meeting.  I told him Ihad not the pleasure of remembering it."Why" says he, "it was Miss Grant herself presented me!  My name isso-and-so.""It may very well be, sir," said I; "but I have kept no mind ofit."At which he desisted; and in the midst of the disgust that commonlyoverflowed my spirits I had a glisk of pleasure.But I have not patience to dwell upon that time at length.  When Iwas in company with these young politics I was borne down withshame for myself and my own plain ways, and scorn for them andtheir duplicity.  Of the two evils, I thought Prestongrange to bethe least; and while I was always as stiff as buckram to the youngbloods, I made rather a dissimulation of my hard feelings towardsthe Advocate, and was (in old Mr. Campbell's word) "soople to thelaird."  Himself commented on the difference, and bid me be more ofmy age, and make friends with my young comrades.I told him I was slow of making friends."I will take the word back," said he.  "But there is such a thingas FAIR GUDE S'EN AND FAIR GUDE DAY, Mr. David.  These are the sameyoung men with whom you are to pass your days and get through life:your backwardness has a look of arrogance; and unless you canassume a little more lightness of manner, I fear you will meetdifficulties in the path.""It will be an ill job to make a silk purse of a sow's ear," saidI.On the morning of October 1st I was awakened by the clattering inof an express; and getting to my window almost before he haddismounted, I saw the messenger had ridden hard.  Somewhile after Iwas called to Prestongrange, where he was sitting in his bedgownand nightcap, with his letters round him."Mr. David," add he, "I have a piece of news for you.  It concernssome friends of yours, of whom I sometimes think you are a littleashamed, for you have never referred to their existence."I suppose I blushed."See you understand, since you make the answering signal," said he."And I must compliment you on your excellent taste in beauty.  Butdo you know, Mr. David? this seems to me a very enterprising lass.She crops up from every side.  The Government of Scotland appearsunable to proceed for Mistress Katrine Drummond, which was somewhatthe case (no great while back) with a certain Mr. David Balfour.Should not these make a good match?  Her first intromission inpolitics--but I must not tell you that story, the authorities havedecided you are to hear it otherwise and from a livelier narrator.This new example is more serious, however; and I am afraid I mustalarm you with the intelligence that she is now in prison."I cried out."Yes," said he, "the little lady is in prison.  But I would nothave you to despair.  Unless you (with your friends and memorials)shall procure my downfall, she is to suffer nothing.""But what has she done?  What is her offence?" I cried."It might be almost construed a high treason," he returned, "forshe has broke the king's Castle of Edinburgh.""The lady is much my friend," I said.  "I know you would not mockme if the thing were serious.""And yet it is serious in a sense," said he; "for this rogue of aKatrine--or Cateran, as we may call her--has set adrift again uponthe world that very doubtful character, her papa."Here was one of my previsions justified:  James More was once againat liberty.  He had lent his men to keep me a prisoner; he hadvolunteered his testimony in the Appin case, and the same (nomatter by what subterfuge) had been employed to influence the jury.Now came his reward, and he was free.  It might please theauthorities to give to it the colour of an escape; but I knewbetter--I knew it must be the fulfilment of a bargain.  The samecourse of thought relieved me of the least alarm for Catriona.  Shemight be thought to have broke prison for her father; she mighthave believed so herself.  But the chief hand in the whole businesswas that of Prestongrange; and I was sure, so far from letting hercome to punishment, he would not suffer her to be even tried.Whereupon thus came out of me the not very politic ejaculation:"Ah! I was expecting that!""You have at times a great deal of discretion, too!" saysPrestongrange."And what is my lord pleased to mean by that?" I asked."I was just marvelling", he replied, "that being so clever as todraw these inferences, you should not be clever enough to keep themto yourself.  But I think you would like to hear the details of theaffair.  I have received two versions:  and the least official isthe more full and far the more entertaining, being from the livelypen of my eldest daughter.  'Here is all the town bizzing with afine piece of work,' she writes, 'and what would make the thingmore noted (if it were only known) the malefactor is a protegee ofhis lordship my papa.  I am sure your heart is too much in yourduty (if it were nothing else) to have forgotten Grey Eyes.  Whatdoes she do, but get a broad hat with the flaps open, a long hairy-like man's greatcoat, and a big gravatt; kilt her coats up to GUDEKENS WHAUR, clap two pair of boot-hose upon her legs, take a pairof CLOUTED BROGUES {15} in her hand, and off to the Castle!  Hereshe gives herself out to be a soutar {16} in the employ of JamesMore, and gets admitted to his cell, the lieutenant (who seems tohave been full of pleasantry) making sport among his soldiers ofthe soutar's greatcoat.  Presently they hear disputation and thesound of blows inside.  Out flies the cobbler, his coat flying, theflaps of his hat beat about his face, and the lieutenant and hissoldiers mock at him as he runs off.  They laughed no so hearty thenext time they had occasion to visit the cell and found nobody buta tall, pretty, grey-eyed lass in the female habit!  As for thecobbler, he was 'over the hills ayout Dumblane,' and it's thoughtthat poor Scotland will have to console herself without him.  Idrank Catriona's health this night in public.Indeed, the whole town admires her; and I think the beaux wouldwear bits of her garters in their button-holes if they could onlyget them.  I would have gone to visit her in prison too, only Iremembered in time I was papa's daughter; so I wrote her a billetinstead, which I entrusted to the faithful Doig, and I hope youwill admit I can be political when I please.  The same faithfulgomeral is to despatch this letter by the express along with thoseof the wiseacres, so that you may hear Tom Fool in company withSolomon.  Talking of GOMERALS, do tell DAUVIT BALFOUR.  I would Icould see the face of him at the thought of a long-legged lass insuch a predicament; to say nothing of the levities of youraffectionate daughter, and his respectful friend.'  So my rascalsigns herself!" continued Prestongrange.  "And you see, Mr. David,it is quite true what I tell you, that my daughters regard you withthe most affectionate playfulness.""The gomeral is much obliged," said I."And was not this prettily done!" he went on.  "Is not thisHighland maid a piece of a heroine?""I was always sure she had a great heart," said I.  "And I wagershe guessed nothing . . . But I beg your pardon, this is to treadupon forbidden subjects.""I will go bail she did not," he returned, quite openly.  "I willgo bail she thought she was flying straight into King George'sface."Remembrance of Catriona and the thought of her lying in captivity,moved me strangely.  I could see that even Prestongrange admired,and could not withhold his lips from smiling when he considered herbehaviour.  As for Miss Grant, for all her ill habit of mockery,her admiration shone out plain.  A kind of a heat came on me."I am not your lordship's daughter. . . " I began."That I know of!" he put in, smiling."I speak like a fool," said I; "or rather I began wrong.  It woulddoubtless be unwise in Mistress Grant to go to her in prison; butfor me, I think I would look like a half-hearted friend if I didnot fly there instantly.""So-ho, Mr. David," says he; "I thought that you and I were in abargain?""My lord," I said, "when I made that bargain I was a good dealaffected by your goodness, but I'll never can deny that I was movedbesides by my own interest.  There was self-seeking in my heart,and I think shame of it now.  It may be for your lordship's safetyto say this fashious Davie Balfour is your friend and housemate.Say it then; I'll never contradict you.  But as for your patronage,I give it all back.  I ask but the one thing--let me go, and giveme a pass to see her in her prison."He looked at me with a hard eye.  "You put the cart before thehorse, I think," says he.  "That which I had given was a portion ofmy liking, which your thankless nature does not seem to haveremarked.  But for my patronage, it is not given, nor (to be exact)is it yet offered."  He paused a bit.  "And I warn you, you do notknow yourself," he added.  "Youth is a hasty season; you will thinkbetter of all this before a year.""Well, and I would like to be that kind of youth!" I cried.  "Ihave seen too much of the other party in these young advocates thatfawn upon your lordship and are even at the pains to fawn on me.And I have seen it in the old ones also.  They are all for by-ends,the whole clan of them!  It's this that makes me seem to misdoubtyour lordship's liking.  Why would I think that you would like me?But ye told me yourself ye had an interest!"I stopped at this, confounded that I had run so far; he wasobserving me with an unfathomable face."My lord, I ask your pardon," I resumed.  "I have nothing in mychafts but a rough country tongue.  I think it would be onlydecent-like if I would go to see my friend in her captivity; butI'm owing you my life--I'll never forget that; and if it's for yourlordship's good, here I'll stay.  That's barely gratitude.""This might have been reached in fewer words," says Prestongrangegrimly.  "It is easy, and it is at times gracious, to say a plainScots 'ay'.""Ah, but, my lord, I think ye take me not yet entirely!" cried I."For YOUR sake, for my life-safe, and the kindness that ye say yebear to me--for these, I'll consent; but not for any good thatmight be coming to myself.  If I stand aside when this young maidis in her trial, it's a thing I will be noways advantaged by; Iwill lose by it, I will never gain.  I would rather make ashipwreck wholly than to build on that foundation."He was a minute serious, then smiled.  "You mind me of the man withthe long nose," said he; "was you to see the moon by a telescopeyou would see David Balfour there!  But you shall have your way ofit.  I will ask at you one service, and then set you free:  Myclerks are overdriven; be so good as copy me these few pages, andwhen that is done, I shall bid you God speed!  I would never chargemyself with Mr. David's conscience; and if you could cast some partof it (as you went by) in a moss hag, you would find yourself toride much easier without it.""Perhaps not just entirely in the same direction though, my lord!"says I."And you shall have the last word, too!" cries he gaily.Indeed, he had some cause for gaiety, having now found the means togain his purpose.  To lessen the weight of the memorial, or to havea readier answer at his hand, he desired I should appear publiclyin the character of his intimate.  But if I were to appear with thesame publicity as a visitor to Catriona in her prison the worldwould scarce stint to draw conclusions, and the true nature ofJames More's escape must become evident to all.  This was thelittle problem I had to set him of a sudden, and to which he had sobriskly found an answer.  I was to be tethered in Glasgow by thatjob of copying, which in mere outward decency I could not wellrefuse; and during these hours of employment Catriona was privatelygot rid of.  I think shame to write of this man that loaded me withso many goodnesses.  He was kind to me as any father, yet I everthought him as false as a cracked bell.CHAPTER XIX--I AM MUCH IN THE HANDS OF THE LADIESThe copying was a weary business, the more so as I perceived veryearly there was no sort of urgency in the matters treated, andbegan very early to consider my employment a pretext.  I had nosooner finished than I got to horse, used what remained of daylightto the best purpose, and being at last fairly benighted, slept in ahouse by Almond-Water side.  I was in the saddle again before theday, and the Edinburgh booths were just opening when I clattered inby the West Bow and drew up a smoking horse at my lord Advocate'sdoor.  I had a written word for Doig, my lord's private hand thatwas thought to be in all his secrets--a worthy little plain man,all fat and snuff and self-sufficiency.  Him I found already at hisdesk and already bedabbled with maccabaw, in the same anteroomwhere I rencountered with James More.  He read the notescrupulously through like a chapter in his Bible."H'm," says he; "ye come a wee thing ahint-hand, Mr. Balfour.  Thebird's flaen--we hae letten her out.""Miss Drummond is set free?" I cried."Achy!" said he.  "What would we keep her for, ye ken?  To hae madea steer about the bairn would has pleased naebody.""And where'll she be now?" says I."Gude kens!" says Doig, with a shrug."She'll have gone home to Lady Allardyce, I'm thinking," said I."That'll be it," said he."Then I'll gang there straight," says I."But ye'll be for a bite or ye go?" said he."Neither bite nor sup," said I.  "I had a good wauch of milk in byRatho.""Aweel, aweel," says Doig.  "But ye'll can leave your horse hereand your bags, for it seems we're to have your up-put.""Na, na", said I.  "Tamson's mear {17} would never be the thing forme this day of all days."Doig speaking somewhat broad, I had been led by imitation into anaccent much more countrified than I was usually careful to affect agood deal broader, indeed, than I have written it down; and I wasthe more ashamed when another voice joined in behind me with ascrap of a ballad:"Gae saddle me the bonny black,Gae saddle sune and mak' him readyFor I will down the Gatehope-slack,And a' to see my bonny leddy."The young lady, when I turned to her, stood in a morning gown, andher hands muffled in the same, as if to hold me at a distance.  YetI could not but think there was kindness in the eye with which shesaw me."My best respects to you, Mistress Grant," said I, bowing."The like to yourself, Mr. David," she replied with a deepcourtesy.  "And I beg to remind you of an old musty saw, that meatand mass never hindered man.  The mass I cannot afford you, for weare all good Protestants.  But the meat I press on your attention.And I would not wonder but I could find something for your privateear that would be worth the stopping for.""Mistress Grant," said I, "I believe I am already your debtor forsome merry words--and I think they were kind too--on a piece ofunsigned paper.""Unsigned paper?" says she, and made a droll face, which waslikewise wondrous beautiful, as of one trying to remember."Or else I am the more deceived," I went on.  "But to be sure, weshall have the time to speak of these, since your father is so goodas to make me for a while your inmate; and the GOMERAL begs you atthis time only for the favour of his liberty,""You give yourself hard names," said she."Mr. Doig and I would be blythe to take harder at your clever pen,"says I."Once more I have to admire the discretion of all men-folk," shereplied.  "But if you will not eat, off with you at once; you willbe back the sooner, for you go on a fool's errand.  Off with you,Mr. David," she continued, opening the door."He has lowpen on his bonny grey,He rade the richt gate and the readyI trow he would neither stint nor stay,For he was seeking his bonny leddy."I did not wait to be twice bidden, and did justice to Miss Grant'scitation on the way to Dean.Old Lady Allardyce walked there alone in the garden, in her hat andmutch, and having a silver-mounted staff of some black wood to leanupon.  As I alighted from my horse, and drew near to her withCONGEES, I could see the blood come in her face, and her head flinginto the air like what I had conceived of empresses."What brings you to my poor door?" she cried, speaking high throughher nose.  "I cannot bar it.  The males of my house are dead andburied; I have neither son nor husband to stand in the gate for me;any beggar can pluck me by the baird {18}--and a baird there is,and that's the worst of it yet?" she added partly to herself.I was extremely put out at this reception, and the last remark,which seemed like a daft wife's, left me near hand speechless."I see I have fallen under your displeasure, ma'am," said I.  "YetI will still be so bold as ask after Mistress Drummond."She considered me with a burning eye, her lips pressed closetogether into twenty creases, her hand shaking on her staff.  "Thiscows all!" she cried.  "Ye come to me to speir for her?  Would GodI knew!""She is not here?" I cried.She threw up her chin and made a step and a cry at me, so that Ifell back incontinent."Out upon your leeing throat!" she cried.  "What! ye come and speirat me!  She's in jyle, whaur ye took her to--that's all there is toit.  And of a' the beings ever I beheld in breeks, to think itshould be to you!  Ye timmer scoun'rel, if I had a male left to myname I would have your jaicket dustit till ye raired."I thought it not good to delay longer in that place, because Iremarked her passion to be rising.  As I turned to the horse-postshe even followed me; and I make no shame to confess that I rodeaway with the one stirrup on and scrambling for the other.As I knew no other quarter where I could push my inquiries, therewas nothing left me but to return to the Advocate's.  I was wellreceived by the four ladies, who were now in company together, andmust give the news of Prestongrange and what word went in the westcountry, at the most inordinate length and with great weariness tomyself; while all the time that young lady, with whom I so muchdesired to be alone again, observed me quizzically and seemed tofind pleasure in the sight of my impatience.  At last, after I hadendured a meal with them, and was come very near the point ofappealing for an interview before her aunt, she went and stood bythe music-case, and picking out a tune, sang to it on a high key--"He that will not when he may, When he will he shall have nay."But this was the end of her rigours, and presently, after makingsome excuse of which I have no mind, she carried me away in privateto her father's library.  I should not fail to say she was dressedto the nines, and appeared extraordinary handsome."Now, Mr. David, sit ye down here and let us have a two-handedcrack," said she.  "For I have much to tell you, and it appearsbesides that I have been grossly unjust to your good taste.""In what manner, Mistress Grant?" I asked.  "I trust I have neverseemed to fail in due respect.""I will be your surety, Mr, David," said she.  "Your respect,whether to yourself or your poor neighbours, has been always andmost fortunately beyond imitation.  But that is by the question.You got a note from me?" she asked."I was so bold as to suppose so upon inference," said I, "and itwas kindly thought upon.""It must have prodigiously surprised you," said she.  "But let usbegin with the beginning.  You have not perhaps forgot a day whenyou were so kind as to escort three very tedious misses to HopePark?  I have the less cause to forget it myself, because you wasso particular obliging as to introduce me to some of the principlesof the Latin grammar, a thing which wrote itself profoundly on mygratitude.""I fear I was sadly pedantical," said I, overcome with confusion atthe memory.  "You are only to consider I am quite unused with thesociety of ladies.""I will say the less about the grammar then," she replied.  "Buthow came you to desert your charge?  'He has thrown her out,overboard, his ain dear Annie!'" she hummed; "and his ain dearAnnie and her two sisters had to taigle home by theirselves like astring of green geese!  It seems you returned to my papa's, whereyou showed yourself excessively martial, and then on to realmsunknown, with an eye (it appears) to the Bass Rock; solan geesebeing perhaps more to your mind than bonny lasses."Through all this raillery there was something indulgent in thelady's eye which made me suppose there might be better coming."You take a pleasure to torment me," said I, "and I make a veryfeckless plaything; but let me ask you to be more merciful.  Atthis time there is but the one thing that I care to hear of, andthat will be news of Catriona.""Do you call her by that name to her face, Mr. Balfour?" she asked."In troth, and I am not very sure," I stammered."I would not do so in any case to strangers," said Miss Grant."And why are you so much immersed in the affairs of this younglady?""I heard she was in prison," said I."Well, and now you hear that she is out of it," she replied, "andwhat more would you have?  She has no need of any furtherchampion.""I may have the greater need of her, ma'am," said I."Come, this is better!" says Miss Grant.  "But look me fairly inthe face; am I not bonnier than she?""I would be the last to be denying it," said I.  "There is not yourmarrow in all Scotland.""Well, here you have the pick of the two at your hand, and mustneeds speak of the other," said she.  "This is never the way toplease the ladies, Mr. Balfour.""But, mistress," said I, "there are surely other things besidesmere beauty.""By which I am to understand that I am no better than I should be,perhaps?" she asked."By which you will please understand that I am like the cock in themidden in the fable book," said I.  "I see the braw jewel--and Ilike fine to see it too--but I have more need of the pickle corn.""Bravissimo!" she cried.  "There is a word well said at last, and Iwill reward you for it with my story.  That same night of yourdesertion I came late from a friend's house--where I wasexcessively admired, whatever you may think of it--and what shouldI hear but that a lass in a tartan screen desired to speak with me?She had been there an hour or better, said the servant-lass, andshe grat in to herself as she sat waiting.  I went to her direct;she rose as I came in, and I knew her at a look.  'Grey Eyes!' saysI to myself, but was more wise than to let on.  YOU WILL BE MISSGRANT AT LAST? she says, rising and looking at me hard and pitiful.AY, IT WAS TRUE HE SAID, YOU ARE BONNY AT ALL EVENTS.--THE WAY GODMADE ME, MY DEAR, I said, BUT I WOULD BE GEY AND OBLIGED IF YOUCOULD TELL ME WHAT BROUGHT YOU HERE AT SUCH A TIME OF THE NIGHT.--LADY, she said, WE ARE KINSFOLK, WE ARE BOTH COME OF THE BLOOD OFTHE SONS OF ALPIN.--MY DEAR, I replied, I THINK NO MORE OF ALPIN ORHIS SONS THAN WHAT I DO OF A KALESTOCK.  YOU HAVE A BETTER ARGUMENTIN THESE TEARS UPON YOUR BONNY FACE.  And at that I was so weak-minded as to kiss her, which is what you would like to do dearly,and I wager will never find the courage of.  I say it was weak-minded of me, for I knew no more of her than the outside; but itwas the wisest stroke I could have hit upon.  She is a verystaunch, brave nature, but I think she has been little used withtenderness; and at that caress (though to say the truth, it was butlightly given) her heart went out to me.  I will never betray thesecrets of my sex, Mr. Davie; I will never tell you the way sheturned me round her thumb, because it is the same she will use totwist yourself.  Ay, it is a fine lass!  She is as clean as hillwell water.""She is e'en't!" I cried."Well, then, she told me her concerns," pursued Miss Grant, "and inwhat a swither she was in about her papa, and what a taking aboutyourself, with very little cause, and in what a perplexity she hadfound herself after you was gone away.  AND THEN I MINDED AT LONGLAST, says she, THAT WE WERE KINSWOMEN, AND THAT MR. DAVID SHOULDHAVE GIVEN YOU THE NAME OF THE BONNIEST OF THE BONNY, AND I WASTHINKING TO MYSELF 'IF SHE IS SO BONNY SHE WILL BE GOOD AT ALLEVENTS'; AND I TOOK UP MY FOOT SOLES OUT OF THAT.  That was when Iforgave yourself, Mr. Davie.  When you was in my society, youseemed upon hot iron:  by all marks, if ever I saw a young man thatwanted to be gone, it was yourself, and I and my two sisters werethe ladies you were so desirous to be gone from; and now itappeared you had given me some notice in the by-going, and was sokind as to comment on my attractions!  From that hour you may dateour friendship, and I began to think with tenderness upon the Latingrammar.""You will have many hours to rally me in," said I; "and I thinkbesides you do yourself injustice.  I think it was Catriona turnedyour heart in my direction.  She is too simple to perceive as youdo the stiffness of her friend.""I would not like to wager upon that, Mr. David," said she.  "Thelasses have clear eyes.  But at least she is your friend entirely,as I was to see.  I carried her in to his lordship my papa; and hisAdvocacy being in a favourable stage of claret, was so good as toreceive the pair of us.  HERE IS GREY EYES THAT YOU HAVE BEENDEAVED WITH THESE DAYS PAST, said I, SHE IS COME TO PROVE THAT WESPOKE TRUE, AND I LAY THE PRETTIEST LASS IN THE THREE LOTHIANS ATYOUR FEET--making a papistical reservation of myself.  She suitedher action to my words:  down she went upon her knees to him--Iwould not like to swear but he saw two of her, which doubtless madeher appeal the more irresistible, for you are all a pack ofMahomedans--told him what had passed that night, and how she hadwithheld her father's man from following of you, and what a caseshe was in about her father, and what a flutter for yourself; andbegged with weeping for the lives of both of you (neither of whichwas in the slightest danger), till I vow I was proud of my sexbecause it was done so pretty, and ashamed for it because of thesmallness of the occasion.  She had not gone far, I assure you,before the Advocate was wholly sober, to see his inmost politicsravelled out by a young lass and discovered to the most unruly ofhis daughters.  But we took him in hand, the pair of us, andbrought that matter straight.  Properly managed--and that meansmanaged by me--there is no one to compare with my papa.""He has been a good man to me," said I."Well, he was a good man to Katrine, and I was there to see to it,"said she."And she pled for me?" say I."She did that, and very movingly," said Miss Grant.  "I would notlike to tell you what she said--I find you vain enough already.""God reward her for it!" cried I."With Mr. David Balfour, I suppose?" says she."You do me too much injustice at the last!" I cried.  "I wouldtremble to think of her in such hard hands.  Do you think I wouldpresume, because she begged my life?  She would do that for a newwhelped puppy!  I have had more than that to set me up, if you butken'd.  She kissed that hand of mine.  Ay, but she did.  And why?because she thought I was playing a brave part and might be goingto my death.  It was not for my sake--but I need not be tellingthat to you, that cannot look at me without laughter.  It was forthe love of what she thought was bravery.  I believe there is nonebut me and poor Prince Charlie had that honour done them.  Was thisnot to make a god of me? and do you not think my heart would quakewhen I remember it?""I do laugh at you a good deal, and a good deal more than is quitecivil," said she; "but I will tell you one thing:  if you speak toher like that, you have some glimmerings of a chance.""Me?" I cried, "I would never dare.  I can speak to you, MissGrant, because it's a matter of indifference what ye think of me.But her? no fear!" said I."I think you have the largest feet in all broad Scotland," saysshe."Troth they are no very small," said I, looking down."Ah, poor Catriona!" cries Miss Grant.And I could but stare upon her; for though I now see very well whatshe was driving at (and perhaps some justification for the same), Iwas never swift at the uptake in such flimsy talk."Ah well, Mr. David," she said, "it goes sore against myconscience, but I see I shall have to be your speaking board.  Sheshall know you came to her straight upon the news of herimprisonment; she shall know you would not pause to eat; and of ourconversation she shall hear just so much as I think convenient fora maid of her age and inexperience.  Believe me, you will be inthat way much better served than you could serve yourself, for Iwill keep the big feet out of the platter.""You know where she is, then?" I exclaimed."That I do, Mr. David, and will never tell," said she."Why that?" I asked."Well," she said, "I am a good friend, as you will soon discover;and the chief of those that I am friend to is my papa.  I assureyou, you will never heat nor melt me out of that, so you may spareme your sheep's eyes; and adieu to your David-Balfourship for thenow.""But there is yet one thing more," I cried.  "There is one thingthat must be stopped, being mere ruin to herself, and to me too.""Well," she said, "be brief; I have spent half the day on youalready.""My Lady Allardyce believes," I began--"she supposes--she thinksthat I abducted her."The colour came into Miss Grant's face, so that at first I wasquite abashed to find her ear so delicate, till I bethought me shewas struggling rather with mirth, a notion in which I wasaltogether confirmed by the shaking of her voice as she replied -"I will take up the defence of your reputation," she said.  "Youmay leave it in my hands."And with that she withdrew out of the library.CHAPTER XX--I CONTINUE TO MOVE IN GOOD SOCIETYFor about exactly two months I remained a guest in Prestongrange'sfamily, where I bettered my acquaintance with the bench, the bar,and the flower of Edinburgh company.  You are not to suppose myeducation was neglected; on the contrary, I was kept extremelybusy.  I studied the French, so as to be more prepared to go toLeyden; I set myself to the fencing, and wrought hard, sometimesthree hours in the day, with notable advancement; at the suggestionof my cousin, Pilrig, who was an apt musician, I was put to asinging class; and by the orders of my Miss Grant, to one for thedancing, at which I must say I proved far from ornamental.However, all were good enough to say it gave me an address a littlemore genteel; and there is no question but I learned to manage mycoat skirts and sword with more dexterity, and to stand in a roomas though the same belonged to me.  My clothes themselves were allearnestly re-ordered; and the most trifling circumstance, such aswhere I should tie my hair, or the colour of my ribbon, debatedamong the three misses like a thing of weight.  One way withanother, no doubt I was a good deal improved to look at, andacquired a bit of modest air that would have surprised the goodfolks at Essendean.The two younger misses were very willing to discuss a point of myhabiliment, because that was in the line of their chief thoughts.I cannot say that they appeared any other way conscious of mypresence; and though always more than civil, with a kind ofheartless cordiality, could not hide how much I wearied them.  Asfor the aunt, she was a wonderful still woman; and I think she gaveme much the same attention as she gave the rest of the family,which was little enough.  The eldest daughter and the Advocatehimself were thus my principal friends, and our familiarity wasmuch increased by a pleasure that we took in common.  Before thecourt met we spent a day or two at the house of Grange, living verynobly with an open table, and here it was that we three began toride out together in the fields, a practice afterwards maintainedin Edinburgh, so far as the Advocate's continual affairs permitted.When we were put in a good frame by the briskness of the exercise,the difficulties of the way, or the accidents of bad weather, myshyness wore entirely off; we forgot that we were strangers, andspeech not being required, it flowed the more naturally on.  Thenit was that they had my story from me, bit by bit, from the timethat I left Essendean, with my voyage and battle in the Covenant,wanderings in the heather, etc.; and from the interest they foundin my adventures sprung the circumstance of a jaunt we made alittle later on, on a day when the courts were not sitting, and ofwhich I will tell a trifle more at length.We took horse early, and passed first by the house of Shaws, whereit stood smokeless in a great field of white frost, for it was yetearly in the day.  Here Prestongrange alighted down, gave me hishorse, an proceeded alone to visit my uncle.  My heart, I remember,swelled up bitter within me at the sight of that bare house and thethought of the old miser sitting chittering within in the coldkitchen!"There is my home," said I; "and my family.""Poor David Balfour!" said Miss Grant.What passed during the visit I have never heard; but it woulddoubtless not be very agreeable to Ebenezer, for when the Advocatecame forth again his face was dark."I think you will soon be the laird indeed, Mr. Davie," says he,turning half about with the one foot in the stirrup."I will never pretend sorrow," said I; and, to say the truth,during his absence Miss Grant and I had been embellishing the placein fancy with plantations, parterres, and a terrace--much as I havesince carried out in fact.Thence we pushed to the Queensferry, where Rankeillor gave us agood welcome, being indeed out of the body to receive so great avisitor.  Here the Advocate was so unaffectedly good as to go quitefully over my affairs, sitting perhaps two hours with the Writer inhis study, and expressing (I was told) a great esteem for myselfand concern for my fortunes.  To while this time, Miss Grant and Iand young Rankeillor took boat and passed the Hope to Limekilns.Rankeillor made himself very ridiculous (and, I thought, offensive)with his admiration for the young lady, and to my wonder (only itis so common a weakness of her sex) she seemed, if anything, to bea little gratified.  One use it had:  for when we were come to theother side, she laid her commands on him to mind the boat, whileshe and I passed a little further to the alehouse.  This was herown thought, for she had been taken with my account of AlisonHastie, and desired to see the lass herself.  We found her oncemore alone--indeed, I believe her father wrought all day in thefields--and she curtsied dutifully to the gentry-folk and thebeautiful young lady in the riding-coat."Is this all the welcome I am to get?" said I, holding out my hand."And have you no more memory of old friends?""Keep me! wha's this of it?" she cried, and then, "God's truth,it's the tautit {19} laddie!""The very same," says"Mony's the time I've thocht upon you and your freen, and blythe amI to see in your braws," {20} she cried.  "Though I kent ye werecome to your ain folk by the grand present that ye sent me and thatI thank ye for with a' my heart.""There," said Miss Grant to me, "run out by with ye, like a guidbairn.  I didnae come here to stand and haud a candle; it's her andme that are to crack."I suppose she stayed ten minutes in the house, but when she cameforth I observed two things--that her eyes were reddened, and asilver brooch was gone out of her bosom.  This very much affectedme."I never saw you so well adorned," said I."O Davie man, dinna be a pompous gowk!" said she, and was more thanusually sharp to me the remainder of the day.About candlelight we came home from this excursion.For a good while I heard nothing further of Catriona--my Miss Grantremaining quite impenetrable, and stopping my mouth withpleasantries.  At last, one day that she returned from walking andfound me alone in the parlour over my French, I thought there wassomething unusual in her looks; the colour heightened, the eyessparkling high, and a bit of a smile continually bitten in as sheregarded me.  She seemed indeed like the very spirit of mischief,and, walking briskly in the room, had soon involved me in a kind ofquarrel over nothing and (at the least) with nothing intended on myside.  I was like Christian in the slough--the more I tried toclamber out upon the side, the deeper I became involved; until atlast I heard her declare, with a great deal of passion, that shewould take that answer from the hands of none, and I must down uponmy knees for pardon.The causelessness of all this fuff stirred my own bile.  "I havesaid nothing you can properly object to," said I, "and as for myknees, that is an attitude I keep for God.""And as a goddess I am to be served!" she cried, shaking her brownlocks at me and with a bright colour.  "Every man that comes withinwaft of my petticoats shall use me so!""I will go so far as ask your pardon for the fashion's sake,although I vow I know not why," I replied.  "But for these play-acting postures, you can go to others.""O Davie!" she said.  "Not if I was to beg you?"I bethought me I was fighting with a woman, which is the same as tosay a child, and that upon a point entirely formal."I think it a bairnly thing," I said, "not worthy in you to ask, orme to render.  Yet I will not refuse you, neither," said I; "andthe stain, if there be any, rests with yourself."  And at that Ikneeled fairly down."There!" she cried.  "There is the proper station, there is where Ihave been manoeuvring to bring you."  And then, suddenly, "Kep,"{21} said she, flung me a folded billet, and ran from the apartmentlaughing.The billet had neither place nor date.  "Dear Mr. David," it began,"I get your news continually by my cousin, Miss Grant, and it is apleisand hearing.  I am very well, in a good place, among goodfolk, but necessitated to be quite private, though I am hoping thatat long last we may meet again.  All your friendships have beentold me by my loving cousin, who loves us both.  She bids me tosend you this writing, and oversees the same.  I will be asking youto do all her commands, and rest your affectionate friend, CatrionaMacgregor-Drummond.  P.S.--Will you not see my cousin, Allardyce?"I think it not the least brave of my campaigns (as the soldierssay) that I should have done as I was here bidden and goneforthright to the house by Dean.  But the old lady was now entirelychanged and supple as a glove.  By what means Miss Grant hadbrought this round I could never guess; I am sure, at least, shedared not to appear openly in the affair, for her papa wascompromised in it pretty deep.  It was he, indeed, who hadpersuaded Catriona to leave, or rather, not to return, to hercousin's, placing her instead with a family of Gregorys--decentpeople, quite at the Advocate's disposition, and in whom she mighthave the more confidence because they were of his own clan andfamily.  These kept her private till all was ripe, heated andhelped her to attempt her father's rescue, and after she wasdischarged from prison received her again into the same secrecy.Thus Prestongrange obtained and used his instrument; nor did thereleak out the smallest word of his acquaintance with the daughter ofJames More.  There was some whispering, of course, upon the escapeof that discredited person; but the Government replied by a show ofrigour, one of the cell porters was flogged, the lieutenant of theguard (my poor friend, Duncansby) was broken of his rank, and asfor Catriona, all men were well enough pleased that her faultshould be passed by in silence.I could never induce Miss Grant to carry back an answer.  "No," shewould say, when I persisted, "I am going to keep the big feet outof the platter."  This was the more hard to bear, as I was awareshe saw my little friend many times in the week, and carried her mynews whenever (as she said) I "had behaved myself."  At last shetreated me to what she called an indulgence, and I thought rathermore of a banter.  She was certainly a strong, almost a violent,friend to all she liked, chief among whom was a certain frail oldgentlewoman, very blind and very witty, who dwelt on the top of atall land on a strait close, with a nest of linnets in a cage, andthronged all day with visitors.  Miss Grant was very fond to carryme there and put me to entertain her friend with the narrative ofmy misfortunes:  and Miss Tibbie Ramsay (that was her name) wasparticular kind, and told me a great deal that was worth knowledgeof old folks and past affairs in Scotland.  I should say that fromher chamber window, and not three feet away, such is the straitnessof that close, it was possible to look into a barred loopholelighting the stairway of the opposite house.Here, upon some pretext, Miss Grant left me one day alone with MissRamsay.  I mind I thought that lady inattentive and like onepreoccupied.  I was besides very uncomfortable, for the window,contrary to custom, was left open and the day was cold.  All atonce the voice of Miss Grant sounded in my ears as from a distance."Here, Shaws!" she cried, "keek out of the window and see what Ihave broughten you."I think it was the prettiest sight that ever I beheld.  The well ofthe close was all in clear shadow where a man could see distinctly,the walls very black and dingy; and there from the barred loopholeI saw two faces smiling across at me--Miss Grant's and Catriona's."There!" says Miss Grant, "I wanted her to see you in your brawslike the lass of Limekilns.  I wanted her to see what I could makeof you, when I buckled to the job in earnest!"It came in my mind that she had been more than common particularthat day upon my dress; and I think that some of the same care hadbeen bestowed upon Catriona.  For so merry and sensible a lady,Miss Grant was certainly wonderful taken up with duds."Catriona!" was all I could get out.As for her, she said nothing in the world, but only waved her handand smiled to me, and was suddenly carried away again from beforethe loophole.That vision was no sooner lost than I ran to the house door, whereI found I was locked in; thence back to Miss Ramsay, crying for thekey, but might as well have cried upon the castle rock.  She hadpassed her word, she said, and I must be a good lad.  It wasimpossible to burst the door, even if it had been mannerly; it wasimpossible I should leap from the window, being seven storeys aboveground.  All I could do was to crane over the close and watch fortheir reappearance from the stair.  It was little to see, being nomore than the tops of their two heads each on a ridiculous bobbinof skirts, like to a pair of pincushions.  Nor did Catriona so muchas look up for a farewell; being prevented (as I heard afterwards)by Miss Grant, who told her folk were never seen to less advantagethan from above downward.On the way home, as soon as I was set free, I upbraided Miss Grantwith her cruelty."I am sorry you was disappointed," says she demurely.  "For my partI was very pleased.  You looked better than I dreaded; you looked--if it will not make you vain--a mighty pretty young man when youappeared in the window.  You are to remember that she could not seeyour feet," says she, with the manner of one reassuring me."O!" cried I, "leave my feet be--they are no bigger than myneighbours'.""They are even smaller than some," said she, "but I speak inparables like a Hebrew prophet.""I marvel little they were sometimes stoned!" says I.  "But, youmiserable girl, how could you do it?  Why should you care totantalise me with a moment?""Love is like folk," says she; "it needs some kind of vivers." {22}"Oh, Barbara, let me see her properly!" I pleaded.  "YOU can--yousee her when you please; let me have half an hour.""Who is it that is managing this love affair!  You!  Or me?" sheasked, and as I continued to press her with my instances, fell backupon a deadly expedient:  that of imitating the tones of my voicewhen I called on Catriona by name; with which, indeed, she held mein subjection for some days to follow.There was never the least word heard of the memorial, or none byme.  Prestongrange and his grace the Lord President may have heardof it (for what I know) on the deafest sides of their heads; theykept it to themselves, at least--the public was none the wiser; andin course of time, on November 8th, and in the midst of aprodigious storm of wind and rain, poor James of the Glens was dulyhanged at Lettermore by Ballachulish.So there was the final upshot of my politics!  Innocent men haveperished before James, and are like to keep on perishing (in spiteof all our wisdom) till the end of time.  And till the end of timeyoung folk (who are not yet used with the duplicity of life andmen) will struggle as I did, and make heroical resolves, and takelong risks; and the course of events will push them upon the oneside and go on like a marching army.  James was hanged; and herewas I dwelling in the house of Prestongrange, and grateful to himfor his fatherly attention.  He was hanged; and behold! when I metMr. Simon in the causeway, I was fain to pull off my beaver to himlike a good little boy before his dominie.  He had been hanged byfraud and violence, and the world wagged along, and there was not apennyweight of difference; and the villains of that horrid plotwere decent, kind, respectable fathers of families, who went tokirk and took the sacrament!But I had had my view of that detestable business they callpolitics--I had seen it from behind, when it is all bones andblackness; and I was cured for life of any temptations to take partin it again.  A plain, quiet, private path was that which I wasambitious to walk in, when I might keep my head out of the way ofdangers and my conscience out of the road of temptation.  For, upona retrospect, it appeared I had not done so grandly, after all; butwith the greatest possible amount of big speech and preparation,had accomplished nothing.The 25th of the same month a ship was advertised to sail fromLeith; and I was suddenly recommended to make up my mails forLeyden.  To Prestongrange I could, of course, say nothing; for Ihad already been a long while sorning on his house and table.  Butwith his daughter I was more open, bewailing my fate that I shouldbe sent out of the country, and assuring her, unless she shouldbring me to farewell with Catriona, I would refuse at the lasthour."Have I not given you my advice?" she asked."I know you have," said I, "and I know how much I am beholden toyou already, and that I am bidden to obey your orders.  But youmust confess you are something too merry a lass at times to lippen{23} to entirely.""I will tell you, then," said she.  "Be you on board by nineo'clock forenoon; the ship does not sail before one; keep your boatalongside; and if you are not pleased with my farewells when Ishall send them, you can come ashore again and seek Katrine foryourself."Since I could make no more of her, I was fain to be content withthis.The day came round at last when she and I were to separate.  We hadbeen extremely intimate and familiar; I was much in her debt; andwhat way we were to part was a thing that put me from my sleep,like the vails I was to give to the domestic servants.  I knew sheconsidered me too backward, and rather desired to rise in heropinion on that head.  Besides which, after so much affection shownand (I believe) felt upon both sides, it would have looked cold-like to be anyways stiff.  Accordingly, I got my courage up and mywords ready, and the last chance we were like to be alone, askedpretty boldly to be allowed to salute her in farewell."You forget yourself strangely, Mr. Balfour," said she.  "I cannotcall to mind that I have given you any right to presume on ouracquaintancy."I stood before her like a stopped clock, and knew not what tothink, far less to say, when of a sudden she cast her arms about myneck and kissed me with the best will in the world."You inimitable bairn?" she cried.  "Did you think that I would letus part like strangers?  Because I can never keep my gravity at youfive minutes on end, you must not dream I do not love you verywell:  I am all love and laughter, every time I cast an eye on you!And now I will give you an advice to conclude your education, whichyou will have need of before it's very long.Never ASK womenfolk.  They're bound to answer 'No'; God never madethe lass that could resist the temptation.  It's supposed bydivines to be the curse of Eve:  because she did not say it whenthe devil offered her the apple, her daughters can say nothingelse.""Since I am so soon to lose my bonny professor," I began."This is gallant, indeed," says she curtseying."I would put the one question," I went on.  "May I ask a lass tomarry to me?""You think you could not marry her without!" she asked.  "Or elseget her to offer?""You see you cannot be serious," said I."I shall be very serious in one thing, David," said she:  "I shallalways be your friend."As I got to my horse the next morning, the four ladies were all atthat same window whence we had once looked down on Catriona, andall cried farewell and waved their pocket napkins as I rode away.One out of the four I knew was truly sorry; and at the thought ofthat, and how I had come to the door three months ago for the firsttime, sorrow and gratitude made a confusion in my mind.PART II--FATHER AND DAUGHTERCHAPTER XXI--THE VOYAGE INTO HOLLANDThe ship lay at a single anchor, well outside the pier of Leith, sothat all we passengers must come to it by the means of skiffs.This was very little troublesome, for the reason that the day was aflat calm, very frosty and cloudy, and with a low shifting fog uponthe water.  The body of the vessel was thus quite hid as I drewnear, but the tall spars of her stood high and bright in a sunshinelike the flickering of a fire.  She proved to be a very roomy,commodious merchant, but somewhat blunt in the bows, and loadenextraordinary deep with salt, salted salmon, and fine white linenstockings for the Dutch.  Upon my coming on board, the captainwelcomed me--one Sang (out of Lesmahago, I believe), a very hearty,friendly tarpaulin of a man, but at the moment in rather of abustle.  There had no other of the passengers yet appeared, so thatI was left to walk about upon the deck, viewing the prospect andwondering a good deal what these farewells should be which I waspromised.All Edinburgh and the Pentland Hills glinted above me in a kind ofsmuisty brightness, now and again overcome with blots of cloud; ofLeith there was no more than the tops of chimneys visible, and onthe face of the water, where the haar {24} lay, nothing at all.Out of this I was presently aware of a sound of oars pulling, and alittle after (as if out of the smoke of a fire) a boat issued.There sat a grave man in the stern sheets, well muffled from thecold, and by his side a tall, pretty, tender figure of a maid thatbrought my heart to a stand.  I had scarce the time to catch mybreath in, and be ready to meet her, as she stepped upon the deck,smiling, and making my best bow, which was now vastly finer thansome months before, when first I made it to her ladyship.  No doubtwe were both a good deal changed:  she seemed to have shot up likea young, comely tree.  She had now a kind of pretty backwardnessthat became her well as of one that regarded herself more highlyand was fairly woman; and for another thing, the hand of the samemagician had been at work upon the pair of us, and Miss Grant hadmade us both BRAW, if she could make but the one BONNY.The same cry, in words not very different, came from both of us,that the other was come in compliment to say farewell, and then weperceived in a flash we were to ship together."O, why will not Baby have been telling me!" she cried; and thenremembered a letter she had been given, on the condition of notopening it till she was well on board.  Within was an enclosure formyself, and ran thus:"DEAR DAVIE,--What do you think of my farewell? and what do you sayto your fellow passenger?  Did you kiss, or did you ask?  I wasabout to have signed here, but that would leave the purport of myquestion doubtful, and in my own case I KEN THE ANSWER.  So fill uphere with good advice.  Do not be too blate, {25} and for God'ssake do not try to be too forward; nothing acts you worse.  I am"Your affectionate friend and governess,"BARBARA GRANT."I wrote a word of answer and compliment on a leaf out of mypocketbook, put it in with another scratch from Catriona, sealedthe whole with my new signet of the Balfour arms, and despatched itby the hand of Prestongrange's servant that still waited in myboat.Then we had time to look upon each other more at leisure, which wehad not done for a piece of a minute before (upon a common impulse)we shook hands again."Catriona?" said I.  It seemed that was the first and last word ofmy eloquence."You will be glad to see me again?" says she."And I think that is an idle word," said I.  "We are too deepfriends to make speech upon such trifles.""Is she not the girl of all the world?" she cried again.  "I wasnever knowing such a girl so honest and so beautiful.""And yet she cared no more for Alpin than what she did for a kale-stock," said I."Ah, she will say so indeed!" cries Catriona.  "Yet it was for thename and the gentle kind blood that she took me up and was so goodto me.""Well, I will tell you why it was," said I.  "There are all sortsof people's faces in this world.  There is Barbara's face, thateveryone must look at and admire, and think her a fine, brave,merry girl.  And then there is your face, which is quite different--I never knew how different till to-day.  You cannot see yourself,and that is why you do not understand; but it was for the love ofyour face that she took you up and was so good to you.  Andeverybody in the world would do the same.""Everybody?" says she."Every living soul?" said I."Ah, then, that will be why the soldiers at the castle took me up!"she cried,"Barbara has been teaching you to catch me," said I."She will have taught me more than that at all events.  She willhave taught me a great deal about Mr. David--all the ill of him,and a little that was not so ill either, now and then," she said,smiling.  "She will have told me all there was of Mr. David, onlyjust that he would sail upon this very same ship.  And why it isyou go?"I told her."Ah, well," said she, "we will be some days in company and then (Isuppose) good-bye for altogether!  I go to meet my father at aplace of the name of Helvoetsluys, and from there to France, to beexiles by the side of our chieftain."I could say no more than just "O!" the name of James More alwaysdrying up my very voice.She was quick to perceive it, and to guess some portion of mythought."There is one thing I must be saying first of all, Mr. David," saidshe.  "I think two of my kinsfolk have not behaved to youaltogether very well.  And the one of them two is James More, myfather, and the other is the Laird of Prestongrange.  Prestongrangewill have spoken by himself, or his daughter in the place of him.But for James More, my father, I have this much to say:  he layshackled in a prison; he is a plain honest soldier and a plainHighland gentleman; what they would be after he would never beguessing; but if he had understood it was to be some prejudice to ayoung gentleman like yourself, he would have died first.  And forthe sake of all your friendships, I will be asking you to pardon myfather and family for that same mistake.""Catriona," said I, "what that mistake was I do not care to know.I know but the one thing--that you went to Prestongrange and beggedmy life upon your knees.  O, I ken well enough it was for yourfather that you went, but when you were there you pleaded for mealso.  It is a thing I cannot speak of.  There are two things Icannot think of into myself:  and the one is your good words whenyou called yourself my little friend, and the other that youpleaded for my life.  Let us never speak more, we two, of pardon oroffence."We stood after that silent, Catriona looking on the deck and I onher; and before there was more speech, a little wind having sprungup in the nor'-west, they began to shake out the sails and heave inupon the anchor.There were six passengers besides our two selves, which made of ita full cabin.  Three were solid merchants out of Leith, Kirkcaldy,and Dundee, all engaged in the same adventure into High Germany.One was a Hollander returning; the rest worthy merchants' wives, tothe charge of one of whom Catriona was recommended.  Mrs. Gebbie(for that was her name) was by great good fortune heavilyincommoded by the sea, and lay day and night on the broad of herback.  We were besides the only creatures at all young on board theRose, except a white-faced boy that did my old duty to attend uponthe table; and it came about that Catriona and I were left almostentirely to ourselves.  We had the next seats together at thetable, where I waited on her with extraordinary pleasure.  On deck,I made her a soft place with my cloak; and the weather beingsingularly fine for that season, with bright frosty days andnights, a steady, gentle wind, and scarce a sheet started all theway through the North Sea, we sat there (only now and again walkingto and fro for warmth) from the first blink of the sun till eightor nine at night under the clear stars.  The merchants or CaptainSang would sometimes glance and smile upon us, or pass a merry wordor two and give us the go-by again; but the most part of the timethey were deep in herring and chintzes and linen, or incomputations of the slowness of the passage, and left us to our ownconcerns, which were very little important to any but ourselves.At the first, we had a great deal to say, and thought ourselvespretty witty; and I was at a little pains to be the beau, and she(I believe) to play the young lady of experience.  But soon we grewplainer with each other.  I laid aside my high, clipped English(what little there was left of it) and forgot to make my Edinburghbows and scrapes; she, upon her side, fell into a sort of kindfamiliarity; and we dwelt together like those of the samehousehold, only (upon my side) with a more deep emotion.  About thesame time the bottom seemed to fall out of our conversation, andneither one of us the less pleased.  Whiles she would tell me oldwives' tales, of which she had a wonderful variety, many of themfrom my friend red-headed Niel.  She told them very pretty, andthey were pretty enough childish tales; but the pleasure to myselfwas in the sound of her voice, and the thought that she was tellingand I listening.  Whiles, again, we would sit entirely silent, notcommunicating even with a look, and tasting pleasure enough in thesweetness of that neighbourhood.  I speak here only for myself.  Ofwhat was in the maid's mind, I am not very sure that ever I askedmyself; and what was in my own, I was afraid to consider.  I needmake no secret of it now, either to myself or to the reader; I wasfallen totally in love.  She came between me and the sun.  She hadgrown suddenly taller, as I say, but with a wholesome growth; sheseemed all health, and lightness, and brave spirits; and I thoughtshe walked like a young deer, and stood like a birch upon themountains.  It was enough for me to sit near by her on the deck;and I declare I scarce spent two thoughts upon the future, and wasso well content with what I then enjoyed that I was never at thepains to imagine any further step; unless perhaps that I would besometimes tempted to take her hand in mine and hold it there.  ButI was too like a miser of what joys I had, and would venturenothing on a hazard.What we spoke was usually of ourselves or of each other, so that ifanyone had been at so much pains as overhear us, he must havesupposed us the most egotistical persons in the world.  It befellone day when we were at this practice, that we came on a discourseof friends and friendship, and I think now that we were sailingnear the wind.  We said what a fine thing friendship was, and howlittle we had guessed of it, and how it made life a new thing, anda thousand covered things of the same kind that will have beensaid, since the foundation of the world, by young folk in the samepredicament.  Then we remarked upon the strangeness of thatcircumstance, that friends came together in the beginning as ifthey were there for the first time, and yet each had been alive agood while, losing time with other people."It is not much that I have done," said she, "and I could betelling you the five-fifths of it in two-three words.  It is only agirl I am, and what can befall a girl, at all events?  But I wentwith the clan in the year '45.  The men marched with swords andfire-locks, and some of them in brigades in the same set of tartan;they were not backward at the marching, I can tell you.  And therewere gentlemen from the Low Country, with their tenants mounted andtrumpets to sound, and there was a grant skirling of war-pipes.  Irode on a little Highland horse on the right hand of my father,James More, and of Glengyle himself.  And here is one fine thingthat I remember, that Glengyle kissed me in the face, because (sayshe) 'my kinswoman, you are the only lady of the clan that has comeout,' and me a little maid of maybe twelve years old!  I saw PrinceCharlie too, and the blue eyes of him; he was pretty indeed!  I hadhis hand to kiss in front of the army.  O, well, these were thegood days, but it is all like a dream that I have seen and thenawakened.  It went what way you very well know; and these were theworst days of all, when the red-coat soldiers were out, and myfather and uncles lay in the hill, and I was to be carrying themtheir meat in the middle night, or at the short sight of day whenthe cocks crow.  Yes, I have walked in the night, many's the time,and my heart great in me for terror of the darkness.  It is astrange thing I will never have been meddled with by a bogle; butthey say a maid goes safe.  Next there was my uncle's marriage, andthat was a dreadful affair beyond all.  Jean Kay was that woman'sname; and she had me in the room with her that night at Inversnaid,the night we took her from her friends in the old, ancient manner.She would and she wouldn't; she was for marrying Rob the oneminute, and the next she would be for none of him.  I will neverhave seen such a feckless creature of a woman; surely all there wasof her would tell her ay or no.  Well, she was a widow; and I cannever be thinking a widow a good woman.""Catriona!" says I, "how do you make out that?""I do not know," said she; "I am only telling you the seeming in myheart.  And then to marry a new man!  Fy!  But that was her; andshe was married again upon my Uncle Robin, and went with him awhileto kirk and market; and then wearied, or else her friends gotclaught of her and talked her round, or maybe she turned ashamed;at the least of it, she ran away, and went back to her own folk,and said we had held her in the lake, and I will never tell you allwhat.  I have never thought much of any females since that day.And so in the end my father, James More, came to be cast in prison,and you know the rest of it an well as me.""And through all you had no friends?" said I."No," said she; "I have been pretty chief with two-three lasses onthe braes, but not to call it friends.""Well, mine is a plain tale," said I.  "I never had a friend to myname till I met in with you.""And that brave Mr. Stewart?" she asked."O, yes, I was forgetting him," I said.  "But he in a man, and thatin very different.""I would think so," said she.  "O, yes, it is quite different.""And then there was one other," said I.  "I once thought I had afriend, but it proved a disappointment."She asked me who she was?"It was a he, then," said I.  "We were the two best lads at myfather's school, and we thought we loved each other dearly.  Well,the time came when he went to Glasgow to a merchant's house, thatwas his second cousin once removed; and wrote me two-three times bythe carrier; and then he found new friends, and I might write tillI was tired, he took no notice.  Eh, Catriona, it took me a longwhile to forgive the world.  There is not anything more bitter thanto lose a fancied friend."Then she began to question me close upon his looks and character,for we were each a great deal concerned in all that touched theother; till at last, in a very evil hour, I minded of his lettersand went and fetched the bundle from the cabin."Here are his letters," said I, "and all the letters that ever Igot.  That will be the last I'll can tell of myself; ye know thelave {26} as well as I do.""Will you let me read them, then?" says she.I told her, IF SHE WOULD BE AT THE PAINS; and she bade me go awayand she would read them from the one end to the other.  Now, inthis bundle that I gave her, there were packed together not onlyall the letters of my false friend, but one or two of Mr.Campbell's when he was in town at the Assembly, and to make acomplete roll of all that ever was written to me, Catriona's littleword, and the two I had received from Miss Grant, one when I was onthe Bass and one on board that ship.  But of these last I had noparticular mind at the moment.I was in that state of subjection to the thought of my friend thatit mattered not what I did, nor scarce whether I was in herpresence or out of it; I had caught her like some kind of a noblefever that lived continually in my bosom, by night and by day, andwhether I was waking or asleep.  So it befell that after I was comeinto the fore-part of the ship where the broad bows splashed intothe billows, I was in no such hurry to return as you might fancy;rather prolonged my absence like a variety in pleasure.  I do notthink I am by nature much of an Epicurean:  and there had come tillthen so small a share of pleasure in my way that I might be excusedperhaps to dwell on it unduly.When I returned to her again, I had a faint, painful impression asof a buckle slipped, so coldly she returned the packet."You have read them?" said I; and I thought my voice sounded notwholly natural, for I was turning in my mind for what could ailher."Did you mean me to read all?" she asked.I told her "Yes," with a drooping voice."The last of them as well?" said she.I knew where we were now; yet I would not lie to her either.  "Igave them all without afterthought," I said, "as I supposed thatyou would read them.  I see no harm in any.""I will be differently made," said she.  "I thank God I amdifferently made.  It was not a fit letter to be shown me.  It wasnot fit to be written.""I think you are speaking of your own friend, Barbara Grant?" saidI."There will not be anything as bitter as to lose a fancied friend,"said she, quoting my own expression."I think it is sometimes the friendship that was fancied!" I cried."What kind of justice do you call this, to blame me for some wordsthat a tomfool of a madcap lass has written down upon a piece ofpaper?  You know yourself with what respect I have behaved--andwould do always.""Yet you would show me that same letter!" says she.  "I want nosuch friends.  I can be doing very well, Mr. Balfour, without her--or you.""This is your fine gratitude!" says I."I am very much obliged to you," said she.  "I will be asking youto take away your--letters."  She seemed to choke upon the word, sothat it sounded like an oath."You shall never ask twice," said I; picked up that bundle, walkeda little way forward and cast them as far as possible into the sea.For a very little more I could have cast myself after them.The rest of the day I walked up and down raging.  There were fewnames so ill but what I gave her them in my own mind before the sunwent down.  All that I had ever heard of Highland pride seemedquite outdone; that a girl (scarce grown) should resent so triflingan allusion, and that from her next friend, that she had nearwearied me with praising of!  I had bitter, sharp, hard thoughts ofher, like an angry boy's.  If I had kissed her indeed (I thought),perhaps she would have taken it pretty well; and only because ithad been written down, and with a spice of jocularity, up she mustfuff in this ridiculous passion.  It seemed to me there was a wantof penetration in the female sex, to make angels weep over the caseof the poor men.We were side by side again at supper, and what a change was there!She was like curdled milk to me; her face was like a wooden doll's;I could have indifferently smitten her or grovelled at her feet,but she gave me not the least occasion to do either.  No sooner themeal done than she betook herself to attend on Mrs. Gebbie, which Ithink she had a little neglected heretofore.  But she was to makeup for lost time, and in what remained of the passage wasextraordinary assiduous with the old lady, and on deck began tomake a great deal more than I thought wise of Captain Sang.  Notbut what the Captain seemed a worthy, fatherly man; but I hated tobehold her in the least familiarity with anyone except myself.Altogether, she was so quick to avoid me, and so constant to keepherself surrounded with others, that I must watch a long whilebefore I could find my opportunity; and after it was found, I madenot much of it, as you are now to hear."I have no guess how I have offended," said I; "it should scarce bebeyond pardon, then.  O, try if you can pardon me.""I have no pardon to give," said she; and the words seemed to comeout of her throat like marbles.  "I will be very much obliged forall your friendships."  And she made me an eighth part of acurtsey.But I had schooled myself beforehand to say more, and I was goingto say it too."There is one thing," said I.  "If I have shocked yourparticularity by the showing of that letter, it cannot touch MissGrant.  She wrote not to you, but to a poor, common, ordinary lad,who might have had more sense than show it.  If you are to blameme--""I will advise you to say no more about that girl, at all events!"said Catriona.  "It is her I will never look the road of, not ifshe lay dying."  She turned away from me, and suddenly back.  "Willyou swear you will have no more to deal with her?" she cried."Indeed, and I will never be so unjust then," said I; "nor yet soungrateful."And now it was I that turned away.CHAPTER XXII--HELVOETSLUYSThe weather in the end considerably worsened; the wind sang in theshrouds, the sea swelled higher, and the ship began to labour andcry out among the billows.  The song of the leadsman in the chainswas now scarce ceasing, for we thrid all the way among shoals.About nine in the morning, in a burst of wintry sun between twosqualls of hail, I had my first look of Holland--a line ofwindmills birling in the breeze.  It was besides my first knowledgeof these daft-like contrivances, which gave me a near sense offoreign travel and a new world and life.  We came to an anchorabout half-past eleven, outside the harbour of Helvoetsluys, in aplace where the sea sometimes broke and the ship pitchedoutrageously.  You may be sure we were all on deck save Mrs.Gebbie, some of us in cloaks, others mantled in the ship'starpaulins, all clinging on by ropes, and jesting the most like oldsailor-folk that we could imitate.Presently a boat, that was backed like a partancrab, came gingerlyalongside, and the skipper of it hailed our master in the Dutch.Thence Captain Sang turned, very troubled-like, to Catriona; andthe rest of us crowding about, the nature of the difficulty wasmade plain to all.  The Rose was bound to the port of Rotterdam,whither the other passengers were in a great impatience to arrive,in view of a conveyance due to leave that very evening in thedirection of the Upper Germany.  This, with the present half-galeof wind, the captain (if no time were lost) declared himself stillcapable to save.  Now James More had trysted in Helvoet with hisdaughter, and the captain had engaged to call before the port andplace her (according to the custom) in a shore boat.  There was theboat, to be sure, and here was Catriona ready:  but both our masterand the patroon of the boat scrupled at the risk, and the first wasin no humour to delay."Your father," said he, "would be gey an little pleased if we wasto break a leg to ye, Miss Drummond, let-a-be drowning of you.Take my way of it," says he, "and come on-by with the rest of ushere to Rotterdam.  Ye can get a passage down the Maes in a sailingscoot as far as to the Brill, and thence on again, by a place in arattel-waggon, back to Helvoet."But Catriona would hear of no change.  She looked white-like as shebeheld the bursting of the sprays, the green seas that sometimespoured upon the fore-castle, and the perpetual bounding andswooping of the boat among the billows; but she stood firmly by herfather's orders.  "My father, James More, will have arranged itso," was her first word and her last.  I thought it very idle andindeed wanton in the girl to be so literal and stand opposite to somuch kind advice; but the fact is she had a very good reason, ifshe would have told us.  Sailing scoots and rattel-waggons areexcellent things; only the use of them must first be paid for, andall she was possessed of in the world was just two shillings and apenny halfpenny sterling.  So it fell out that captain andpassengers, not knowing of her destitution--and she being too proudto tell them--spoke in vain."But you ken nae French and nae Dutch neither," said one."It is very true," says she, "but since the year '46 there are somany of the honest Scotch abroad that I will be doing very well.  Ithank you."There was a pretty country simplicity in this that made some laugh,others looked the more sorry, and Mr. Gebbie fall outright in apassion.  I believe he knew it was his duty (his wife havingaccepted charge of the girl) to have gone ashore with her and seenher safe:  nothing would have induced him to have done so, since itmust have involved the lose of his conveyance; and I think he madeit up to his conscience by the loudness of his voice.  At least hebroke out upon Captain Sang, raging and saying the thing was adisgrace; that it was mere death to try to leave the ship, and atany event we could not cast down an innocent maid in a boatful ofnasty Holland fishers, and leave her to her fate.  I was thinkingsomething of the same; took the mate upon one side, arranged withhim to send on my chests by track-scoot to an address I had inLeyden, and stood up and signalled to the fishers."I will go ashore with the young lady, Captain Sang," said I.  "Itis all one what way I go to Leyden;" and leaped at the same timeinto the boat, which I managed not so elegantly but what I fellwith two of the fishers in the bilge.From the boat the business appeared yet more precarious than fromthe ship, she stood so high over us, swung down so swift, andmenaced us so perpetually with her plunging and passaging upon theanchor cable.  I began to think I had made a fool's bargain, thatit was merely impossible Catriona should be got on board to me, andthat I stood to be set ashore at Helvoet all by myself and with nohope of any reward but the pleasure of embracing James More, if Ishould want to.  But this was to reckon without the lass's courage.She had seen me leap with very little appearance (however muchreality) of hesitation; to be sure, she was not to be beat by herdiscarded friend.  Up she stood on the bulwarks and held by a stay,the wind blowing in her petticoats, which made the enterprise moredangerous, and gave us rather more of a view of her stockings thanwould be thought genteel in cities.  There was no minute lost, andscarce time given for any to interfere if they had wished the same.I stood up on the other side and spread my arms; the ship swungdown on us, the patroon humoured his boat nearer in than wasperhaps wholly safe, and Catriona leaped into the air.  I was sohappy as to catch her, and the fishers readily supporting us,escaped a fall.  She held to me a moment very tight, breathingquick and deep; thence (she still clinging to me with both hands)we were passed aft to our places by the steersman; and Captain Sangand all the crew and passengers cheering and crying farewell, theboat was put about for shore.As soon as Catriona came a little to herself she unhanded mesuddenly, but said no word.  No more did I; and indeed thewhistling of the wind and the breaching of the sprays made it notime for speech; and our crew not only toiled excessively but madeextremely little way, so that the Rose had got her anchor and wasoff again before we had approached the harbour mouth.We were no sooner in smooth water than the patroon, according totheir beastly Hollands custom, stopped his boat and required of usour fares.  Two guilders was the man's demand--between three andfour shillings English money--for each passenger.  But at thisCatriona began to cry out with a vast deal of agitation.  She hadasked of Captain Sang, she said, and the fare was but an Englishshilling.  "Do you think I will have come on board and not askfirst?" cries she.  The patroon scolded back upon her in a lingowhere the oaths were English and the rest right Hollands; till atlast (seeing her near tears) I privately slipped in the rogue'shand six shillings, whereupon he was obliging enough to receivefrom her the other shilling without more complaint.  No doubt I wasa good deal nettled and ashamed.  I like to see folk thrifty, butnot with so much passion; and I daresay it would be rather coldlythat I asked her, as the boat moved on again for shore, where itwas that she was trysted with her father."He is to be inquired of at the house of one Sprott, an honestScotch merchant," says she; and then with the same breath, "I amwishing to thank you very much--you are a brave friend to me.""It will be time enough when I get you to your father," said I,little thinking that I spoke so true.  "I can tell him a fine taleof a loyal daughter.""O, I do not think I will be a loyal girl, at all events," shecried, with a great deal of painfulness in the expression.  "I donot think my heart is true.""Yet there are very few that would have made that leap, and all toobey a father's orders," I observed."I cannot have you to be thinking of me so," she cried again."When you had done that same, how would I stop behind?  And at allevents that was not all the reasons."  Whereupon, with a burningface, she told me the plain truth upon her poverty."Good guide us!" cried I, "what kind of daft-like proceeding isthis, to let yourself be launched on the continent of Europe withan empty purse--I count it hardly decent--scant decent!" I cried."You forget James More, my father, is a poor gentleman," said she."He is a hunted exile.""But I think not all your friends are hunted exiles," I exclaimed."And was this fair to them that care for you?  Was it fair to me?was it fair to Miss Grant that counselled you to go, and would bedriven fair horn-mad if she could hear of it?  Was it even fair tothese Gregory folk that you were living with, and used youlovingly?  It's a blessing you have fallen in my hands!  Supposeyour father hindered by an accident, what would become of you here,and you your lee-lone in a strange place?  The thought of the thingfrightens me," I said."I will have lied to all of them," she replied.  "I will have toldthem all that I had plenty.  I told HER too.  I could not belowering James More to them."I found out later on that she must have lowered him in the verydust, for the lie was originally the father's, not the daughter's,and she thus obliged to persevere in it for the man's reputation.But at the time I was ignorant of this, and the mere thought of herdestitution and the perils in which see must have fallen, hadruffled me almost beyond reason."Well, well, well," said I, "you will have to learn more sense."I left her mails for the moment in an inn upon the shore, where Igot a direction for Sprott's house in my new French, and we walkedthere--it was some little way--beholding the place with wonder aswe went.  Indeed, there was much for Scots folk to admire:  canalsand trees being intermingled with the houses; the houses, eachwithin itself, of a brave red brick, the colour of a rose, withsteps and benches of blue marble at the cheek of every door, andthe whole town so clean you might have dined upon the causeway.Sprott was within, upon his ledgers, in a low parlour, very neatand clean, and set out with china and pictures, and a globe of theearth in a brass frame.  He was a big-chafted, ruddy, lusty man,with a crooked hard look to him; and he made us not that muchcivility as offer us a seat."Is James More Macgregor now in Helvoet, sir?" says I."I ken nobody by such a name," says he, impatient-like."Since you are so particular," says I, "I will amend my question,and ask you where we are to find in Helvoet one James Drummond,alias Macgregor, alias James More, late tenant in Inveronachile?""Sir," says he, "he may be in Hell for what I ken, and for my partI wish he was.""The young lady is that gentleman's daughter, sir," said I, "beforewhom, I think you will agree with me, it is not very becoming todiscuss his character.""I have nothing to make either with him, or her, or you!" cries hein his gross voice."Under your favour, Mr. Sprott," said I, "this young lady is comefrom Scotland seeking him, and by whatever mistake, was given thename of your house for a direction.  An error it seems to havebeen, but I think this places both you and me--who am but herfellow-traveller by accident--under a strong obligation to help ourcountrywoman.""Will you ding me daft?" he cries.  "I tell ye I ken naething andcare less either for him or his breed.  I tell ye the man owes memoney.""That may very well be, sir," said I, who was now rather more angrythan himself.  "At least, I owe you nothing; the young lady isunder my protection; and I am neither at all used with thesemanners, nor in the least content with them."As I said this, and without particularly thinking what I did, Idrew a step or two nearer to his table; thus striking, by mere goodfortune, on the only argument that could at all affect the man.The blood left his lusty countenance."For the Lord's sake dinna be hasty, sir!" he cried.  "I am trulywishfu' no to be offensive.  But ye ken, sir, I'm like a wheenguid-natured, honest, canty auld fellows--my bark is waur nor mybite.  To hear me, ye micht whiles fancy I was a wee thing dour;but na, na! it's a kind auld fallow at heart, Sandie Sprott!  Andye could never imagine the fyke and fash this man has been to me.""Very good, sir," said I.  "Then I will make that much freedom withyour kindness as trouble you for your last news of Mr. Drummond.""You're welcome, sir!" said he.  "As for the young leddy (myrespects to her!), he'll just have clean forgotten her.  I ken theman, ye see; I have lost siller by him ere now.  He thinks ofnaebody but just himsel'; clan, king, or dauchter, if he can gethis wameful, he would give them a' the go-by! ay, or hiscorrespondent either.  For there is a sense in whilk I may benearly almost said to be his correspondent.  The fact is, we areemployed thegether in a business affair, and I think it's like toturn out a dear affair for Sandie Sprott.  The man's as guid's mypairtner, and I give ye my mere word I ken naething by where he is.He micht be coming here to Helvoet; he micht come here the morn, hemichtnae come for a twalmouth; I would wonder at naething--or justat the ae thing, and that's if he was to pay me my siller.  Ye seewhat way I stand with it; and it's clear I'm no very likely tomeddle up with the young leddy, as ye ca' her.  She cannae stophere, that's ae thing certain sure.  Dod, sir, I'm a lone man!  IfI was to tak her in, its highly possible the hellicat would try andgar me marry her when he turned up.""Enough of this talk," said I.  "I will take the young leddy amongbetter friends.  Give me, pen, ink, and paper, and I will leavehere for James More the address of my correspondent in Leyden.  Hecan inquire from me where he is to seek his daughter."This word I wrote and sealed; which while I was doing, Sprott ofhis own motion made a welcome offer, to charge himself with MissDrummond's mails, and even send a porter for them to the inn.  Iadvanced him to that effect a dollar or two to be a cover, and hegave me an acknowledgment in writing of the sum.Whereupon (I giving my arm to Catriona) we left the house of thisunpalatable rascal.  She had said no word throughout, leaving me tojudge and speak in her place; I, upon my side, had been careful notto embarrass her by a glance; and even now, although my heart stillglowed inside of me with shame and anger, I made it my affair toseem quite easy."Now," said I, "let us get back to yon same inn where they canspeak the French, have a piece of dinner, and inquire forconveyances to Rotterdam.  I will never be easy till I have yousafe again in the hands of Mrs. Gebbie.""I suppose it will have to be," said Catriona, "though whoever willbe pleased, I do not think it will be her.  And I will remind youthis once again that I have but one shilling, and three baubees.""And just this once again," said I, "I will remind you it was ablessing that I came alongst with you.""What else would I be thinking all this time?" says she, and Ithought weighed a little on my arm.  "It is you that are the goodfriend to me."CHAPTER XXIII--TRAVELS IN HOLLANDThe rattel-waggon, which is a kind of a long waggon set withbenches, carried us in four hours of travel to the great city ofRotterdam.  It was long past dark by then, but the streets werepretty brightly lighted and thronged with wild-like, outlandishcharacters--bearded Hebrews, black men, and the hordes ofcourtesans, most indecently adorned with finery and stopping seamenby their very sleeves; the clash of talk about us made our heads towhirl; and what was the most unexpected of all, we appeared to beno more struck with all these foreigners than they with us.  I madethe best face I could, for the lass's sake and my own credit; butthe truth is I felt like a lost sheep, and my heart beat in mybosom with anxiety.  Once or twice I inquired after the harbour orthe berth of the ship Rose:  but either fell on some who spoke onlyHollands, or my own French failed me.  Trying a street at aventure, I came upon a lane of lighted houses, the doors andwindows thronged with wauf-like painted women; these jostled andmocked upon us as we passed, and I was thankful we had nothing oftheir language.  A little after we issued forth upon an open placealong the harbour."We shall be doing now," cries I, as soon as I spied masts.  "Letus walk here by the harbour.  We are sure to meet some that has theEnglish, and at the best of it we may light upon that very ship."We did the next best, as happened; for, about nine of the evening,whom should we walk into the arms of but Captain Sang?  He told usthey had made their run in the most incredible brief time, the windholding strong till they reached port; by which means hispassengers were all gone already on their further travels.  It wasimpossible to chase after the Gebbies into the High Germany, and wehad no other acquaintance to fall back upon but Captain Sanghimself.  It was the more gratifying to find the man friendly andwishful to assist.  He made it a small affair to find some goodplain family of merchants, where Catriona might harbour till theRose was loaden; declared he would then blithely carry her back toLeith for nothing and see her safe in the hands of Mr. Gregory; andin the meanwhile carried us to a late ordinary for the meal westood in need of.  He seemed extremely friendly, as I say, but whatsurprised me a good deal, rather boisterous in the bargain; and thecause of this was soon to appear.  For at the ordinary, calling forRhenish wine and drinking of it deep, he soon became unutterablytipsy.  In this case, as too common with all men, but especiallywith those of his rough trade, what little sense or manners hepossessed deserted him; and he behaved himself so scandalous to theyoung lady, jesting most ill-favouredly at the figure she had madeon the ship's rail, that I had no resource but carry her suddenlyaway.She came out of the ordinary clinging to me close.  "Take me away,David," she said.  "YOU keep me.  I am not afraid with you.""And have no cause, my little friend!" cried I, and could havefound it in my heart to weep."Where will you be taking me?" she said again.  "Don't leave me atall events--never leave me.""Where am I taking you to?" says I stopping, for I had been stavingon ahead in mere blindness.  "I must stop and think.  But I'll notleave you, Catriona; the Lord do so to me, and more also, if Ishould fail or fash you."She crept close into me by way of a reply."Here," I said, "is the stillest place we have hit on yet in thisbusy byke of a city.  Let us sit down here under yon tree andconsider of our course."That tree (which I am little like to forget) stood hard by theharbour side.  It was like a black night, but lights were in thehouses, and nearer hand in the quiet ships; there was a shining ofthe city on the one hand, and a buzz hung over it of many thousandswalking and talking; on the other, it was dark and the waterbubbled on the sides.  I spread my cloak upon a builder's stone,and made her sit there; she would have kept her hold upon me, forshe still shook with the late affronts; but I wanted to thinkclear, disengaged myself, and paced to and fro before her, in themanner of what we call a smuggler's walk, belabouring my brains forany remedy.  By the course of these scattering thoughts I wasbrought suddenly face to face with a remembrance that, in the heatand haste of our departure, I had left Captain Sang to pay theordinary.  At this I began to laugh out loud, for I thought the manwell served; and at the same time, by an instinctive movement,carried my hand to the pocket where my money was.  I suppose it wasin the lane where the women jostled us; but there is only the onething certain, that my purse was gone."You will have thought of something good," said she, observing meto pause.At the pinch we were in, my mind became suddenly clear as aperspective glass, and I saw there was no choice of methods.  I hadnot one doit of coin, but in my pocket-book I had still my letteron the Leyden merchant; and there was now but the one way to get toLeyden, and that was to walk on our two feet."Catriona," said I, "I know you're brave and I believe you'restrong--do you think you could walk thirty miles on a plain road?"We found it, I believe, scarce the two-thirds of that, but such wasmy notion of the distance."David," she said, "if you will just keep near, I will go anywhereand do anything.  The courage of my heart, it is all broken.  Donot be leaving me in this horrible country by myself, and I will doall else.""Can you start now and march all night?" said I."I will do all that you can ask of me," she said, "and never askyou why.  I have been a bad ungrateful girl to you; and do what youplease with me now!  And I think Miss Barbara Grant is the bestlady in the world," she added, "and I do not see what she woulddeny you for at all events."This was Greek and Hebrew to me; but I had other matters toconsider, and the first of these was to get clear of that city onthe Leyden road.  It proved a cruel problem; and it may have beenone or two at night ere we had solved it.  Once beyond the houses,there was neither moon nor stars to guide us; only the whiteness ofthe way in the midst and a blackness of an alley on both hands.The walking was besides made most extraordinary difficult by aplain black frost that fell suddenly in the small hours and turnedthat highway into one long slide."Well, Catriona," said I, "here we are like the king's sons and theold wives' daughters in your daft-like Highland tales.  Soon we'llbe going over the 'SEVEN BENS, THE SEVEN GLENS AND THE SEVENMOUNTAIN MOORS'."  Which was a common byword or overcome in thosetales of hers that had stuck in my memory."Ah," says she, "but here are no glens or mountains!  Though I willnever be denying but what the trees and some of the plain placeshereabouts are very pretty.  But our country is the best yet.""I wish we could say as much for our own folk," says I, recallingSprott and Sang, and perhaps James More himself."I will never complain of the country of my friend," said she, andspoke it out with an accent so particular that I seemed to see thelook upon her face.I caught in my breath sharp and came near falling (for my pains) onthe black ice."I do not know what YOU think, Catriona," said I, when I was alittle recovered, "but this has been the best day yet!  I thinkshame to say it, when you have met in with such misfortunes anddisfavours; but for me, it has been the best day yet.""It was a good day when you showed me so much love," said she."And yet I think shame to be happy too," I went on, "and you hereon the road in the black night.""Where in the great world would I be else?" she cried.  "I amthinking I am safest where I am with you.""I am quite forgiven, then?" I asked."Will you not forgive me that time so much as not to take it inyour mouth again?" she cried.  "There is nothing in this heart toyou but thanks.  But I will be honest too," she added, with a kindof suddenness, "and I'll never can forgive that girl.""Is this Miss Grant again?" said I.  "You said yourself she was thebest lady in the world.""So she will be, indeed!" says Catriona.  "But I will never forgiveher for all that.  I will never, never forgive her, and let me heartell of her no more.""Well," said I, "this beats all that ever came to my knowledge; andI wonder that you can indulge yourself in such bairnly whims.  Hereis a young lady that was the best friend in the world to the bothof us, that learned us how to dress ourselves, and in a greatmanner how to behave, as anyone can see that knew us both beforeand after."But Catriona stopped square in the midst of the highway."It is this way of it," said she.  "Either you will go on to speakof her, and I will go back to yon town, and let come of it what Godpleases!  Or else you will do me that politeness to talk of otherthings."I was the most nonplussed person in this world; but I bethought methat she depended altogether on my help, that she was of the frailsex and not so much beyond a child, and it was for me to be wisefor the pair of us."My dear girl," said I, "I can make neither head nor tails of this;but God forbid that I should do anything to set you on the jee.  Asfor talking of Miss Grant, I have no such a mind to it, and Ibelieve it was yourself began it.  My only design (if I took you upat all) was for your own improvement, for I hate the very look ofinjustice.  Not that I do not wish you to have a good pride and anice female delicacy; they become you well; but here you show themto excess.""Well, then, have you done?" said she."I have done," said I."A very good thing," said she, and we went on again, but now insilence.It was an eerie employment to walk in the gross night, beholdingonly shadows and hearing nought but our own steps.  At first, Ibelieve our hearts burned against each other with a deal of enmity;but the darkness and the cold, and the silence, which only thecocks sometimes interrupted, or sometimes the farmyard dogs, hadpretty soon brought down our pride to the dust; and for my ownparticular, I would have jumped at any decent opening for speech.Before the day peeped, came on a warmish rain, and the frost wasall wiped away from among our feet.  I took my cloak to her andsought to hap her in the same; she bade me, rather impatiently, tokeep it."Indeed and I will do no such thing," said I.  "Here am I, a great,ugly lad that has seen all kinds of weather, and here are you atender, pretty maid!  My dear, you would not put me to a shame?"Without more words she let me cover her; which as I was doing inthe darkness, I let my hand rest a moment on her shoulder, almostlike an embrace."You must try to be more patient of your friend," said I.I thought she seemed to lean the least thing in the world againstmy bosom, or perhaps it was but fancy."There will be no end to your goodness," said she.And we went on again in silence; but now all was changed; and thehappiness that was in my heart was like a fire in a great chimney.The rain passed ere day; it was but a sloppy morning as we cameinto the town of Delft.  The red gabled houses made a handsome showon either hand of a canal; the servant lassies were out slesteringand scrubbing at the very stones upon the public highway; smokerose from a hundred kitchens; and it came in upon me strongly itwas time to break our fasts."Catriona," said I, "I believe you have yet a shilling and threebaubees?""Are you wanting it?" said she, and passed me her purse.  "I amwishing it was five pounds!  What will you want it for?""And what have we been walking for all night, like a pair of waifEgyptians!" says I.  "Just because I was robbed of my purse and allI possessed in that unchancy town of Rotterdam.  I will tell you ofit now, because I think the worst is over, but we have still a goodtramp before us till we get to where my money is, and if you wouldnot buy me a piece of bread, I were like to go fasting."She looked at me with open eyes.  By the light of the new day shewas all black and pale for weariness, so that my heart smote me forher.  But as for her, she broke out laughing."My torture! are we beggars then!" she cried.  "You too?  O, Icould have wished for this same thing!  And I am glad to buy yourbreakfast to you.  But it would be pleisand if I would have had todance to get a meal to you!  For I believe they are not very wellacquainted with our manner of dancing over here, and might bepaying for the curiosity of that sight."I could have kissed her for that word, not with a lover's mind, butin a heat of admiration.  For it always warms a man to see a womanbrave.We got a drink of milk from a country wife but new come to thetown, and in a baker's, a piece of excellent, hot, sweet-smellingbread, which we ate upon the road as we went on.  That road fromDelft to the Hague is just five miles of a fine avenue shaded withtrees, a canal on the one hand, on the other excellent pastures ofcattle.  It was pleasant here indeed."And now, Davie," said she, "what will you do with me at allevents?""It is what we have to speak of," said I, "and the sooner yet thebetter.  I can come by money in Leyden; that will be all well.  Butthe trouble is how to dispose of you until your father come.  Ithought last night you seemed a little sweir to part from me?""It will be more than seeming then," said she."You are a very young maid," said I, "and I am but a very youngcallant.  This is a great piece of difficulty.  What way are we tomanage?  Unless indeed, you could pass to be my sister?""And what for no?" said she, "if you would let me!""I wish you were so, indeed," I cried.  "I would be a fine man if Ihad such a sister.  But the rub is that you are Catriona Drummond.""And now I will be Catriona Balfour," she said.  "And who is token?  They are all strange folk here.""If you think that it would do," says I.  "I own it troubles me.  Iwould like it very ill, if I advised you at all wrong.""David, I have no friend here but you," she said."The mere truth is, I am too young to be your friend," said I.  "Iam too young to advise you, or you to be advised.  I see not whatelse we are to do, and yet I ought to warn you.""I will have no choice left," said she.  "My father James More hasnot used me very well, and it is not the first time, I am cast uponyour hands like a sack of barley meal, and have nothing else tothink of but your pleasure.  If you will have me, good and well.If you will not"--she turned and touched her hand upon my arm--"David, I am afraid," said she."No, but I ought to warn you," I began; and then bethought me I wasthe bearer of the purse, and it would never do to seem toochurlish.  "Catriona," said I, "don't misunderstand me:  I am justtrying to do my duty by you, girl!  Here am I going alone to thisstrange city, to be a solitary student there; and here is thischance arisen that you might dwell with me a bit, and be like mysister; you can surely understand this much, my dear, that I wouldjust love to have you?""Well, and here I am," said she.  "So that's soon settled."I know I was in duty bounden to have spoke more plain.  I know thiswas a great blot on my character, for which I was lucky that I didnot pay more dear.  But I minded how easy her delicacy had beenstartled with a word of kissing her in Barbara's letter; now thatshe depended on me, how was I to be more bold?  Besides, the truthis, I could see no other feasible method to dispose of her.  And Idaresay inclination pulled me very strong.A little beyond the Hague she fell very lame and made the rest ofthe distance heavily enough.  Twice she must rest by the wayside,which she did with pretty apologies, calling herself a shame to theHighlands and the race she came of, and nothing but a hindrance tomyself.  It was her excuse, she said, that she was not much usedwith walking shod.  I would have had her strip off her shoes andstockings and go barefoot.  But she pointed out to me that thewomen of that country, even in the landward roads, appeared to beall shod."I must not be disgracing my brother," said she, and was very merrywith it all, although her face told tales of her.There is a garden in that city we were bound to, sanded below withclean sand, the trees meeting overhead, some of them trimmed, somepreached, and the whole place beautified with alleys and arbours.Here I left Catriona, and went forward by myself to find mycorrespondent.  There I drew on my credit, and asked to berecommended to some decent, retired lodging.  My baggage being notyet arrived, I told him I supposed I should require his cautionwith the people of the house; and explained that, my sister beingcome for a while to keep house with me, I should be wanting twochambers.  This was all very well; but the trouble was that Mr.Balfour in his letter of recommendation had condescended on a greatdeal of particulars, and never a word of any sister in the case.  Icould see my Dutchman was extremely suspicious; and viewing me overthe rims of a great pair of spectacles--he was a poor, frail body,and reminded me of an infirm rabbit--he began to question me close.Here I fell in a panic.  Suppose he accept my tale (thinks I),suppose he invite my sister to his house, and that I bring her.  Ishall have a fine ravelled pirn to unwind, and may end bydisgracing both the lassie and myself.  Thereupon I began hastilyto expound to him my sister's character.  She was of a bashfuldisposition, it appeared, and be extremely fearful of meetingstrangers that I had left her at that moment sitting in a publicplace alone.  And then, being launched upon the stream offalsehood, I must do like all the rest of the world in the samecircumstance, and plunge in deeper than was any service; addingsome altogether needless particulars of Miss Balfour's ill-healthand retirement during childhood.  In the midst of which I awoke toa sense of my behaviour, and was turned to one blush.The old gentleman was not so much deceived but what he discovered awillingness to be quit of me.  But he was first of all a man ofbusiness; and knowing that my money was good enough, however itmight be with my conduct, he was so far obliging as to send his sonto be my guide and caution in the matter of a lodging.  Thisimplied my presenting of the young man to Catriona.  The poor,pretty child was much recovered with resting, looked and behaved toperfection, and took my arm and gave me the name of brother moreeasily than I could answer her.  But there was one misfortune:thinking to help, she was rather towardly than otherwise to myDutchman.  And I could not but reflect that Miss Balfour had rathersuddenly outgrown her bashfulness.  And there was another thing,the difference of our speech.  I had the Low Country tongue anddwelled upon my words; she had a hill voice, spoke with somethingof an English accent, only far more delightful, and was scarcequite fit to be called a deacon in the craft of talking Englishgrammar; so that, for a brother and sister, we made a most unevenpair.  But the young Hollander was a heavy dog, without so muchspirit in his belly as to remark her prettiness, for which Iscorned him.  And as soon as he had found a cover to our heads, heleft us alone, which was the greater service of the two.CHAPTER XXIV--FULL STORY OF A COPY OF HEINECCIUSThe place found was in the upper part of a house backed on a canal.We had two rooms, the second entering from the first; each had achimney built out into the floor in the Dutch manner; and beingalongside, each had the same prospect from the window of the top ofa tree below us in a little court, of a piece of the canal, and ofhouses in the Hollands architecture and a church spire upon thefurther side.  A full set of bells hung in that spire and madedelightful music; and when there was any sun at all, it shonedirect in our two chambers.  From a tavern hard by we had goodmeals sent in.The first night we were both pretty weary, and she extremely so.There was little talk between us, and I packed her off to her bedas soon as she had eaten.  The first thing in the morning I wroteword to Sprott to have her mails sent on, together with a line toAlan at his chief's; and had the same despatched, and her breakfastready, ere I waked her.  I was a little abashed when she came forthin her one habit, and the mud of the way upon her stockings.  Bywhat inquiries I had made, it seemed a good few days must passbefore her mails could come to hand in Leyden, and it was plainlyneedful she must have a shift of things.  She was unwilling atfirst that I should go to that expense; but I reminded her she wasnow a rich man's sister and must appear suitably in the part, andwe had not got to the second merchant's before she was entirelycharmed into the spirit of the thing, and her eyes shining.  Itpleased me to see her so innocent and thorough in this pleasure.What was more extraordinary was the passion into which I fell on itmyself; being never satisfied that I had bought her enough or fineenough, and never weary of beholding her in different attires.Indeed, I began to understand some little of Miss Grant's immersionin the interest of clothes; for the truth is, when you have theground of a beautiful person to adorn, the whole business becomesbeautiful.  The Dutch chintzes I should say were extraordinarycheap and fine; but I would be ashamed to set down what I paid forstockings to her.  Altogether I spent so great a sum upon thispleasuring (as I may call it) that I was ashamed for a great whileto spend more; and by way of a set-off, I left our chambers prettybare.  If we had beds, if Catriona was a little braw, and I hadlight to see her by, we were richly enough lodged for me.By the end of this merchandising I was glad to leave her at thedoor with all our purchases, and go for a long walk alone in whichto read myself a lecture.  Here had I taken under my roof, and asgood as to my bosom, a young lass extremely beautiful, and whoseinnocence was her peril.  My talk with the old Dutchman, and thelies to which I was constrained, had already given me a sense ofhow my conduct must appear to others; and now, after the strongadmiration I had just experienced and the immoderacy with which Ihad continued my vain purchases, I began to think of it myself asvery hazarded.  I bethought me, if I had a sister indeed, whether Iwould so expose her; then, judging the case too problematical, Ivaried my question into this, whether I would so trust Catriona inthe hands of any other Christian being; the answer to which made myface to burn.  The more cause, since I had been entrapped and hadentrapped the girl into an undue situation, that I should behave init with scrupulous nicety.  She depended on me wholly for her breadand shelter; in case I should alarm her delicacy, she had noretreat.  Besides I was her host and her protector; and the moreirregularly I had fallen in these positions, the less excuse for meif I should profit by the same to forward even the most honestsuit; for with the opportunities that I enjoyed, and which no wiseparent would have suffered for a moment, even the most honest suitwould be unfair.  I saw I must be extremely hold-off in myrelations; and yet not too much so neither; for if I had no rightto appear at all in the character of a suitor, I must yet appearcontinually, and if possible agreeably, in that of host.  It wasplain I should require a great deal of tact and conduct, perhapsmore than my years afforded.  But I had rushed in where angelsmight have feared to tread, and there was no way out of thatposition save by behaving right while I was in it.  I made a set ofrules for my guidance; prayed for strength to be enabled to observethem, and as a more human aid to the same end purchased a study-book in law.  This being all that I could think of, I relaxed fromthese grave considerations; whereupon my mind bubbled at once intoan effervescency of pleasing spirits, and it was like one treadingon air that I turned homeward.  As I thought that name of home, andrecalled the image of that figure awaiting me between four walls,my heart beat upon my bosom.My troubles began with my return.  She ran to greet me with anobvious and affecting pleasure.  She was clad, besides, entirely inthe new clothes that I had bought for her; looked in them beyondexpression well; and must walk about and drop me curtseys todisplay them and to be admired.  I am sure I did it with an illgrace, for I thought to have choked upon the words."Well," she said, "if you will not be caring for my pretty clothes,see what I have done with our two chambers."  And she showed me theplace all very finely swept, and the fires glowing in the twochimneys.I was glad of a chance to seem a little more severe than I quitefelt.  "Catriona," said I, "I am very much displeased with you, andyou must never again lay a hand upon my room.  One of us two musthave the rule while we are here together; it is most fit it shouldbe I who am both the man and the elder; and I give you that for mycommand."She dropped me one of her curtseys; which were extraordinarytaking.  "If you will be cross," said she, "I must be making prettymanners at you, Davie.  I will be very obedient, as I should bewhen every stitch upon all there is of me belongs to you.  But youwill not be very cross either, because now I have not anyone else."This struck me hard, and I made haste, in a kind of penitence, toblot out all the good effect of my last speech.  In this directionprogress was more easy, being down hill; she led me forward,smiling; at the sight of her, in the brightness of the fire andwith her pretty becks and looks, my heart was altogether melted.We made our meal with infinite mirth and tenderness; and the twoseemed to be commingled into one, so that our very laughter soundedlike a kindness.In the midst of which I awoke to better recollections, made a lameword of excuse, and set myself boorishly to my studies.  It was asubstantial, instructive book that I had bought, by the late Dr.Heineccius, in which I was to do a great deal reading these nextfew days, and often very glad that I had no one to question me ofwhat I read.  Methought she bit her lip at me a little, and thatcut me.  Indeed it left her wholly solitary, the more as she wasvery little of a reader, and had never a book.  But what was I todo?So the rest of the evening flowed by almost without speech.I could have beat myself.  I could not lie in my bed that night forrage and repentance, but walked to and fro on my bare feet till Iwas nearly perished, for the chimney was gone out and the frostkeen.  The thought of her in the next room, the thought that shemight even hear me as I walked, the remembrance of my churlishnessand that I must continue to practise the same ungrateful course orbe dishonoured, put me beside my reason.  I stood like a manbetween Scylla and Charybdis:  WHAT MUST SHE THINK OF ME? was myone thought that softened me continually into weakness.  WHAT IS TOBECOME OF US? the other which steeled me again to resolution.  Thiswas my first night of wakefulness and divided counsels, of which Iwas now to pass many, pacing like a madman, sometimes weeping likea childish boy, sometimes praying (I fain would hope) like aChristian.But prayer is not very difficult, and the hitch comes in practice.In her presence, and above all if I allowed any beginning offamiliarity, I found I had very little command of what shouldfollow.  But to sit all day in the same room with her, and feign tobe engaged upon Heineccius, surpassed my strength.  So that I fellinstead upon the expedient of absenting myself so much as I wasable; taking out classes and sitting there regularly, often withsmall attention, the test of which I found the other day in a note-book of that period, where I had left off to follow an edifyinglecture and actually scribbled in my book some very ill verses,though the Latinity is rather better than I thought that I couldever have compassed.  The evil of this course was unhappily near asgreat as its advantage.  I had the less time of trial, but Ibelieve, while the time lasted, I was tried the more extremely.For she being so much left to solitude, she came to greet my returnwith an increasing fervour that came nigh to overmaster me.  Thesefriendly offers I must barbarously cast back; and my rejectionsometimes wounded her so cruelly that I must unbend and seek tomake it up to her in kindness.  So that our time passed in ups anddowns, tiffs and disappointments, upon the which I could almost say(if it may be said with reverence) that I was crucified.The base of my trouble was Catriona's extraordinary innocence, atwhich I was not so much surprised as filled with pity andadmiration.  She seemed to have no thought of our position, nosense of my struggles; welcomed any mark of my weakness withresponsive joy; and when I was drove again to my retrenchments, didnot always dissemble her chagrin.  There were times when I havethought to myself, "If she were over head in love, and set her capto catch me, she would scarce behave much otherwise;" and then Iwould fall again into wonder at the simplicity of woman, from whomI felt (in these moments) that I was not worthy to be descended.There was one point in particular on which our warfare turned, andof all things, this was the question of her clothes.  My baggagehad soon followed me from Rotterdam, and hers from Helvoet.  Shehad now, as it were, two wardrobes; and it grew to be understoodbetween us (I could never tell how) that when she was friendly shewould wear my clothes, and when otherwise her own.  It was meantfor a buffet, and (as it were) the renunciation of her gratitude;and I felt it so in my bosom, but was generally more wise than toappear to have observed the circumstance.Once, indeed, I was betrayed into a childishness greater than herown; it fell in this way.  On my return from classes, thinking uponher devoutly with a great deal of love and a good deal of annoyancein the bargain, the annoyance began to fade away out of my mind;and spying in a window one of those forced flowers, of which theHollanders are so skilled in the artifice, I gave way to an impulseand bought it for Catriona.  I do not know the name of that flower,but it was of the pink colour, and I thought she would admire thesame, and carried it home to her with a wonderful soft heart.  Ihad left her in my clothes, and when I returned to find her allchanged and a face to match, I cast but the one look at her fromhead to foot, ground my teeth together, flung the window open, andmy flower into the court, and then (between rage and prudence)myself out of that room again, of which I slammed she door as Iwent out.On the steep stair I came near falling, and this brought me tomyself, so that I began at once to see the folly of my conduct.  Iwent, not into the street as I had purposed, but to the housecourt, which was always a solitary place, and where I saw my flower(that had cost me vastly more than it was worth) hanging in theleafless tree.  I stood by the side of the canal, and looked uponthe ice.  Country people went by on their skates, and I enviedthem.  I could see no way out of the pickle I was in no way so muchas to return to the room I had just left.  No doubt was in my mindbut I had now betrayed the secret of my feelings; and to makethings worse, I had shown at the same time (and that with wretchedboyishness) incivility to my helpless guest.I suppose she must have seen me from the open window.  It did notseem to me that I had stood there very long before I heard thecrunching of footsteps on the frozen snow, and turning somewhatangrily (for I was in no spirit to be interrupted) saw Catrionadrawing near.  She was all changed again, to the clocked stockings."Are we not to have our walk to-day?" said she.I was looking at her in a maze.  "Where is your brooch?" says I.She carried her hand to her bosom and coloured high.  "I will haveforgotten it," said she.  "I will run upstairs for it quick, andthen surely we'll can have our walk?"There was a note of pleading in that last that staggered me; I hadneither words nor voice to utter them; I could do no more than nodby way of answer; and the moment she had left me, climbed into thetree and recovered my flower, which on her return I offered her."I bought it for you, Catriona," said I.She fixed it in the midst of her bosom with the brooch, I couldhave thought tenderly."It is none the better of my handling," said I again, and blushed."I will be liking it none the worse, you may be sure of that," saidshe.We did not speak so much that day; she seemed a thought on thereserve, though not unkindly.  As for me, all the time of ourwalking, and after we came home, and I had seen her put my flowerinto a pot of water, I was thinking to myself what puzzles womenwere.  I was thinking, the one moment, it was the most stupid thingon earth she should not have perceived my love; and the next, thatshe had certainly perceived it long ago, and (being a wise girlwith the fine female instinct of propriety) concealed herknowledge.We had our walk daily.  Out in the streets I felt more safe; Irelaxed a little in my guardedness; and for one thing, there was noHeineccius.  This made these periods not only a relief to myself,but a particular pleasure to my poor child.  When I came back aboutthe hour appointed, I would generally find her ready dressed, andglowing with anticipation.  She would prolong their duration to theextreme, seeming to dread (as I did myself) the hour of the return;and there is scarce a field or waterside near Leyden, scarce astreet or lane there, where we have not lingered.  Outside ofthese, I bade her confine herself entirely to our lodgings; this inthe fear of her encountering any acquaintance, which would haverendered our position very difficult.  From the same apprehension Iwould never suffer her to attend church, nor even go myself; butmade some kind of shift to hold worship privately in our ownchamber--I hope with an honest, but I am quite sure with a verymuch divided mind.  Indeed, there was scarce anything that moreaffected me, than thus to kneel down alone with her before God likeman and wife.One day it was snowing downright hard.  I had thought it notpossible that we should venture forth, and was surprised to findher waiting for me ready dressed."I will not be doing without my walk," she cried.  "You are never agood boy, Davie, in the house; I will never be caring for you onlyin the open air.  I think we two will better turn Egyptian anddwell by the roadside."That was the best walk yet of all of them; she clung near to me inthe falling snow; it beat about and melted on us, and the dropsstood upon her bright cheeks like tears and ran into her smilingmouth.  Strength seemed to come upon me with the sight like agiant's; I thought I could have caught her up and run with her intothe uttermost places in the earth; and we spoke together all thattime beyond belief for freedom and sweetness.It was the dark night when we came to the house door.  She pressedmy arm upon her bosom.  "Thank you kindly for these same goodhours," said she, on a deep note of her voice.The concern in which I fell instantly on this address, put me withthe same swiftness on my guard; and we were no sooner in thechamber, and the light made, than she beheld the old, dour,stubborn countenance of the student of Heineccius.  Doubtless shewas more than usually hurt; and I know for myself, I found it morethan usually difficult to maintain any strangeness.  Even at themeal, I durst scarce unbuckle and scarce lift my eyes to her; andit was no sooner over than I fell again to my civilian, with moreseeming abstraction and less understanding than before.  Methought,as I read, I could hear my heart strike like an eight-day clock.Hard as I feigned to study, there was still some of my eyesightthat spilled beyond the book upon Catriona.  She sat on the floorby the side of my great mail, and the chimney lighted her up, andshone and blinked upon her, and made her glow and darken through awonder of fine hues.  Now she would be gazing in the fire, and thenagain at me; and at that I would be plunged in a terror of myself,and turn the pages of Heineccius like a man looking for the text inchurch.Suddenly she called out aloud.  "O, why does not my father come?"she cried, and fell at once into a storm of tears.I leaped up, flung Heineccius fairly in the fire, ran to her side,and cast an arm around her sobbing body.She put me from her sharply, "You do not love your friend," saysshe.  "I could be so happy too, if you would let me!"  And then,"O, what will I have done that you should hate me so?""Hate you!" cries I, and held her firm.  "You blind less, can younot see a little in my wretched heart?  Do you not think when I sitthere, reading in that fool-book that I have just burned and bedamned to it, I take ever the least thought of any stricken thingbut just yourself?  Night after night I could have grat to see yousitting there your lone.  And what was I to do?  You are here undermy honour; would you punish me for that?  Is it for that that youwould spurn a loving servant?"At the word, with a small, sudden motion, she clung near to me.  Iraised her face to mine, I kissed it, and she bowed her brow uponmy bosom, clasping me tight.  I saw in a mere whirl like a mandrunken.  Then I heard her voice sound very small and muffled in myclothes."Did you kiss her truly?" she asked.There went through me so great a heave of surprise that I was allshook with it."Miss Grant?" I cried, all in a disorder.  "Yes, I asked her tokiss me good-bye, the which she did.""Ah, well!" said she, "you have kissed me too, at all events."At the strangeness and sweetness of that word, I saw where we hadfallen; rose, and set her on her feet."This will never do," said I.  "This will never, never do.  OCatrine, Catrine!"  Then there came a pause in which I was debarredfrom any speaking.  And then, "Go away to your bed," said I.  "Goaway to your bed and leave me."She turned to obey me like a child, and the next I knew of it, hadstopped in the very doorway."Good night, Davie!" said she."And O, good night, my love!" I cried, with a great outbreak of mysoul, and caught her to me again, so that it seemed I must havebroken her.  The next moment I had thrust her from the room, shutto the door even with violence, and stood alone.The milk was spilt now, the word was out and the truth told.  I hadcrept like an untrusty man into the poor maid's affections; she wasin my hand like any frail, innocent thing to make or mar; and whatweapon of defence was left me?  It seemed like a symbol thatHeineccius, my old protection, was now burned.  I repented, yetcould not find it in my heart to blame myself for that greatfailure.  It seemed not possible to have resisted the boldness ofher innocence or that last temptation of her weeping.  And all thatI had to excuse me did but make my sin appear the greater--it wasupon a nature so defenceless, and with such advantages of theposition, that I seemed to have practised.What was to become of us now?  It seemed we could no longer dwellin the one place.  But where was I to go? or where she?  Withouteither choice or fault of ours, life had conspired to wall ustogether in that narrow place.  I had a wild thought of marryingout of hand; and the next moment put it from me with revolt.  Shewas a child, she could not tell her own heart; I had surprised herweakness, I must never go on to build on that surprisal; I mustkeep her not only clear of reproach, but free as she had come tome.Down I sat before the fire, and reflected, and repented, and beatmy brains in vain for any means of escape.  About two of themorning, there were three red embers left and the house and all thecity was asleep, when I was aware of a small sound of weeping inthe next room.  She thought that I slept, the poor soul; sheregretted her weakness--and what perhaps (God help her!) she calledher forwardness--and in the dead of the night solaced herself withtears.  Tender and bitter feelings, love and penitence and pity,struggled in my soul; it seemed I was under bond to heal thatweeping."O, try to forgive me!" I cried out, "try, try to forgive me.  Letus forget it all, let us try if we'll no can forget it!"There came no answer, but the sobbing ceased.  I stood a long whilewith my hands still clasped as I had spoken; then the cold of thenight laid hold upon me with a shudder, and I think my reasonreawakened."You can make no hand of this, Davie," thinks I.  "To bed with youlike a wise lad, and try if you can sleep.  To-morrow you may seeyour way."CHAPTER XXV--THE RETURN OF JAMES MOREI was called on the morrow out of a late and troubled slumber by aknocking on my door, ran to open it, and had almost swooned withthe contrariety of my feelings, mostly painful; for on thethreshold, in a rough wraprascal and an extraordinary big lacedhat, there stood James More.I ought to have been glad perhaps without admixture, for there wasa sense in which the man came like an answer to prayer.  I had beensaying till my head was weary that Catriona and I must separate,and looking till my head ached for any possible means ofseparation.  Here were the means come to me upon two legs, and joywas the hindmost of my thoughts.  It is to be considered, however,that even if the weight of the future were lifted off me by theman's arrival, the present heaved up the more black and menacing;so that, as I first stood before him in my shirt and breeches, Ibelieve I took a leaping step backward like a person shot."Ah," said he, "I have found you, Mr, Balfour."  And offered me hislarge, fine hand, the which (recovering at the same time my post inthe doorway, as if with some thought of resistance) I took him bydoubtfully.  "It is a remarkable circumstance how our affairsappear to intermingle," he continued.  "I am owing you an apologyfor an unfortunate intrusion upon yours, which I suffered myself tobe entrapped into by my confidence in that false-face,Prestongrange; I think shame to own to you that I was ever trustingto a lawyer."  He shrugged his shoulders with a very French air."But indeed the man is very plausible," says he.  "And now it seemsthat you have busied yourself handsomely in the matter of mydaughter, for whose direction I was remitted to yourself.""I think, sir," said I, with a very painful air, "that it will benecessary we two should have an explanation.""There is nothing amiss?" he asked.  "My agent, Mr. Sprott--""For God's sake moderate your voice!" I cried.  "She must not heartill we have had an explanation.""She is in this place?" cries he."That is her chamber door," said I."You are here with her alone?" he asked."And who else would I have got to stay with us?" cries I.I will do him the justice to admit that he turned pale."This is very unusual," said he.  "This is a very unusualcircumstance.  You are right, we must hold an explanation."So saying he passed me by, and I must own the tall old rogueappeared at that moment extraordinary dignified.  He had now, forthe first time, the view of my chamber, which I scanned (I may say)with his eyes.  A bit of morning sun glinted in by the window pane,and showed it off; my bed, my mails, and washing dish, with somedisorder of my clothes, and the unlighted chimney, made the onlyplenishing; no mistake but it looked bare and cold, and the mostunsuitable, beggarly place conceivable to harbour a young lady.  Atthe same time came in on my mind the recollection of the clothesthat I had bought for her; and I thought this contrast of povertyand prodigality bore an ill appearance.He looked all about the chamber for a seat, and finding nothingelse to his purpose except my bed, took a place upon the side ofit; where, after I had closed the door, I could not very well avoidjoining him.  For however this extraordinary interview might end,it must pass if possible without waking Catriona; and the one thingneedful was that we should sit close and talk low.  But I canscarce picture what a pair we made; he in his great coat which thecoldness of my chamber made extremely suitable; I shivering in myshirt and breeks; he with very much the air of a judge; and I(whatever I looked) with very much the feelings of a man who hasheard the last trumpet."Well?" says he.And "Well," I began, but found myself unable to go further."You tell me she is here?" said he again, but now with a spice ofimpatience that seemed to brace me up."She is in this house," said I, "and I knew the circumstance wouldbe called unusual.  But you are to consider how very unusual thewhole business was from the beginning.  Here is a young lady landedon the coast of Europe with two shillings and a penny halfpenny.She is directed to yon man Sprott in Helvoet.  I hear you call himyour agent.  All I can say is he could do nothing but damn andswear at the mere mention of your name, and I must fee him out ofmy own pocket even to receive the custody of her effects.  Youspeak of unusual circumstances, Mr. Drummond, if that be the nameyou prefer.  Here was a circumstance, if you like, to which it wasbarbarity to have exposed her.""But this is what I cannot understand the least," said James.  "Mydaughter was placed into the charge of some responsible persons,whose names I have forgot."  "Gebbie was the name," said I; "andthere is no doubt that Mr. Gebbie should have gone ashore with herat Helvoet.  But he did not, Mr. Drummond; and I think you mightpraise God that I was there to offer in his place.""I shall have a word to say to Mr. Gebbie before long," said he."As for yourself, I think it might have occurred that you weresomewhat young for such a post.""But the choice was not between me and somebody else, it wasbetween me and nobody," cried I.  "Nobody offered in my place, andI must say I think you show a very small degree of gratitude to methat did.""I shall wait until I understand my obligation a little more in theparticular," says he."Indeed, and I think it stares you in the face, then," said I."Your child was deserted, she was clean flung away in the midst ofEurope, with scarce two shillings, and not two words of anylanguage spoken there:  I must say, a bonny business!  I broughther to this place.  I gave her the name and the tenderness due to asister.  All this has not gone without expense, but that I scarceneed to hint at.  They were services due to the young lady'scharacter which I respect; and I think it would be a bonny businesstoo, if I was to be singing her praises to her father.""You are a young man," he began."So I hear you tell me," said I, with a good deal of heat."You are a very young man," he repeated, "or you would haveunderstood the significancy of the step.""I think you speak very much at your ease," cried I.  "What elsewas I to do?  It is a fact I might have hired some decent, poorwoman to be a third to us, and I declare I never thought of ituntil this moment!  But where was I to find her, that am aforeigner myself?  And let me point out to your observation, Mr.Drummond, that it would have cost me money out of my pocket.  Forhere is just what it comes to, that I had to pay through the nosefor your neglect; and there is only the one story to it, just thatyou were so unloving and so careless as to have lost yourdaughter.""He that lives in a glass house should not be casting stones," sayshe; "and we will finish inquiring into the behaviour of MissDrummond before we go on to sit in judgment on her father.""But I will be entrapped into no such attitude," said I.  "Thecharacter of Miss Drummond is far above inquiry, as her fatherought to know.  So is mine, and I am telling you that.  There arebut the two ways of it open.  The one is to express your thanks tome as one gentleman to another, and to say no more.  The other (ifyou are so difficult as to be still dissatisfied) is to pay me,that which I have expended and be done."He seemed to soothe me with a hand in the air.  "There, there,"said he.  "You go too fast, you go too fast, Mr. Balfour.  It is agood thing that I have learned to be more patient.  And I believeyou forget that I have yet to see my daughter."I began to be a little relieved upon this speech and a change inthe man's manner that I spied in him as soon as the name of moneyfell between us."I was thinking it would be more fit--if you will excuse theplainness of my dressing in your presence--that I should go forthand leave you to encounter her alone?" said I."What I would have looked for at your hands!" says he; and therewas no mistake but what he said it civilly.I thought this better and better still, and as I began to pull onmy hose, recalling the man's impudent mendicancy atPrestongrange's, I determined to pursue what seemed to be myvictory."If you have any mind to stay some while in Leyden," said I, "thisroom is very much at your disposal, and I can easy find another formyself:  in which way we shall have the least amount of flittingpossible, there being only one to change.""Why, sir," said he, making his bosom big, "I think no shame of apoverty I have come by in the service of my king; I make no secretthat my affairs are quite involved; and for the moment, it would beeven impossible for me to undertake a journey.""Until you have occasion to communicate with your friends," said I,"perhaps it might be convenient for you (as of course it would behonourable to myself) if you were to regard yourself in the lightof my guest?""Sir," said he, "when an offer is frankly made, I think I honourmyself most to imitate that frankness.  Your hand, Mr. David; youhave the character that I respect the most; you are one of thosefrom whom a gentleman can take a favour and no more words about it.I am an old soldier," he went on, looking rather disgusted-likearound my chamber, "and you need not fear I shall proveburthensome.  I have ate too often at a dyke-side, drank of theditch, and had no roof but the rain.""I should be telling you," said I, "that our breakfasts are sentcustomarily in about this time of morning.  I propose I should gonow to the tavern, and bid them add a cover for yourself and delaythe meal the matter of an hour, which will give you an interval tomeet your daughter in."Methought his nostrils wagged at this.  "O, an hour" says he."That is perhaps superfluous.  Half an hour, Mr. David, or saytwenty minutes; I shall do very well in that.  And by the way," headds, detaining me by the coat, "what is it you drink in themorning, whether ale or wine?""To be frank with you, sir," says I, "I drink nothing else butspare, cold water.""Tut-tut," says he, "that is fair destruction to the stomach, takean old campaigner's word for it.  Our country spirit at home isperhaps the most entirely wholesome; but as that is not come-at-able, Rhenish or a white wine of Burgundy will be next best.""I shall make it my business to see you are supplied," said I."Why, very good," said he, "and we shall make a man of you yet, Mr.David."By this time, I can hardly say that I was minding him at all,beyond an odd thought of the kind of father-in-law that he was liketo prove; and all my cares centred about the lass his daughter, towhom I determined to convey some warning of her visitor.  I steppedto the door accordingly, and cried through the panels, knockingthereon at the same time:  "Miss Drummond, here is your father comeat last."With that I went forth upon my errand, having (by two words)extraordinarily damaged my affairs.CHAPTER XXVI--THE THREESOMEWhether or not I was to be so much blamed, or rather perhapspitied, I must leave others to judge.  My shrewdness (of which Ihave a good deal, too) seems not so great with the ladies.  Nodoubt, at the moment when I awaked her, I was thinking a good dealof the effect upon James More; and similarly when I returned and wewere all sat down to breakfast, I continued to behave to the younglady with deference and distance; as I still think to have beenmost wise.  Her father had cast doubts upon the innocence of myfriendship; and these, it was my first business to allay.  Butthere is a kind of an excuse for Catriona also.  We had shared in ascene of some tenderness and passion, and given and receivedcaresses:  I had thrust her from me with violence; I had calledaloud upon her in the night from the one room to the other; she hadpassed hours of wakefulness and weeping; and it is not to besupposed I had been absent from her pillow thoughts.  Upon the backof this, to be awaked, with unaccustomed formality, under the nameof Miss Drummond, and to be thenceforth used with a great deal ofdistance and respect, led her entirely in error on my privatesentiments; and she was indeed so incredibly abused as to imagineme repentant and trying to draw off!The trouble betwixt us seems to have been this:  that whereas I(since I had first set eyes on his great hat) thought singly ofJames More, his return and suspicions, she made so little of thesethat I may say she scarce remarked them, and all her troubles anddoings regarded what had passed between us in the night before.This is partly to be explained by the innocence and boldness of hercharacter; and partly because James More, having sped so ill in hisinterview with me, or had his mouth closed by my invitation, saidno word to her upon the subject.  At the breakfast, accordingly, itsoon appeared we were at cross purposes.  I had looked to find herin clothes of her own:  I found her (as if her father wereforgotten) wearing some of the best that I had bought for her, andwhich she knew (or thought) that I admired her in.  I had looked tofind her imitate my affectation of distance, and be most preciseand formal; instead I found her flushed and wild-like, with eyesextraordinary bright, and a painful and varying expression, callingme by name with a sort of appeal of tenderness, and referring anddeferring to my thoughts and wishes like an anxious or a suspectedwife.But this was not for long.  As I behold her so regardless of herown interests, which I had jeopardised and was now endeavouring torecover, I redoubled my own coldness in the manner of a lesson tothe girl.  The more she came forward, the farther I drew back; themore she betrayed the closeness of our intimacy, the more pointedlycivil I became, until even her father (if he had not been soengrossed with eating) might have observed the opposition.  In themidst of which, of a sudden, she became wholly changed, and I toldmyself, with a good deal of relief, that she had took the hint atlast.All day I was at my classes or in quest of my new lodging; andthough the hour of our customary walk hung miserably on my hands, Icannot say but I was happy on the whole to find my way cleared, thegirl again in proper keeping, the father satisfied or at leastacquiescent, and myself free to prosecute my love with honour.  Atsupper, as at all our meals, it was James More that did thetalking.  No doubt but he talked well if anyone could have believedhim.  But I will speak of him presently more at large.  The meal atan end, he rose, got his great coat, and looking (as I thought) atme, observed he had affairs abroad.  I took this for a hint that Iwas to be going also, and got up; whereupon the girl, who hadscarce given me greeting at my entrance, turned her eyes upon mewide open with a look that bade me stay.  I stood between them likea fish out of water, turning from one to the other; neither seemedto observe me, she gazing on the floor, he buttoning his coat:which vastly swelled my embarrassment.  This appearance ofindifference argued, upon her side, a good deal of anger very nearto burst out.  Upon his, I thought it horribly alarming; I madesure there was a tempest brewing there; and considering that to bethe chief peril, turned towards him and put myself (so to speak) inthe man's hands."Can I do anything for YOU, Mr. Drummond?" says I.He stifled a yawn, which again I thought to be duplicity.  "Why,Mr. David," said he, "since you are so obliging as to propose it,you might show me the way to a certain tavern" (of which he gavethe name) "where I hope to fall in with some old companions inarms."There was no more to say, and I got my hat and cloak to bear himcompany."And as for you," say he to his daughter, "you had best go to yourbed.  I shall be late home, and EARLY TO BED AND EARLY TO RISE,GARS BONNY LASSES HAVE BRIGHT EYES."Whereupon he kissed her with a good deal of tenderness, and usheredme before him from the door.  This was so done (I thought onpurpose) that it was scarce possible there should be any partingsalutation; but I observed she did not look at me, and set it downto terror of James More.It was some distance to that tavern.  He talked all the way ofmatters which did not interest me the smallest, and at the doordismissed me with empty manners.  Thence I walked to my newlodging, where I had not so much as a chimney to hold me warm, andno society but my own thoughts.  These were still bright enough; Idid not so much as dream that Catriona was turned against me; Ithought we were like folk pledged; I thought we had been too nearand spoke too warmly to be severed, least of all by what were onlysteps in a most needful policy.  And the chief of my concern wasonly the kind of father-in-law that I was getting, which was not atall the kind I would have chosen:  and the matter of how soon Iought to speak to him, which was a delicate point on several sides.In the first place, when I thought how young I was I blushed allover, and could almost have found it in my heart to have desisted;only that if once I let them go from Leyden without explanation, Imight lose her altogether.  And in the second place, there was ourvery irregular situation to be kept in view, and the rather scantmeasure of satisfaction I had given James More that morning.  Iconcluded, on the whole, that delay would not hurt anything, yet Iwould not delay too long neither; and got to my cold bed with afull heart.The next day, as James More seemed a little on the complaining handin the matter of my chamber, I offered to have in more furniture;and coming in the afternoon, with porters bringing chairs andtables, found the girl once more left to herself.  She greeted meon my admission civilly, but withdrew at once to her own room, ofwhich she shut the door.  I made my disposition, and paid anddismissed the men so that she might hear them go, when I supposedshe would at once come forth again to speak to me.  I waited yetawhile, then knocked upon her door."Catriona!" said I.The door was opened so quickly, even before I had the word out,that I thought she must have stood behind it listening.  Sheremained there in the interval quite still; but she had a look thatI cannot put a name on, as of one in a bitter trouble."Are we not to have our walk to-day either?" so I faltered."I am thanking you," said she.  "I will not be caring much to walk,now that my father is come home.""But I think he has gone out himself and left you here alone," saidI."And do you think that was very kindly said?" she asked."It was not unkindly meant," I replied.  "What ails you, Catriona?What have I done to you that you should turn from me like this?""I do not turn from you at all," she said, speaking very carefully."I will ever be grateful to my friend that was good to me; I willever be his friend in all that I am able.  But now that my fatherJames More is come again, there is a difference to be made, and Ithink there are some things said and done that would be better tobe forgotten.  But I will ever be your friend in all that I amable, and if that is not all that . . . . if it is not so much . .. . Not that you will be caring!  But I would not have you think ofme too hard.  It was true what you said to me, that I was too youngto be advised, and I am hoping you will remember I was just achild.  I would not like to lose your friendship, at all events."She began this very pale; but before she was done, the blood was inher face like scarlet, so that not her words only, but her face andthe trembling of her very hands, besought me to be gentle.  I saw,for the first time, how very wrong I had done to place the child inthat position, where she had been entrapped into a moment'sweakness, and now stood before me like a person shamed."Miss Drummond," I said, and stuck, and made the same beginningonce again, "I wish you could see into my heart," I cried.  "Youwould read there that my respect is undiminished.  If that werepossible, I should say it was increased.  This is but the result ofthe mistake we made; and had to come; and the less said of it nowthe better.  Of all of our life here, I promise you it shall neverpass my lips; I would like to promise you too that I would neverthink of it, but it's a memory that will be always dear to me.  Andas for a friend, you have one here that would die for you.""I am thanking you," said she.We stood awhile silent, and my sorrow for myself began to get theupper hand; for here were all my dreams come to a sad tumble, andmy love lost, and myself alone again in the world as at thebeginning."Well," said I, "we shall be friends always, that's a certainthing.  But this is a kind of farewell, too:  it's a kind of afarewell after all; I shall always ken Miss Drummond, but this is afarewell to my Catriona."I looked at her; I could hardly say I saw her, but she seemed togrow great and brighten in my eyes; and with that I suppose I musthave lost my head, for I called out her name again and made a stepat her with my hands reached forth.She shrank back like a person struck, her face flamed; but theblood sprang no faster up into her cheeks, than what it flowed backupon my own heart, at sight of it, with penitence and concern.  Ifound no words to excuse myself, but bowed before her very deep,and went my ways out of the house with death in my bosom.I think it was about five days that followed without any change.  Isaw her scarce ever but at meals, and then of course in the companyof James More.  If we were alone even for a moment, I made it mydevoir to behave the more distantly and to multiply respectfulattentions, having always in my mind's eye that picture of the girlshrinking and flaming in a blush, and in my heart more pity for herthan I could depict in words.  I was sorry enough for myself, Ineed not dwell on that, having fallen all my length and more thanall my height in a few seconds; but, indeed, I was near as sorryfor the girl, and sorry enough to be scarce angry with her save byfits and starts.  Her plea was good; she had been placed in anunfair position; if she had deceived herself and me, it was no morethan was to have been looked for.And for another thing she was now very much alone.  Her father,when he was by, was rather a caressing parent; but he was very easyled away by his affairs and pleasures, neglected her withoutcompunction or remark, spent his nights in taverns when he had themoney, which was more often than I could at all account for; andeven in the course of these few days, failed once to come to ameal, which Catriona and I were at last compelled to partake ofwithout him.  It was the evening meal, and I left immediately thatI had eaten, observing I supposed she would prefer to be alone; towhich she agreed and (strange as it may seem) I quite believed her.Indeed, I thought myself but an eyesore to the girl, and a reminderof a moment's weakness that she now abhorred to think of.  So shemust sit alone in that room where she and I had been so merry, andin the blink of that chimney whose light had shone upon our manydifficult and tender moments.  There she must sit alone, and thinkof herself as of a maid who had most unmaidenly proffered heraffections and had the same rejected.  And in the meanwhile I wouldbe alone some other place, and reading myself (whenever I wastempted to be angry) lessons upon human frailty and femaledelicacy.  And altogether I suppose there were never two poor foolsmade themselves more unhappy in a greater misconception.As for James, he paid not so much heed to us, or to anything innature but his pocket, and his belly, and his own prating talk.Before twelve hours were gone he had raised a small loan of me;before thirty, he had asked for a second and been refused.  Moneyand refusal he took with the same kind of high good nature.Indeed, he had an outside air of magnanimity that was very wellfitted to impose upon a daughter; and the light in which he wasconstantly presented in his talk, and the man's fine presence andgreat ways went together pretty harmoniously.  So that a man thathad no business with him, and either very little penetration or afurious deal of prejudice, might almost have been taken in.  To me,after my first two interviews, he was as plain as print; I saw himto be perfectly selfish, with a perfect innocency in the same; andI would hearken to his swaggering talk (of arms, and "an oldsoldier," and "a poor Highland gentleman," and "the strength of mycountry and my friends") as I might to the babbling of a parrot.The odd thing was that I fancy he believed some part of it himself,or did at times; I think he was so false all through that he scarceknew when he was lying; and for one thing, his moments of dejectionmust have been wholly genuine.  There were times when he would bethe most silent, affectionate, clinging creature possible, holdingCatriona's hand like a big baby, and begging of me not to leave ifI had any love to him; of which, indeed, I had none, but all themore to his daughter.  He would press and indeed beseech us toentertain him with our talk, a thing very difficult in the state ofour relations; and again break forth in pitiable regrets for hisown land and friends, or into Gaelic singing."This is one of the melancholy airs of my native land," he wouldsay.  "You may think it strange to see a soldier weep, and indeedit is to make a near friend of you," says he.  "But the notes ofthis singing are in my blood, and the words come out of my heart.And when I mind upon my red mountains and the wild birds callingthere, and the brave streams of water running down, I would scarcethink shame to weep before my enemies."  Then he would sing again,and translate to me pieces of the song, with a great deal ofboggling and much expressed contempt against the English language."It says here," he would say, "that the sun is gone down, and thebattle is at an end, and the brave chiefs are defeated.  And ittells here how the stars see them fleeing into strange countries orlying dead on the red mountain; and they will never more shout thecall of battle or wash their feet in the streams of the valley.But if you had only some of this language, you would weep alsobecause the words of it are beyond all expression, and it is meremockery to tell you it in English."Well, I thought there was a good deal of mockery in the business,one way and another; and yet, there was some feeling too, for whichI hated him, I think, the worst of all.  And it used to cut me tothe quick to see Catriona so much concerned for the old rogue, andweeping herself to see him weep, when I was sure one half of hisdistress flowed from his last night's drinking in some tavern.There were times when I was tempted to lend him a round sum, andsee the last of him for good; but this would have been to see thelast of Catriona as well, for which I was scarcely so prepared; andbesides, it went against my conscience to squander my good money onone who was so little of a husband.CHAPTER XXVII--A TWOSOMEI believe it was about the fifth day, and I know at least thatJames was in one of his fits of gloom, when I received threeletters.  The first was from Alan, offering to visit me in Leyden;the other two were out of Scotland and prompted by the same affair,which was the death of my uncle and my own complete accession to myrights.  Rankeillor's was, of course, wholly in the business view;Miss Grant's was like herself, a little more witty than wise, fullof blame to me for not having written (though how was I to writewith such intelligence?) and of rallying talk about Catriona, whichit cut me to the quick to read in her very presence.For it was of course in my own rooms that I found them, when I cameto dinner, so that I was surprised out of my news in the very firstmoment of reading it.  This made a welcome diversion for all threeof us, nor could any have foreseen the ill consequences thatensued.  It was accident that brought the three letters the sameday, and that gave them into my hand in the same room with JamesMore; and of all the events that flowed from that accident, andwhich I might have prevented if I had held my tongue, the truth isthat they were preordained before Agricola came into Scotland orAbraham set out upon his travels.The first that I opened was naturally Alan's; and what more naturalthan that I should comment on his design to visit me? but Iobserved James to sit up with an air of immediate attention."Is that not Alan Breck that was suspected of the Appin accident?"he inquired.I told him, "Ay," it was the same; and he withheld me some timefrom my other letters, asking of our acquaintance, of Alan's mannerof life in France, of which I knew very little, and further of hisvisit as now proposed."All we forfeited folk hang a little together," he explained, "andbesides I know the gentleman:  and though his descent is not thething, and indeed he has no true right to use the name of Stewart,he was very much admired in the day of Drummossie.  He did therelike a soldier; if some that need not be named had done as well,the upshot need not have been so melancholy to remember.  Therewere two that did their best that day, and it makes a bond betweenthe pair of us," says he.I could scarce refrain from shooting out my tongue at him, andcould almost have wished that Alan had been there to have inquireda little further into that mention of his birth.  Though, they tellme, the same was indeed not wholly regular.Meanwhile, I had opened Miss Grant's, and could not withhold anexclamation."Catriona," I cried, forgetting, the first time since her fatherwas arrived, to address her by a handle, "I am come into my kingdomfairly, I am the laird of Shaws indeed--my uncle is dead at last."She clapped her hands together leaping from her seat.  The nextmoment it must have come over both of us at once what little causeof joy was left to either, and we stood opposite, staring on eachother sadly.But James showed himself a ready hypocrite.  "My daughter," sayshe, "is this how my cousin learned you to behave?  Mr. David haslost a new friend, and we should first condole with him on hisbereavement.""Troth, sir," said I, turning to him in a kind of anger, "I canmake no such great faces.  His death is as blithe news as ever Igot.""It's a good soldier's philosophy," says James.  "'Tis the way offlesh, we must all go, all go.  And if the gentleman was so farfrom your favour, why, very well!  But we may at least congratulateyou on your accession to your estates.""Nor can I say that either," I replied, with the same heat.  "It isa good estate; what matters that to a lone man that has enoughalready?  I had a good revenue before in my frugality; and but forthe man's death--which gratifies me, shame to me that must confessit!--I see not how anyone is to be bettered by this change.""Come, come," said he, "you are more affected than you let on, oryou would never make yourself out so lonely.  Here are threeletters; that means three that wish you well; and I could name twomore, here in this very chamber.  I have known you not so verylong, but Catriona, when we are alone, is never done with thesinging of your praises."She looked up at him, a little wild at that; and he slid off atonce into another matter, the extent of my estate, which (duringthe most of the dinner time) he continued to dwell upon withinterest.  But it was to no purpose he dissembled; he had touchedthe matter with too gross a hand:  and I knew what to expect.Dinner was scarce ate when he plainly discovered his designs.  Hereminded Catriona of an errand, and bid her attend to it.  "I donot see you should be one beyond the hour," he added, "and friendDavid will be good enough to bear me company till you return."  Shemade haste to obey him without words.  I do not know if sheunderstood, I believe not; but I was completely satisfied, and satstrengthening my mind for what should follow.The door had scarce closed behind her departure, when the manleaned back in his chair and addressed me with a good affectationof easiness.  Only the one thing betrayed him, and that was hisface; which suddenly shone all over with fine points of sweat."I am rather glad to have a word alone with you," says he, "becausein our first interview there were some expressions youmisapprehended and I have long meant to set you right upon.  Mydaughter stands beyond doubt.  So do you, and I would make thatgood with my sword against all gainsayers.  But, my dear David,this world is a censorious place--as who should know it better thanmyself, who have lived ever since the days of my late departedfather, God sain him! in a perfect spate of calumnies?  We have toface to that; you and me have to consider of that; we have toconsider of that."  And he wagged his head like a minister in apulpit."To what effect, Mr. Drummond?" said I.  "I would be obliged to youif you would approach your point.""Ay, ay," said he, laughing, "like your character, indeed! and whatI most admire in it.  But the point, my worthy fellow, is sometimesin a kittle bit."  He filled a glass of wine.  "Though between youand me, that are such fast friends, it need not bother us long.The point, I need scarcely tell you, is my daughter.  And the firstthing is that I have no thought in my mind of blaming you.  In theunfortunate circumstances, what could you do else?  'Deed, and Icannot tell.""I thank you for that," said I, pretty close upon my guard."I have besides studied your character," he went on; "your talentsare fair; you seem to have a moderate competence, which does noharm; and one thing with another, I am very happy to have toannounce to you that I have decided on the latter of the two waysopen.""I am afraid I am dull," said I.  "What ways are these?"He bent his brows upon me formidably and uncrossed his legs.  "Why,sir," says he, "I think I need scarce describe them to a gentlemanof your condition; either that I should cut your throat or that youshould marry my daughter.""You are pleased to be quite plain at last," said I."And I believe I have been plain from the beginning!" cries herobustiously.  "I am a careful parent, Mr. Balfour; but I thankGod, a patient and deleeborate man.  There is many a father, sir,that would have hirsled you at once either to the altar or thefield.  My esteem for your character--""Mr. Drummond," I interrupted, "if you have any esteem for me atall, I will beg of you to moderate your voice.  It is quiteneedless to rowt at a gentleman in the same chamber with yourselfand lending you his best attention.""Why, very true," says he, with an immediate change.  "And you mustexcuse the agitations of a parent.""I understand you then," I continued--"for I will take no note ofyour other alternative, which perhaps it was a pity you let fall--Iunderstand you rather to offer me encouragement in case I shoulddesire to apply for your daughter's hand?""It is not possible to express my meaning better," said he, "and Isee we shall do well together.""That remains to be yet seen," said I.  "But so much I need make nosecret of, that I bear the lady you refer to the most tenderaffection, and I could not fancy, even in a dream, a better fortunethan to get her.""I was sure of it, I felt certain of you, David," he cried, andreached out his hand to me.I put it by.  "You go too fast, Mr. Drummond," said I.  "There areconditions to be made; and there is a difficulty in the path, whichI see not entirely how we shall come over.  I have told you that,upon my side, there is no objection to the marriage, but I havegood reason to believe there will be much on the young lady's.""This is all beside the mark," says he.  "I will engage for heracceptance.""I think you forget, Mr. Drummond," said I, "that, even in dealingwith myself, you have been betrayed into two-three unpalatableexpressions.  I will have none such employed to the young lady.  Iam here to speak and think for the two of us; and I give you tounderstand that I would no more let a wife be forced upon myself,than what I would let a husband be forced on the young lady."He sat and glowered at me like one in doubt and a good deal oftemper."So that is to be the way of it," I concluded.  "I will marry MissDrummond, and that blithely, if she is entirely willing.  But ifthere be the least unwillingness, as I have reason to fear--marryher will I never.""Well well," said he, "this is a small affair.  As soon as shereturns I will sound her a bit, and hope to reassure you--"But I cut in again.  "Not a finger of you, Mr. Drummond, or I cryoff, and you can seek a husband to your daughter somewhere else,"said I.  "It is I that am to be the only dealer and the only judge.I shall satisfy myself exactly; and none else shall anyways meddle--you the least of all.""Upon my word, sir!" he exclaimed, "and who are you to be thejudge?""The bridegroom, I believe," said I."This is to quibble," he cried.  "You turn your back upon the fact.The girl, my daughter, has no choice left to exercise.  Hercharacter is gone.""And I ask your pardon," said I, "but while this matter liesbetween her and you and me, that is not so.""What security have I!" he cried.  "Am I to let my daughter'sreputation depend upon a chance?""You should have thought of all this long ago," said I, "before youwere so misguided as to lose her; and not afterwards when it isquite too late.  I refuse to regard myself as any way accountablefor your neglect, and I will be browbeat by no man living.  My mindis quite made up, and come what may, I will not depart from it ahair's breadth.  You and me are to sit here in company till herreturn:  upon which, without either word or look from you, she andI are to go forth again to hold our talk.  If she can satisfy methat she is willing to this step, I will then make it; and if shecannot, I will not."He leaped out of his chair like a man stung.  "I can spy yourmanoeuvre," he cried; "you would work upon her to refuse!""Maybe ay, and maybe no," said I.  "That is the way it is to be,whatever.""And if I refuse?" cries he."Then, Mr. Drummond, it will have to come to the throat-cutting,"said I.What with the size of the man, his great length of arm in which hecame near rivalling his father, and his reputed skill at weapons, Idid not use this word without trepidation, to say nothing at all ofthe circumstance that he was Catriona's father.  But I might havespared myself alarms.  From the poorness of my lodging--he does notseem to have remarked his daughter's dresses, which were indeed allequally new to him--and from the fact that I had shown myselfaverse to lend, he had embraced a strong idea of my poverty.  Thesudden news of my estate convinced him of his error, and he hadmade but the one bound of it on this fresh venture, to which he wasnow so wedded, that I believe he would have suffered anythingrather than fall to the alternative of fighting.A little while longer he continued to dispute with me, until I hitupon a word that silenced him."If I find you so averse to let me see the lady by herself," saidI, "I must suppose you have very good grounds to think me in theright about her unwillingness."He gabbled some kind of an excuse."But all this is very exhausting to both of our tempers," I added,"and I think we would do better to preserve a judicious silence."The which we did until the girl returned, and I must suppose wouldhave cut a very ridiculous figure had there been any there to viewus.CHAPTER XXVIII--IN WHICH I AM LEFT ALONEI opened the door to Catriona and stopped her on the threshold."Your father wishes us to take our walk," said I.She looked to James More, who nodded, and at that, like a trainedsoldier, she turned to go with me.We took one of our old ways, where we had gone often together, andbeen more happy than I can tell of in the past.  I came a half astep behind, so that I could watch her unobserved.  The knocking ofher little shoes upon the way sounded extraordinary pretty and sad;and I thought it a strange moment that I should be so near bothends of it at once, and walk in the midst between two destinies,and could not tell whether I was hearing these steps for the lasttime, or whether the sound of them was to go in and out with metill death should part us.She avoided even to look at me, only walked before her, like onewho had a guess of what was coming.  I saw I must speak soon beforemy courage was run out, but where to begin I knew not.  In thispainful situation, when the girl was as good as forced into my armsand had already besought my forbearance, any excess of pressuremust have seemed indecent; yet to avoid it wholly would have a verycold-like appearance.  Between these extremes I stood helpless, andcould have bit my fingers; so that, when at last I managed to speakat all, it may be said I spoke at random."Catriona," said I, "I am in a very painful situation; or rather,so we are both; and I would be a good deal obliged to you if youwould promise to let me speak through first of all, and not tointerrupt me till I have done."She promised me that simply."Well," said I, "this that I have got to say is very difficult, andI know very well I have no right to be saying it.  After whatpassed between the two of us last Friday, I have no manner ofright.  We have got so ravelled up (and all by my fault) that Iknow very well the least I could do is just to hold my tongue,which was what I intended fully, and there was nothing further frommy thoughts than to have troubled you again.  But, my dear, it hasbecome merely necessary, and no way by it.  You see, this estate ofmine has fallen in, which makes of me rather a better match; andthe--the business would not have quite the same ridiculous-likeappearance that it would before.  Besides which, it's supposed thatour affairs have got so much ravelled up (as I was saying) that itwould be better to let them be the way they are.  In my view, thispart of the thing is vastly exagerate, and if I were you I wouldnot wear two thoughts on it.  Only it's right I should mention thesame, because there's no doubt it has some influence on James More.Then I think we were none so unhappy when we dwelt together in thistown before.  I think we did pretty well together.  If you wouldlook back, my dear--""I will look neither back nor forward," she interrupted.  "Tell methe one thing:  this is my father's doing?""He approves of it," said I.  "He approved I that I should ask yourhand in marriage," and was going on again with somewhat more of anappeal upon her feelings; but she marked me not, and struck intothe midst."He told you to!" she cried.  "It is no sense denying it, you saidyourself that there was nothing farther from your thoughts.  Hetold you to.""He spoke of it the first, if that is what you mean," I began.She was walking ever the faster, and looking fain in front of her;but at this she made a little noise in her head, and I thought shewould have run."Without which," I went on, "after what you said last Friday, Iwould never have been so troublesome as make the offer.  But whenhe as good as asked me, what was I to do?"She stopped and turned round upon me."Well, it is refused at all events," she cried, "and there will bean end of that."And she began again to walk forward."I suppose I could expect no better," said I, "but I think youmight try to be a little kind to me for the last end of it.  I seenot why you should be harsh.  I have loved you very well, Catriona--no harm that I should call you so for the last time.  I have donethe best that I could manage, I am trying the same still, and onlyvexed that I can do no better.  It is a strange thing to me thatyou can take any pleasure to be hard to me.""I am not thinking of you," she said, "I am thinking of that man,my father.""Well, and that way, too!" said I.  "I can be of use to you thatway, too; I will have to be.  It is very needful, my dear, that weshould consult about your father; for the way this talk has gone,an angry man will be James More."She stopped again.  "It is because I am disgraced?" she asked."That is what he is thinking," I replied, "but I have told youalready to make nought of it.""It will be all one to me," she cried.  "I prefer to be disgraced!"I did not know very well what to answer, and stood silent.There seemed to be something working in her bosom after that lastcry; presently she broke out, "And what is the meaning of all this?Why is all this shame loundered on my head?  How could you dare it,David Balfour?""My dear," said I, "what else was I to do?""I am not your dear," she said, "and I defy you to be calling methese words.""I am not thinking of my words," said I.  "My heart bleeds for you,Miss Drummond.  Whatever I may say, be sure you have my pity inyour difficult position.  But there is just the one thing that Iwish you would bear in view, if it was only long enough to discussit quietly; for there is going to be a collieshangie when we twoget home.  Take my word for it, it will need the two of us to makethis matter end in peace.""Ay," said she.  There sprang a patch of red in either of hercheeks.  "Was he for fighting you?" said she."Well, he was that," said I.She gave a dreadful kind of laugh.  "At all events, it iscomplete!" she cried.  And then turning on me.  "My father and Iare a fine pair," said she, "but I am thanking the good God therewill be somebody worse than what we are.  I am thanking the goodGod that he has let me see you so.  There will never be the girlmade that will not scorn you."I had borne a good deal pretty patiently, but this was over themark."You have no right to speak to me like that," said I.  "What have Idone but to be good to you, or try to be?  And here is myrepayment!  O, it is too much."She kept looking at me with a hateful smile.  "Coward!" said she."The word in your throat and in your father's!" I cried.  "I havedared him this day already in your interest.  I will dare himagain, the nasty pole-cat; little I care which of us should fall!Come," said I, "back to the house with us; let us be done with it,let me be done with the whole Hieland crew of you!  You will seewhat you think when I am dead."She shook her head at me with that same smile I could have struckher for."O, smile away!" I cried.  "I have seen your bonny father smile onthe wrong side this day.  Not that I mean he was afraid, ofcourse," I added hastily, "but he preferred the other way of it.""What is this?" she asked."When I offered to draw with him," said I."You offered to draw upon James More!" she cried."And I did so," said I, "and found him backward enough, or howwould we be here?""There is a meaning upon this," said she.  "What is it you aremeaning?""He was to make you take me," I replied, "and I would not have it.I said you should be free, and I must speak with you alone; littleI supposed it would be such a speaking!  'AND WHAT IF I REFUSE?'said he.--'THEN IT MUST COME TO THE THROAT-CUTTING,' says I, 'FOR IWILL NO MORE HAVE A HUSBAND FORCED ON THAT YOUNG LADY, THAN WHAT IWOULD HAVE A WIFE FORCED UPON MYSELF.'  These were my words, theywere a friend's words; bonnily have I paid for them!  Now you haverefused me of your own clear free will, and there lives no fatherin the Highlands, or out of them, that can force on this marriage.I will see that your wishes are respected; I will make the same mybusiness, as I have all through.  But I think you might have thatdecency as to affect some gratitude.  'Deed, and I thought you knewme better!  I have not behaved quite well to you, but that wasweakness.  And to think me a coward, and such a coward as that--O,my lass, there was a stab for the last of it!""Davie, how would I guess?" she cried.  "O, this is a dreadfulbusiness!  Me and mine,"--she gave a kind of a wretched cry at theword--"me and mine are not fit to speak to you.  O, I could bekneeling down to you in the street, I could be kissing your handsfor forgiveness!""I will keep the kisses I have got from you already," cried I.  "Iwill keep the ones I wanted and that were something worth; I willnot be kissed in penitence.""What can you be thinking of this miserable girl?" says she."What I am trying to tell you all this while!" said I, "that youhad best leave me alone, whom you can make no more unhappy if youtried, and turn your attention to James More, your father, withwhom you are like to have a queer pirn to wind.""O, that I must be going out into the world alone with such a man!"she cried, and seemed to catch herself in with a great effort."But trouble yourself no more for that," said she.  "He does notknow what kind of nature is in my heart.  He will pay me dear forthis day of it; dear, dear, will he pay."She turned, and began to go home and I to accompany her.  At whichshe stopped."I will be going alone," she said.  "It is alone I must be seeinghim."Some little time I raged about the streets, and told myself I wasthe worst used lad in Christendom.  Anger choked me; it was allvery well for me to breathe deep; it seemed there was not airenough about Leyden to supply me, and I thought I would have burstlike a man at the bottom of the sea.  I stopped and laughed atmyself at a street corner a minute together, laughing out loud, sothat a passenger looked at me, which brought me to myself."Well," I thought, "I have been a gull and a ninny and a soft Tommylong enough.  Time it was done.  Here is a good lesson to havenothing to do with that accursed sex, that was the ruin of the manin the beginning and will be so to the end.  God knows I was happyenough before ever I saw her; God knows I can be happy enough againwhen I have seen the last of her."That seemed to me the chief affair:  to see them go.  I dwelledupon the idea fiercely; and presently slipped on, in a kind ofmalevolence, to consider how very poorly they were likely to farewhen Davie Balfour was no longer by to be their milk-cow; at which,to my very own great surprise, the disposition of my mind turnedbottom up.  I was still angry; I still hated her; and yet I thoughtI owed it to myself that she should suffer nothing.This carried me home again at once, where I found the mails drawnout and ready fastened by the door, and the father and daughterwith every mark upon them of a recent disagreement.  Catriona waslike a wooden doll; James More breathed hard, his face was dottedwith white spots, and his nose upon one side.  As soon as I camein, the girl looked at him with a steady, clear, dark look thatmight have been followed by a blow.  It was a hint that was morecontemptuous than a command, and I was surprised to see James Moreaccept it.  It was plain he had had a master talking-to; and Icould see there must be more of the devil in the girl than I hadguessed, and more good humour about the man than I had given himthe credit of.He began, at least, calling me Mr. Balfour, and plainly speakingfrom a lesson; but he got not very far, for at the first pompousswell of his voice, Catriona cut in."I will tell you what James More is meaning," said she.  "He meanswe have come to you, beggar-folk, and have not behaved to you verywell, and we are ashamed of our ingratitude and ill-behaviour.  Nowwe are wanting to go away and be forgotten; and my father will haveguided his gear so ill, that we cannot even do that unless you willgive us some more alms.  For that is what we are, at an events,beggar-folk and sorners.""By your leave, Miss Drummond," said I, "I must speak to yourfather by myself."She went into her own room and shut the door, without a word or alook."You must excuse her, Mr. Balfour," says James More.  "She has nodelicacy.""I am not here to discuss that with you," said I, "but to be quitof you.  And to that end I must talk of your position.  Now, Mr.Drummond, I have kept the run of your affairs more closely than youbargained for.  I know you had money of your own when you wereborrowing mine.  I know you have had more since you were here inLeyden, though you concealed it even from your daughter.""I bid you beware.  I will stand no more baiting," he broke out."I am sick of her and you.  What kind of a damned trade is this tobe a parent!  I have had expressions used to me--"  There he brokeoff.  "Sir, this is the heart of a soldier and a parent," he wenton again, laying his hand on his bosom, "outraged in bothcharacters--and I bid you beware.""If you would have let me finish," says I, "you would have found Ispoke for your advantage.""My dear friend," he cried, "I know I might have relied upon thegenerosity of your character.""Man! will you let me speak?" said I.  "The fact is that I cannotwin to find out if you are rich or poor.  But it is my idea thatyour means, as they are mysterious in their source, so they aresomething insufficient in amount; and I do not choose your daughterto be lacking.  If I durst speak to herself, you may be certain Iwould never dream of trusting it to you; because I know you likethe back of my hand, and all your blustering talk is that much windto me.  However, I believe in your way you do still care somethingfor your daughter after all; and I must just be doing with thatground of confidence, such as it is."Whereupon, I arranged with him that he was to communicate with me,as to his whereabouts and Catriona's welfare, in consideration ofwhich I was to serve him a small stipend.He heard the business out with a great deal of eagerness; and whenit was done, "My dear fellow, my dear son," he cried out, "this ismore like yourself than any of it yet!  I will serve you with asoldier's faithfulness--""Let me hear no more of it!" says I.  "You have got me to thatpitch that the bare name of soldier rises on my stomach.  Ourtraffic is settled; I am now going forth and will return in onehalf-hour, when I expect to find my chambers purged of you."I gave them good measure of time; it was my one fear that I mightsee Catriona again, because tears and weakness were ready in myheart, and I cherished my anger like a piece of dignity.  Perhapsan hour went by; the sun had gone down, a little wisp of a new moonwas following it across a scarlet sunset; already there were starsin the east, and in my chambers, when at last I entered them, thenight lay blue.  I lit a taper and reviewed the rooms; in the firstthere remained nothing so much as to awake a memory of those whowere gone; but in the second, in a corner of the floor, I spied alittle heap that brought my heart into my mouth.  She had leftbehind at her departure all that she had ever had of me.  It wasthe blow that I felt sorest, perhaps because it was the last; and Ifell upon that pile of clothing and behaved myself more foolishthan I care to tell of.Late in the night, in a strict frost, and my teeth chattering, Icame again by some portion of my manhood and considered withmyself.  The sight of these poor frocks and ribbons, and hershifts, and the clocked stockings, was not to be endured; and if Iwere to recover any constancy of mind, I saw I must be rid of themere the morning.  It was my first thought to have made a fire andburned them; but my disposition has always been opposed to wastery,for one thing; and for another, to have burned these things thatshe had worn so close upon her body seemed in the nature of acruelty.  There was a corner cupboard in that chamber; there Idetermined to bestow them.  The which I did and made it a longbusiness, folding them with very little skill indeed but the morecare; and sometimes dropping them with my tears.  All the heart wasgone out of me, I was weary as though I had run miles, and sorelike one beaten; when, as I was folding a kerchief that she woreoften at her neck, I observed there was a corner neatly cut fromit.  It was a kerchief of a very pretty hue, on which I hadfrequently remarked; and once that she had it on, I rememberedtelling her (by way of a banter) that she wore my colours.  Therecame a glow of hope and like a tide of sweetness in my bosom; andthe next moment I was plunged back in a fresh despair.  For therewas the corner crumpled in a knot and cast down by itself inanother part of the floor.But when I argued with myself, I grew more hopeful.  She had cutthat corner off in some childish freak that was manifestly tender;that she had cast it away again was little to be wondered at; and Iwas inclined to dwell more upon the first than upon the second, andto be more pleased that she had ever conceived the idea of thatkeepsake, than concerned because she had flung it from her in anhour of natural resentment.CHAPTER XXIX--WE MEET IN DUNKIRK.Altogether, then, I was scare so miserable the next days but what Ihad many hopeful and happy snatches; threw myself with a good dealof constancy upon my studies; and made out to endure the time tillAlan should arrive, or I might hear word of Catriona by the meansof James More.  I had altogether three letters in the time of ourseparation.  One was to announce their arrival in the town ofDunkirk in France, from which place James shortly after startedalone upon a private mission.  This was to England and to see LordHolderness; and it has always been a bitter thought that my goodmoney helped to pay the charges of the same.  But he has need of along spoon who soups with the de'il, or James More either.  Duringthis absence, the time was to fall due for another letter; and asthe letter was the condition of his stipend, he had been so carefulas to prepare it beforehand and leave it with Catriona to bedespatched.  The fact of our correspondence aroused her suspicions,and he was no sooner gone than she had burst the seal.  What Ireceived began accordingly in the writing of James More:"My dear Sir,--Your esteemed favour came to hand duly, and I haveto acknowledge the inclosure according to agreement.  It shall beall faithfully expended on my daughter, who is well, and desires tobe remembered to her dear friend.  I find her in rather amelancholy disposition, but trust in the mercy of God to see herre-established.  Our manner of life is very much alone, but wesolace ourselves with the melancholy tunes of our native mountains,and by walking up the margin of the sea that lies next to Scotland.It was better days with me when I lay with five wounds upon my bodyon the field of Gladsmuir.  I have found employment here in theharas of a French nobleman, where my experience is valued.  But, mydear Sir, the wages are so exceedingly unsuitable that I would beashamed to mention them, which makes your remittances the morenecessary to my daughter's comfort, though I daresay the sight ofold friends would be still better."My dear Sir,"Your affectionate, obedient servant,"JAMES MACGREGOR DRUMMOND."Below it began again in the hand of Catriona:-"Do not be believing him, it is all lies together,--C. M. D."Not only did she add this postscript, but I think she must havecome near suppressing the letter; for it came long after date, andwas closely followed by the third.  In the time betwixt them, Alanhad arrived, and made another life to me with his merryconversation; I had been presented to his cousin of the Scots-Dutch, a man that drank more than I could have thought possible andwas not otherwise of interest; I had been entertained to manyjovial dinners and given some myself, all with no great change uponmy sorrow; and we two (by which I mean Alan and myself, and not atall the cousin) had discussed a good deal the nature of myrelations with James More and his daughter.  I was naturallydiffident to give particulars; and this disposition was not anywaylessened by the nature of Alan's commentary upon those I gave."I cannae make heed nor tail of it," he would say, "but it sticksin my mind ye've made a gowk of yourself.  There's few people thathas had more experience than Alan Breck:  and I can never call tomind to have heard tell of a lassie like this one of yours.  Theway that you tell it, the thing's fair impossible.  Ye must havemade a terrible hash of the business, David.""There are whiles that I am of the same mind," said I."The strange thing is that ye seem to have a kind of fancy for hertoo!" said Alan."The biggest kind, Alan," said I, "and I think I'll take it to mygrave with me.""Well, ye beat me, whatever!" he would conclude.I showed him the letter with Catriona's postscript.  "And hereagain!" he cried.  "Impossible to deny a kind of decency to thisCatriona, and sense forby!  As for James More, the man's as boss asa drum; he's just a wame and a wheen words; though I'll can neverdeny that he fought reasonably well at Gladsmuir, and it's truewhat he says here about the five wounds.  But the loss of him isthat the man's boss.""Ye see, Alan," said I, "it goes against the grain with me to leavethe maid in such poor hands.""Ye couldnae weel find poorer," he admitted.  "But what are ye todo with it?  It's this way about a man and a woman, ye see, Davie:The weemenfolk have got no kind of reason to them.  Either theylike the man, and then a' goes fine; or else they just detest him,and ye may spare your breath--ye can do naething.  There's just thetwo sets of them--them that would sell their coats for ye, and themthat never look the road ye're on.  That's a' that there is towomen; and you seem to be such a gomeral that ye cannae tell thetane frae the tither.""Well, and I'm afraid that's true for me," said I."And yet there's naething easier!" cried Alan.  "I could easy learnye the science of the thing; but ye seem to me to be born blind,and there's where the deefficulty comes in.""And can YOU no help me?" I asked, "you that are so clever at thetrade?""Ye see, David, I wasnae here," said he.  "I'm like a field officerthat has naebody but blind men for scouts and eclaireurs; and whatwould he ken?  But it sticks in my mind that ye'll have made somekind of bauchle; and if I was you I would have a try at her again.""Would ye so, man Alan?" said I."I would e'en't," says he.The third letter came to my hand while we were deep in some suchtalk:  and it will be seen how pat it fell to the occasion.  Jamesprofessed to be in some concern upon his daughter's health, which Ibelieve was never better; abounded in kind expressions to myself;and finally proposed that I should visit them at Dunkirk."You will now be enjoying the society of my old comrade Mr.Stewart," he wrote.  "Why not accompany him so far in his return toFrance?  I have something very particular for Mr. Stewart's ear;and, at any rate, I would be pleased to meet in with an old fellow-soldier and one so mettle as himself.  As for you, my dear sir, mydaughter and I would be proud to receive our benefactor, whom weregard as a brother and a son.  The French nobleman has proved aperson of the most filthy avarice of character, and I have beennecessitate to leave the haras.  You will find us in consequence alittle poorly lodged in the auberge of a man Bazin on the dunes;but the situation is caller, and I make no doubt but we might spendsome very pleasant days, when Mr. Stewart and I could recall ourservices, and you and my daughter divert yourselves in a mannermore befitting your age.  I beg at least that Mr. Stewart wouldcome here; my business with him opens a very wide door.""What does the man want with me?" cried Alan, when he had read."What he wants with you in clear enough--it's siller.  But what canhe want with Alan Breck?""O, it'll be just an excuse," said I.  "He is still after thismarriage, which I wish from my heart that we could bring about.And he asks you because he thinks I would be less likely to comewanting you.""Well, I wish that I kent," says Alan.  "Him and me were neveronyways pack; we used to girn at ither like a pair of pipers.'Something for my ear,' quo' he!  I'll maybe have something for hishinder-end, before we're through with it.  Dod, I'm thinking itwould be a kind of divertisement to gang and see what he'll beafter!  Forby that I could see your lassie then.  What say ye,Davie?  Will ye ride with Alan?"You may be sure I was not backward, and Alan's furlough runningtowards an end, we set forth presently upon this joint adventure.It was near dark of a January day when we rode at last into thetown of Dunkirk.  We left our horses at the post, and found a guideto Bazin's Inn, which lay beyond the walls.  Night was quitefallen, so that we were the last to leave that fortress, and heardthe doors of it close behind us as we passed the bridge.  On theother side there lay a lighted suburb, which we thridded for awhile, then turned into a dark lane, and presently found ourselveswading in the night among deep sand where we could hear a bulleringof the sea.  We travelled in this fashion for some while, followingour conductor mostly by the sound of his voice; and I had begun tothink he was perhaps misleading us, when we came to the top of asmall brae, and there appeared out of the darkness a dim light in awindow."Voila l'auberge a Bazin," says the guide.Alan smacked his lips.  "An unco lonely bit," said he, and Ithought by his tone he was not wholly pleased.A little after, and we stood in the lower storey of that house,which was all in the one apartment, with a stairs leading to thechambers at the side, benches and tables by the wall, the cookingfire at the one end of it, and shelves of bottles and the cellar-trap at the other.  Here Bazin, who was an ill-looking, big man,told us the Scottish gentleman was gone abroad he knew not where,but the young lady was above, and he would call her down to us.I took from my breast that kerchief wanting the corner, and knottedit about my throat.  I could hear my heart go; and Alan patting meon the shoulder with some of his laughable expressions, I couldscarce refrain from a sharp word.  But the time was not long towait.  I heard her step pass overhead, and saw her on the stair.This she descended very quietly, and greeted me with a pale faceand a certain seeming of earnestness, or uneasiness, in her mannerthat extremely dashed me."My father, James More, will be here soon.  He will be very pleasedto see you," she said.  And then of a sudden her face flamed, hereyes lightened, the speech stopped upon her lips; and I made sureshe had observed the kerchief.  It was only for a breath that shewas discomposed; but methought it was with a new animation that sheturned to welcome Alan.  "And you will be his friend, Alan Breck?"she cried.  "Many is the dozen times I will have heard him tell ofyou; and I love you already for all your bravery and goodness.""Well, well," says Alan, holding her hand in his and viewing her,"and so this is the young lady at the last of it!  David, ye're anawful poor hand of a description."I do not know that ever I heard him speak so straight to people'shearts; the sound of his voice was like song."What? will he have been describing me?" she cried."Little else of it since I ever came out of France!" says he,"forby a bit of a speciment one night in Scotland in a shaw of woodby Silvermills.  But cheer up, my dear! ye're bonnier than what hesaid.  And now there's one thing sure; you and me are to be a pairof friends.  I'm a kind of a henchman to Davie here; I'm like atyke at his heels; and whatever he cares for, I've got to care fortoo--and by the holy airn! they've got to care for me!  So now youcan see what way you stand with Alan Breck, and ye'll find ye'llhardly lose on the transaction.  He's no very bonnie, my dear, buthe's leal to them he loves.""I thank you from my heart for your good words," said she.  "I havethat honour for a brave, honest man that I cannot find any to beanswering with."Using travellers' freedom, we spared to wait for James More, andsat down to meat, we threesome.  Alan had Catriona sit by him andwait upon his wants:  he made her drink first out of his glass, hesurrounded her with continual kind gallantries, and yet never gaveme the most small occasion to be jealous; and he kept the talk somuch in his own hand, and that in so merry a note, that neither shenor I remembered to be embarrassed.  If any had seen us there, itmust have been supposed that Alan was the old friend and I thestranger.  Indeed, I had often cause to love and to admire the man,but I never loved or admired him better than that night; and Icould not help remarking to myself (what I was sometimes rather indanger of forgetting) that he had not only much experience of life,but in his own way a great deal of natural ability besides.  As forCatriona, she seemed quite carried away; her laugh was like a pealof bells, her face gay as a May morning; and I own, although I waswell pleased, yet I was a little sad also, and thought myself adull, stockish character in comparison of my friend, and very unfitto come into a young maid's life, and perhaps ding down her gaiety.But if that was like to be my part, I found that at least I was notalone in it; for, James More returning suddenly, the girl waschanged into a piece of stone.  Through the rest of that evening,until she made an excuse and slipped to bed, I kept an eye upon herwithout cease; and I can bear testimony that she never smiled,scarce spoke, and looked mostly on the board in front of her.  Sothat I really marvelled to see so much devotion (as it used to be)changed into the very sickness of hate.Of James More it is unnecessary to say much; you know the manalready, what there was to know of him; and I am weary of writingout his lies.  Enough that he drank a great deal, and told us verylittle that was to any possible purpose.  As for the business withAlan, that was to be reserved for the morrow and his privatehearing.It was the more easy to be put off, because Alan and I were prettyweary with four day's ride, and sat not very late after Catriona.We were soon alone in a chamber where we were to make-shift with asingle bed.  Alan looked on me with a queer smile."Ye muckle ass!" said he."What do ye mean by that?" I cried."Mean?  What do I mean!  It's extraordinar, David man," say he,"that you should be so mortal stupit."Again I begged him to speak out."Well, it's this of it," said he.  "I told ye there were the twokinds of women--them that would sell their shifts for ye, and theothers.  Just you try for yoursel, my bonny man!  But what's thatneepkin at your craig?"I told him."I thocht it was something thereabout" said he.Nor would he say another word though I besieged him long withimportunities.CHAPTER XXX--THE LETTER FROM THE SHIPDaylight showed us how solitary the inn stood.  It was plainly hardupon the sea, yet out of all view of it, and beset on every sidewith scabbit hills of sand.  There was, indeed, only one thing inthe nature of a prospect, where there stood out over a brae the twosails of a windmill, like an ass's ears, but with the ass quitehidden.  It was strange (after the wind rose, for at first it wasdead calm) to see the turning and following of each other of thesegreat sails behind the hillock.  Scarce any road came by there; buta number of footways travelled among the bents in all directions upto Mr. Bazin's door.  The truth is, he was a man of many trades,not any one of them honest, and the position of his inn was thebest of his livelihood.  Smugglers frequented it; political agentsand forfeited persons bound across the water came there to awaittheir passages; and I daresay there was worse behind, for a wholefamily might have been butchered in that house and nobody thewiser.I slept little and ill.  Long ere it was day, I had slipped frombeside my bedfellow, and was warming myself at the fire or walkingto and fro before the door.  Dawn broke mighty sullen; but a littleafter, sprang up a wind out of the west, which burst the clouds,let through the sun, and set the mill to the turning.  There wassomething of spring in the sunshine, or else it was in my heart;and the appearing of the great sails one after another from behindthe hill, diverted me extremely.  At times I could hear a creak ofthe machinery; and by half-past eight of the day, and I thoughtthis dreary, desert place was like a paradise.For all which, as the day drew on and nobody came near, I began tobe aware of an uneasiness that I could scarce explain.  It seemedthere was trouble afoot; the sails of the windmill, as they came upand went down over the hill, were like persons spying; and outsideof all fancy, it was surely a strange neighbourhood and house for ayoung lady to be brought to dwell in.At breakfast, which we took late, it was manifest that James Morewas in some danger or perplexity; manifest that Alan was alive tothe same, and watched him close; and this appearance of duplicityupon the one side, and vigilance upon the other, held me on livecoals.  The meal was no sooner over than James seemed to come beganto make apologies.  He had an appointment of a private nature inthe town (it was with the French nobleman, he told me), and wewould please excuse him till about noon.  Meanwhile he carried hisdaughter aside to the far end of the room, where he seemed to speakrather earnestly and she to listen with much inclination."I am caring less and less about this man James," said Alan."There's something no right with the man James, and I shouldnaewonder but what Alan Breck would give an eye to him this day.  Iwould like fine to see yon French nobleman, Davie; and I daresayyou could find an employ to yoursel, and that would be to speir atthe lassie for some news o' your affair.  Just tell it to herplainly--tell her ye're a muckle ass at the off-set; and then, if Iwere you, and ye could do it naitural, I would just mint to her Iwas in some kind of a danger; a' weemenfolk likes that.""I cannae lee, Alan, I cannae do it naitural," says I, mocking him."The more fool you!" says he.  "Then ye'll can tell her that Irecommended it; that'll set her to the laughing; and I wouldnaewonder but what that was the next best.  But see to the pair ofthem!  If I didnae feel just sure of the lassie, and that she wasawful pleased and chief with Alan, I would think there was somekind of hocus-pocus about you.""And is she so pleased with ye, then, Alan?" I asked."She thinks a heap of me," says he.  "And I'm no like you:  I'm onethat can tell.  That she does--she thinks a heap of Alan.  Andtroth! I'm thinking a good deal of him mysel; and with yourpermission, Shaws, I'll be getting a wee yont amang the bents, sothat I can see what way James goes."One after another went, till I was left alone beside the breakfasttable; James to Dunkirk, Alan dogging him, Catriona up the stairsto her own chamber.  I could very well understand how she shouldavoid to be alone with me; yet was none the better pleased with itfor that, and bent my mind to entrap her to an interview before themen returned.  Upon the whole, the best appeared to me to do likeAlan.  If I was out of view among the sandhills, the fine morningwould decoy her forth; and once I had her in the open, I couldplease myself.No sooner said than done; nor was I long under the bield of ahillock before she appeared at the inn door, looked here and there,and (seeing nobody) set out by a path that led directly seaward,and by which I followed her.  I was in no haste to make my presenceknown; the further she went I made sure of the longer hearing to mysuit; and the ground being all sandy it was easy to follow herunheard.  The path rose and came at last to the head of a knowe.Thence I had a picture for the first time of what a desolatewilderness that inn stood hidden in; where was no man to be seen,nor any house of man, except just Bazin's and the windmill.  Only alittle further on, the sea appeared and two or three ships upon it,pretty as a drawing.  One of these was extremely close in to be sogreat a vessel; and I was aware of a shock of new suspicion, when Irecognised the trim of the Seahorse.  What should an English shipbe doing so near in to France?  Why was Alan brought into herneighbourhood, and that in a place so far from any hope of rescue?and was it by accident, or by design, that the daughter of JamesMore should walk that day to the seaside?Presently I came forth behind her in the front of the sandhills andabove the beach.  It was here long and solitary; with a man-o'-war's boat drawn up about the middle of the prospect, and anofficer in charge and pacing the sands like one who waited.  I satdown where the rough grass a good deal covered me, and looked forwhat should follow.  Catriona went straight to the boat; theofficer met her with civilities; they had ten words together; I sawa letter changing hands; and there was Catriona returning.  At thesame time, as if this were all her business on the Continent, theboat shoved off and was headed for the Seahorse.  But I observedthe officer to remain behind and disappear among the bents.I liked the business little; and the more I considered of it, likedit less.  Was it Alan the officer was seeking? or Catriona?  Shedrew near with her head down, looking constantly on the sand, andmade so tender a picture that I could not bear to doubt herinnocence.  The next, she raised her face and recognised me; seemedto hesitate, and then came on again, but more slowly, and I thoughtwith a changed colour.  And at that thought, all else that was uponmy bosom--fears, suspicions, the care of my friend's life--wasclean swallowed up; and I rose to my feet and stood waiting her ina drunkenness of hope.I gave her "good morning" as she came up, which she returned with agood deal of composure."Will you forgive my having followed you?" said I."I know you are always meaning kindly," she replied; and then, witha little outburst, "but why will you be sending money to that man!It must not be.""I never sent it for him," said I, "but for you, as you know well.""And you have no right to be sending it to either one of us," shesaid.  "David, it is not right.""It is not, it is all wrong," said I, "and I pray God he will helpthis dull fellow (if it be at all possible) to make it better.Catriona, this is no kind of life for you to lead; and I ask yourpardon for the word, but yon man is no fit father to take care ofyou.""Do not be speaking of him, even!" was her cry."And I need speak of him no more; it is not of him that I amthinking, O, be sure of that!" says I.  "I think of the one thing.I have been alone now this long time in Leyden; and when I was byway of at my studies, still I was thinking of that.  Next Alancame, and I went among soldier-men to their big dinners; and stillI had the same thought.  And it was the same before, when I had herthere beside me.  Catriona, do you see this napkin at my throat!You cut a corner from it once and then cast it from you.  They'reYOUR colours now; I wear them in my heart.  My dear, I cannot bewanting you.  O, try to put up with me!"I stepped before her so as to intercept her walking on."Try to put up with me," I was saying, "try and bear me with alittle."Still she had never the word, and a fear began to rise in me like afear of death."Catriona," I cried, gazing on her hard, "is it a mistake again?Am I quite lost?"She raised her face to me, breathless."Do you want me, Davie, truly?" said she, and I scarce could hearher say it."I do that," said I.  "O, sure you know it--I do that.""I have nothing left to give or to keep back," said she.  "I wasall yours from the first day, if you would have had a gift of me!"she said,This was on the summit of a brae; the place was windy andconspicuous, we were to be seen there even from the English ship;but I kneeled down before her in the sand, and embraced her knees,and burst into that storm of weeping that I thought it must havebroken me.  All thought was wholly beaten from my mind by thevehemency of my discomposure.  I knew not where I was.  I hadforgot why I was happy; only I knew she stooped, and I felt hercherish me to her face and bosom, and heard her words out of awhirl."Davie," she was saying, "O, Davie, is this what you think of me!Is it so that you were caring for poor me!  O, Davie, Davie!"With that she wept also, and our tears were commingled in a perfectgladness.It might have been ten in the day before I came to a clear sense ofwhat a mercy had befallen me; and sitting over against her, withher hands in mine, gazed in her face, and laughed out loud forpleasure like a child, and called her foolish and kind names.  Ihave never seen the place that looked so pretty as those bents byDunkirk; and the windmill sails, as they bobbed over the knowe,were like a tune of music.I know not how much longer we might have continued to forget allelse besides ourselves, had I not chanced upon a reference to herfather, which brought us to reality."My little friend," I was calling her again and again, rejoicing tosummon up the past by the sound of it, and to gaze across on her,and to be a little distant--"My little friend, now you are minealtogether; mine for good, my little friend and that man's nolonger at all."There came a sudden whiteness in her face, she plucked her handsfrom mine."Davie, take me away from him!" she cried.  "There's somethingwrong; he's not true.  There will be something wrong; I have adreadful terror here at my heart.  What will he be wanting at allevents with that King's ship?  What will this word be saying?"  Andshe held the letter forth.  "My mind misgives me, it will be someill to Alan.  Open it, Davie--open it and see."I took it, and looked at it, and shook my head."No," said I, "it goes against me, I cannot open a man's letter.""Not to save your friend?" she cried."I cannae tell," said I.  "I think not.  If I was only sure!""And you have but to break the seal!" said she."I know it," said I, "but the thing goes against me.""Give it here," said she, "and I will open it myself.""Nor you neither," said I.  "You least of all.  It concerns yourfather, and his honour, dear, which we are both misdoubting.  Noquestion but the place is dangerous-like, and the English shipbeing here, and your father having word from it, and yon officerthat stayed ashore.  He would not be alone either; there must bemore along with him; I daresay we are spied upon this minute.  Ay,no doubt, the letter should be opened; but somehow, not by you norme."I was about thus far with it, and my spirit very much overcome witha sense of danger and hidden enemies, when I spied Alan, come backagain from following James and walking by himself among the sand-hills.  He was in his soldier's coat, of course, and mighty fine;but I could not avoid to shudder when I thought how little thatjacket would avail him, if he were once caught and flung in askiff, and carried on board of the Seahorse, a deserter, a rebel,and now a condemned murderer."There," said I, "there is the man that has the best right to openit:  or not, as he thinks fit."With which I called upon his name, and we both stood up to be amark for him."If it is so--if it be more disgrace--will you can bear it?" sheasked, looking upon me with a burning eye."I was asked something of the same question when I had seen you butthe once," said I.  "What do you think I answered?  That if I likedyou as I thought I did--and O, but I like you better!--I wouldmarry you at his gallows' foot."The blood rose in her face; she came close up and pressed upon me,holding my hand:  and it was so that we awaited Alan.He came with one of his queer smiles.  "What was I telling ye,David?" says he."There is a time for all things, Alan," said I, "and this time isserious.  How have you sped?  You can speak out plain before thisfriend of ours.""I have been upon a fool's errand," said he."I doubt we have done better than you, then," said I; "and, atleast, here is a great deal of matter that you must judge of.  Doyou see that?" I went on, pointing to the ship.  "That is theSeahorse, Captain Palliser.""I should ken her, too," says Alan.  "I had fyke enough with herwhen she was stationed in the Forth.  But what ails the man to comeso close?""I will tell you why he came there first," said I.  "It was tobring this letter to James More.  Why he stops here now that it'sdelivered, what it's likely to be about, why there's an officerhiding in the bents, and whether or not it's probable that he'salone--I would rather you considered for yourself.""A letter to James More?" said he."The same," said I."Well, and I can tell ye more than that," said Alan.  "For the lastnight, when you were fast asleep, I heard the man colloguing withsome one in the French, and then the door of that inn to be openedand shut.""Alan!" cried I, "you slept all night, and I am here to prove it.""Ay, but I would never trust Alan whether he was asleep or waking!"says he.  "But the business looks bad.  Let's see the letter."I gave it him."Catriona," said he, "you have to excuse me, my dear; but there'snothing less than my fine bones upon the cast of it, and I'll haveto break this seal.""It is my wish," said Catriona.He opened it, glanced it through, and flung his hand in the air."The stinking brock!" says he, and crammed the paper in his pocket."Here, let's get our things together.  This place is fair death tome."  And he began to walk towards the inn.It was Catriona that spoke the first.  "He has sold you?" sheasked."Sold me, my dear," said Alan.  "But thanks to you and Davie, I'llcan jink him yet.  Just let me win upon my horse," he added."Catriona must come with us," said I.  "She can have no moretraffic with that man.  She and I are to be married."  At which shepressed my hand to her side."Are ye there with it?" says Alan, looking back.  "The best day'swork that ever either of you did yet!  And I'm bound to say, mydawtie, ye make a real, bonny couple."The way that he was following brought us close in by the windmill,where I was aware of a man in seaman's trousers, who seemed to bespying from behind it.  Only, of course, we took him in the rear."See, Alan!""Wheesht!" said, he, "this is my affairs."The man was, no doubt, a little deafened by the clattering of themill, and we got up close before he noticed.  Then he turned, andwe saw he was a big fellow with a mahogany face."I think, sir," says Alan, "that you speak the English?""Non, monsieur," says he, with an incredible bad accent."Non, monsieur," cries Alan, mocking him.  "Is that how they learnyou French on the Seahorse?  Ye muckle, gutsey hash, here's a Scotsboot to your English hurdies!"And bounding on him before he could escape, he dealt the man a kickthat laid him on his nose.  Then he stood, with a savage smile, andwatched him scramble to his feet and scamper off into the sand-hills."But it's high time I was clear of these empty bents!" said Alan;and continued his way at top speed, and we still following, to thebackdoor of Bazin's inn.It chanced that as we entered by the one door we came face to facewith James More entering by the other."Here!" said I to Catriona, "quick! upstairs with you and make yourpackets; this is no fit scene for you."In the meanwhile James and Alan had met in the midst of the longroom.  She passed them close by to reach the stairs; and after shewas some way up I saw her turn and glance at them again, thoughwithout pausing.  Indeed, they were worth looking at.  Alan wore asthey met one of his best appearances of courtesy and friendliness,yet with something eminently warlike, so that James smelled dangeroff the man, as folk smell fire in a house, and stood prepared foraccidents.Time pressed.  Alan's situation in that solitary place, and hisenemies about him, might have daunted Caesar.  It made no change inhim; and it was in his old spirit of mockery and daffing that hebegan the interview."A braw good day to ye again, Mr. Drummond," said he.  "What'll yonbusiness of yours be just about?""Why, the thing being private, and rather of a long story," saysJames, "I think it will keep very well till we have eaten.""I'm none so sure of that," said Alan.  "It sticks in my mind it'seither now or never; for the fact is me and Mr. Balfour here havegotten a line, and we're thinking of the road."I saw a little surprise in James's eye; but he held himselfstoutly."I have but the one word to say to cure you of that," said he, "andthat is the name of my business.""Say it then," says Alan.  "Hout! wha minds for Davie?""It is a matter that would make us both rich men," said James."Do you tell me that?" cries Alan."I do, sir," said James.  "The plain fact is that it is Cluny'sTreasure.""No!" cried Alan.  "Have ye got word of it?""I ken the place, Mr. Stewart, and can take you there," said James."This crowns all!" says Alan.  "Well, and I'm glad I came toDunkirk.  And so this was your business, was it?  Halvers, I'mthinking?""That is the business, sir," said James."Well, well," said Alan; and then in the same tone of childlikeinterest, "it has naething to do with the Seahorse, then?" heasked,"With what?" says James."Or the lad that I have just kicked the bottom of behind yonwindmill?" pursued Alan.  "Hut, man! have done with your lees!  Ihave Palliser's letter here in my pouch.  You're by with it, JamesMore.  You can never show your face again with dacent folk."James was taken all aback with it.  He stood a second, motionlessand white, then swelled with the living anger."Do you talk to me, you bastard?" he roared out."Ye glee'd swine!" cried Alan, and hit him a sounding buffet on themouth, and the next wink of time their blades clashed together.At the first sound of the bare steel I instinctively leaped backfrom the collision.  The next I saw, James parried a thrust sonearly that I thought him killed; and it lowed up in my mind thatthis was the girl's father, and in a manner almost my own, and Idrew and ran in to sever them."Keep back, Davie!  Are ye daft!  Damn ye, keep back!" roared Alan."Your blood be on your ain heid then!"I beat their blades down twice.  I was knocked reeling against thewall; I was back again betwixt them.  They took no heed of me,thrusting at each other like two furies.  I can never think how Iavoided being stabbed myself or stabbing one of these twoRodomonts, and the whole business turned about me like a piece of adream; in the midst of which I heard a great cry from the stair,and Catriona sprang before her father.  In the same moment thepoint of my sword encountered some thing yielding.  It came back tome reddened.  I saw the blood flow on the girl's kerchief, andstood sick."Will you be killing him before my eyes, and me his daughter afterall!" she cried."My dear, I have done with him," said Alan, and went, and sat on atable, with his arms crossed and the sword naked in his hand.Awhile she stood before the man, panting, with big eyes, then swungsuddenly about and faced him."Begone!" was her word, "take your shame out of my sight; leave mewith clean folk.  I am a daughter of Alpin!  Shame of the sons ofAlpin, begone!"It was said with so much passion as awoke me from the horror of myown bloodied sword.  The two stood facing, she with the red stainon her kerchief, he white as a rag.  I knew him well enough--I knewit must have pierced him in the quick place of his soul; but hebetook himself to a bravado air."Why," says he, sheathing his sword, though still with a bright eyeon Alan, "if this brawl is over I will but get my portmanteau--""There goes no pockmantie out of this place except with me," saysAlan."Sir!" cries James."James More," says Alan, "this lady daughter of yours is to marrymy friend Davie, upon the which account I let you pack with a halecarcase.  But take you my advice of it and get that carcase out ofharm's way or ower late.  Little as you suppose it, there areleemits to my temper.""Be damned, sir, but my money's there!" said James."I'm vexed about that, too," says Alan, with his funny face, "butnow, ye see, it's mines."  And then with more gravity, "Be youadvised, James More, you leave this house."James seemed to cast about for a moment in his mind; but it's to bethought he had enough of Alan's swordsmanship, for he suddenly putoff his hat to us and (with a face like one of the damned) bade usfarewell in a series.  With which he was gone.At the same time a spell was lifted from me."Catriona," I cried, "it was me--it was my sword.  O, are you muchhurt?""I know it, Davie, I am loving you for the pain of it; it was donedefending that bad man, my father.  See!" she said, and showed me ableeding scratch, "see, you have made a man of me now.  I willcarry a wound like an old soldier."Joy that she should be so little hurt, and the love of her bravenature, supported me.  I embraced her, I kissed the wound."And am I to be out of the kissing, me that never lost a chance?"says Alan; and putting me aside and taking Catriona by eithershoulder, "My dear," he said, "you're a true daughter of Alpin.  Byall accounts, he was a very fine man, and he may weel be proud ofyou.  If ever I was to get married, it's the marrow of you I wouldbe seeking for a mother to my sons.  And I bear's a king's name andspeak the truth."He said it with a serious heat of admiration that was honey to thegirl, and through her, to me.  It seemed to wipe us clean of allJames More's disgraces.  And the next moment he was just himselfagain."And now by your leave, my dawties," said he, "this is a' verybonny; but Alan Breck'll be a wee thing nearer to the gallows thanhe's caring for; and Dod! I think this is a grand place to beleaving."The word recalled us to some wisdom.  Alan ran upstairs andreturned with our saddle-bags and James More's portmanteau; Ipicked up Catriona's bundle where she had dropped it on the stair;and we were setting forth out of that dangerous house, when Bazinstopped the way with cries and gesticulations.  He had whippedunder a table when the swords were drawn, but now he was as bold asa lion.  There was his bill to be settled, there was a chairbroken, Alan had sat among his dinner things, James More had fled."Here," I cried, "pay yourself," and flung him down some Lewied'ors; for I thought it was no time to be accounting.He sprang upon that money, and we passed him by, and ran forth intothe open.  Upon three sides of the house were seamen hasting andclosing in; a little nearer to us James More waved his hat as if tohurry them; and right behind him, like some foolish person holdingup his hands, were the sails of the windmill turning.Alan gave but one glance, and laid himself down to run.  He carrieda great weight in James More's portmanteau; but I think he would assoon have lost his life as cast away that booty which was hisrevenge; and he ran so that I was distressed to follow him, andmarvelled and exulted to see the girl bounding at my side.As soon as we appeared, they cast off all disguise upon the otherside; and the seamen pursued us with shouts and view-hullohs.  Wehad a start of some two hundred yards, and they were but bandy-legged tarpaulins after all, that could not hope to better us atsuch an exercise.  I suppose they were armed, but did not care touse their pistols on French ground.  And as soon as I perceivedthat we not only held our advantage but drew a little away, I beganto feel quite easy of the issue.  For all which, it was a hot,brisk bit of work, so long as it lasted; Dunkirk was still far off;and when we popped over a knowe, and found a company of thegarrison marching on the other side on some manoeuvre, I could verywell understand the word that Alan had.He stopped running at once; and mopping at his brow, "They're areal bonny folk, the French nation," says he.CONCLUSIONNo sooner were we safe within the walls of Dunkirk than we held avery necessary council-of-war on our position.  We had taken adaughter from her father at the sword's point; any judge would giveher back to him at once, and by all likelihood clap me and Alaninto jail; and though we had an argument upon our side in CaptainPalliser's letter, neither Catriona nor I were very keen to beusing it in public.  Upon all accounts it seemed the most prudentto carry the girl to Paris to the hands of her own chieftain,Macgregor of Bohaldie, who would be very willing to help hiskinswoman, on the one hand, and not at all anxious to dishonourJames upon other.We made but a slow journey of it up, for Catriona was not so goodat the riding as the running, and had scarce sat in the saddlesince the 'Forty-five.  But we made it out at last, reached Parisearly of a Sabbath morning, and made all speed, under Alan'sguidance, to find Bohaldie.  He was finely lodged, and lived in agood style, having a pension on the Scots Fund, as well as privatemeans; greeted Catriona like one of his own house, and seemedaltogether very civil and discreet, but not particularly open.  Weasked of the news of James More.  "Poor James!" said he, and shookhis head and smiled, so that I thought he knew further than hemeant to tell.  Then we showed him Palliser's letter, and he drew along face at that."Poor James!" said he again.  "Well, there are worse folk thanJames More, too.  But this is dreadful bad.  Tut, tut, he must haveforgot himself entirely!  This is a most undesirable letter.  But,for all that, gentlemen, I cannot see what we would want to make itpublic for.  It's an ill bird that fouls his own nest, and we areall Scots folk and all Hieland."Upon this we all agreed, save perhaps Alan; and still more upon thequestion of our marriage, which Bohaldie took in his own hands, asthough there had been no such person as James More, and gaveCatriona away with very pretty manners and agreeable compliments inFrench.  It was not till all was over, and our healths drunk, thathe told us James was in that city, whither he had preceded us somedays, and where he now lay sick, and like to die.  I thought I sawby my wife's face what way her inclination pointed."And let us go see him, then," said I."If it is your pleasure," said Catriona.  These were early days.He was lodged in the same quarter of the city with his chief, in agreat house upon a corner; and we were guided up to the garretwhere he lay by the sound of Highland piping.  It seemed he hadjust borrowed a set of them from Bohaldie to amuse his sickness;though he was no such hand as was his brother Rob, he made goodmusic of the kind; and it was strange to observe the French folkcrowding on the stairs, and some of them laughing.  He lay proppedin a pallet.  The first look of him I saw he was upon his lastbusiness; and, doubtless, this was a strange place for him to diein.  But even now I find I can scarce dwell upon his end withpatience.  Doubtless, Bohaldie had prepared him; he seemed to knowwe were married, complimented us on the event, and gave us abenediction like a patriarch."I have been never understood," said he.  "I forgive you bothwithout an afterthought;" after which he spoke for all the world inhis old manner, was so obliging as to play us a tune or two uponhis pipes, and borrowed a small sum before I left.I could not trace even a hint of shame in any part of hisbehaviour; but he was great upon forgiveness; it seemed alwaysfresh to him.  I think he forgave me every time we met; and whenafter some four days he passed away in a kind of odour ofaffectionate sanctity, I could have torn my hair out forexasperation.  I had him buried; but what to put upon his tomb wasquite beyond me, till at last I considered the date would look bestalone.I thought it wiser to resign all thoughts of Leyden, where we hadappeared once as brother and sister, and it would certainly lookstrange to return in a new character.  Scotland would be doing forus; and thither, after I had recovered that which I had leftbehind, we sailed in a Low Country ship.And now, Miss Barbara Balfour (to set the ladies first), and Mr.Alan Balfour younger of Shaws, here is the story brought fairly toan end.  A great many of the folk that took a part in it, you willfind (if you think well) that you have seen and spoken with.Alison Hastie in Limekilns was the lass that rocked your cradlewhen you were too small to know of it, and walked abroad with youin the policy when you were bigger.  That very fine great lady thatis Miss Barbara's name-mamma is no other than the same Miss Grantthat made so much a fool of David Balfour in the house of the LordAdvocate.  And I wonder whether you remember a little, lean, livelygentleman in a scratch-wig and a wraprascal, that came to Shawsvery late of a dark night, and whom you were awakened out of yourbeds and brought down to the dining-hall to be presented to, by thename of Mr. Jamieson?  Or has Alan forgotten what he did at Mr.Jamieson's request--a most disloyal act--for which, by the letterof the law, he might be hanged--no less than drinking the king'shealth ACROSS THE WATER?  These were strange doings in a good Whighouse!  But Mr. Jamieson is a man privileged, and might set fire tomy corn-barn; and the name they know him by now in France is theChevalier Stewart.As for Davie and Catriona, I shall watch you pretty close in thenext days, and see if you are so bold as to be laughing at papa andmamma.  It is true we were not so wise as we might have been, andmade a great deal of sorrow out of nothing; but you will find asyou grow up that even the artful Miss Barbara, and even the valiantMr. Alan, will be not so very much wiser than their parents.  Forthe life of man upon this world of ours is a funny business.  Theytalk of the angels weeping; but I think they must more often beholding their sides as they look on; and there was one thing Idetermined to do when I began this long story, and that was to tellout everything as it befell.
CHAPTER I

A BEGGAR ON HORSEBACK


The 25th day of August, 1751, about two in the afternoon, I, David
Balfour, came forth of the British Linen Company, a porter attending me
with a bag of money, and some of the chief of these merchants bowing me
from their doors. Two days before, and even so late as yestermorning, I
was like a beggarman by the wayside, clad in rags, brought down to my
last shillings, my companion a condemned traitor, a price set on my own
head for a crime with the news of which the country rang. To-day I was
served heir to my position in life, a landed laird, a bank porter by me
carrying my gold, recommendations in my pocket, and (in the words of the
saying) the ball directly at my foot.

There were two circumstances that served me as ballast to so much sail.
The first was the very difficult and deadly business I had still to
handle; the second, the place that I was in. The tall, black city, and
the numbers and movement and noise of so many folk, made a new world for
me, after the moorland braes, the sea-sands, and the still country-sides
that I had frequented up to then. The throng of the citizens in
particular abashed me. Rankeillor's son was short and small in the
girth; his clothes scarce held on me; and it was plain I was ill
qualified to strut in the front of a bank-porter. It was plain, if I did
so, I should but set folk laughing, and (what was worse in my case) set
them asking questions. So that I behooved to come by some clothes of my
own, and in the meanwhile to walk by the porter's side, and put my hand
on his arm as though we were a pair of friends.

At a merchant's in the Luckenbooths, I had myself fitted out: none too
fine, for I had no idea to appear like a beggar on horseback; but comely
and responsible, so that servants should respect me. Thence to an
armourer's, where I got a plain sword, to suit with my degree in life. I
felt safer with the weapon, though (for one so ignorant of defence) it
might be called an added danger. The porter, who was naturally a man of
some experience, judged my accoutrement to be well chosen.

"Naething kenspeckle,"[1] said he, "plain, dacent claes. As for the
rapier, nae doubt it sits wi' your degree; but an I had been you, I
would hae waired my siller better-gates than that." And proposed I
should buy winter-hosen from a wife in the Cowgate-back, that was a
cousin of his own, and made them "extraordinar endurable."

But I had other matters on my hand more pressing. Here I was in this
old, black city, which was for all the world like a rabbit-warren, not
only by the number of its indwellers, but the complication of its
passages and holes. It was indeed a place where no stranger had a chance
to find a friend, let be another stranger. Suppose him even to hit on
the right close, people dwelt so thronged in these tall houses, he might
very well seek a day before he chanced on the right door. The ordinary
course was to hire a lad they called a _caddie_, who was like a guide or
pilot, led you where you had occasion, and (your errands being done)
brought you again where you were lodging. But these caddies, being
always employed in the same sort of services, and having it for
obligation to be well informed of every house and person in the city,
had grown to form a brotherhood of spies; and I knew from tales of Mr.
Campbell's how they communicated one with another, what a rage of
curiosity they conceived as to their employer's business, and how they
were like eyes and fingers to the police. It would be a piece of little
wisdom, the way I was now placed, to tack such a ferret to my tails. I
had three visits to make, all immediately needful: to my kinsman Mr.
Balfour of Pilrig, to Stewart the Writer that was Appin's agent, and to
William Grant Esquire of Prestongrange, Lord Advocate of Scotland. Mr.
Balfour's was a non-committal visit; and besides (Pilrig being in the
country) I made bold to find way to it myself, with the help of my two
legs and a Scots tongue. But the rest were in a different case. Not only
was the visit to Appin's agent, in the midst of the cry about the Appin
murder, dangerous in itself, but it was highly inconsistent with the
other. I was like to have a bad enough time of it with my Lord Advocate
Grant, the best of ways; but to go to him hot-foot from Appin's agent,
was little likely to mend my own affairs, and might prove the mere ruin
of friend Alan's. The whole thing, besides, gave me a look of running
with the hare and hunting with the hounds that was little to my fancy. I
determined, therefore, to be done at once with Mr. Stewart and the whole
Jacobitical side of my business, and to profit for that purpose by the
guidance of the porter at my side. But it chanced I had scarce given him
the address, when there came a sprinkle of rain--nothing to hurt, only
for my new clothes--and we took shelter under a pend at the head of a
close or alley.

Being strange to what I saw, I stepped a little farther in. The narrow
paved way descended swiftly. Prodigious tall houses sprang upon each
side and bulged out, one story beyond another, as they rose. At the top
only a ribbon of sky showed in. By what I could spy in the windows, and
by the respectable persons that passed out and in, I saw the houses to
be very well occupied; and the whole appearance of the place interested
me like a tale.

I was still gazing, when there came a sudden brisk tramp of feet in time
and clash of steel behind me. Turning quickly, I was aware of a party of
armed soldiers, and, in their midst, a tall man in a great-coat. He
walked with a stoop that was like a piece of courtesy, genteel and
insinuating: he waved his hands plausibly as he went, and his face was
sly and handsome. I thought his eye took me in, but could not meet it.
This procession went by to a door in the close, which a serving-man in a
fine livery set open; and two of the soldier-lads carried the prisoner
within, the rest lingering with their firelocks by the door.

There can nothing pass in the streets of a city without some following
of idle folk and children. It was so now; but the more part melted away
incontinent until but three were left. One was a girl; she was dressed
like a lady, and had a screen of the Drummond colours on her head; but
her comrades or (I should say) followers were ragged gillies, such as I
had seen the matches of by the dozen in my Highland journey. They all
spoke together earnestly in Gaelic, the sound of which was pleasant in
my ears for the sake of Alan; and though the rain was by again, and my
porter plucked at me to be going, I even drew nearer where they were, to
listen. The lady scolded sharply, the others making apologies and
cringeing before her, so that I made sure she was come of a chief's
house. All the while the three of them sought in their pockets, and by
what I could make out, they had the matter of half a farthing among the
party; which made me smile a little to see all Highland folk alike for
fine obeisances and empty sporrans.

It chanced the girl turned suddenly about, so that I saw her face for
the first time. There is no greater wonder than the way the face of a
young woman fits in a man's mind, and stays there, and he could never
tell you why; it just seems it was the thing he wanted. She had
wonderful bright eyes like stars, and I daresay the eyes had a part in
it; but what I remember the most clearly was the way her lips were a
trifle open as she turned. And whatever was the cause, I stood there
staring like a fool. On her side, as she had not known there was anyone
so near, she looked at me a little longer, and perhaps with more
surprise, than was entirely civil.

It went through my country head she might be wondering at my new
clothes; with that, I blushed to my hair, and at the sight of my
colouring it's to be supposed she drew her own conclusions, for she
moved her gillies farther down the close, and they fell again to this
dispute where I could hear no more of it.

I had often admired a lassie before then, if scarce so sudden and
strong; and it was rather my disposition to withdraw than to come
forward, for I was much in fear of mockery from the womenkind. You would
have thought I had now all the more reason to pursue my common practice,
since I had met this young lady in the city street, seemingly following
a prisoner, and accompanied with two very ragged, indecent-like
Highlandmen. But there was here a different ingredient; it was plain the
girl thought I had been prying in her secrets; and with my new clothes
and sword, and at the top of my new fortunes, this was more than I could
swallow. The beggar on horseback could not bear to be thrust down so
low, or at the least of it, not by this young lady.

I followed, accordingly, and took off my new hat to her, the best that I
was able.

"Madam," said I, "I think it only fair to myself to let you understand I
have no Gaelic. It is true I was listening, for I have friends of my own
across the Highland line, and the sound of that tongue comes friendly;
but for your private affairs, if you had spoken Greek, I might have had
more guess at them."

She made me a little, distant curtsey. "There is no harm done," said
she, with a pretty accent, most like the English (but more agreeable).
"A cat may look at a king."

"I do not mean to offend," said I. "I have no skill of city manners; I
never before this day set foot inside the doors of Edinburgh. Take me
for a country lad--it's what I am; and I would rather I told you than
you found it out."

"Indeed, it will be a very unusual thing for strangers to be speaking to
each other on the causeway," she replied. "But if you are landward[2]
bred it will be different. I am as landward as yourself; I am Highland
as you see, and think myself the farther from my home."

"It is not yet a week since I passed the line," said I. "Less than a
week ago I was on the Braes of Balwhidder."

"Balwhither?" she cries; "come ye from Balwhither? The name of it makes
all there is of me rejoice. You will not have been long there, and not
known some of our friends or family?"

"I lived with a very honest, kind man called Duncan Dhu Maclaren," I
replied.

"Well I know Duncan, and you give him the true name!" she said; "and if
he is an honest man, his wife is honest indeed."

"Ay," said I, "they are fine people, and the place is a bonny place."

"Where in the great world is such another?" she cries; "I am loving the
smell of that place and the roots that grew there."

I was infinitely taken with the spirit of the maid. "I could be wishing
I had brought you a spray of that heather," says I. "And though I did
ill to speak with you at the first, now it seems we have common
acquaintance, I make it my petition you will not forget me. David
Balfour is the name I am known by. This is my lucky day when I have just
come into a landed estate and am not very long out of a deadly peril. I
wish you would keep my name in mind for the sake of Balquidder," said I,
"and I will yours for the sake of my lucky day."

"My name is not spoken," she replied, with a great deal of haughtiness.
"More than a hundred years it has not gone upon men's tongues, save for
a blink. I am nameless like the Folk of Peace.[3] Catriona Drummond is
the one I use."

Now indeed I knew where I was standing. In all broad Scotland there was
but the one name proscribed, and that was the name of the Macgregors.
Yet so far from fleeing this undesirable acquaintancy, I plunged the
deeper in.

"I have been sitting with one who was in the same case with yourself,"
said I, "and I think he will be one of your friends. They called him
Robin Oig."

"Did ye so?" cries she. "Ye met Rob?"

"I passed the night with him," said I.

"He is a fowl of the night," said she.

"There was a set of pipes there," I went on, "so you may judge if the
time passed."

"You should be no enemy, at all events," said she. "That was his brother
there a moment since, with the red soldiers round him. It is him that I
call father."

"Is it so?" cried I. "Are you a daughter of James More's?"

"All the daughter that he has," says she: "the daughter of a prisoner;
that I should forget it so, even for one hour, to talk with strangers!"

Here one of the gillies addressed her in what he had of English, to know
what "she" (meaning by that himself) was to do about "ta sneeshin." I
took some note of him for a short, bandy-legged, red-haired, big-headed
man, that I was to know more of to my cost.

"There can be none the day, Neil," she replied. "How will you get
'sneeshin,' wanting siller? It will teach you another time to be more
careful; and I think James More will not be very well pleased with Neil
of the Tom."

"Miss Drummond," I said, "I told you I was in my lucky day. Here I am,
and a bank-porter at my tail. And remember I have had the hospitality of
your own country of Balwhidder."

"It was not one of my people gave it," said she.

"Ah, well," said I, "but I am owing your uncle at least for some springs
upon the pipes. Besides which, I have offered myself to be your friend,
and you have been so forgetful that you did not refuse me in the proper
time."

"If it had been a great sum, it might have done you honour," said she.
"But I will tell you what this is. James More lies shackled in prison;
but this time past, they will be bringing him down here daily to the
Advocate's..."

"The Advocate's?" I cried. "Is that...?"

"It is the house of the Lord Advocate, Grant of Prestongrange," said
she. "There they bring my father one time and another, for what purpose
I have no thought in my mind; but it seems there is some hope dawned for
him. All this same time they will not let me be seeing him, nor yet him
write; and we wait upon the King's street to catch him; and now we give
him his snuff as he goes by, and now something else. And here is this
son of trouble, Neil, son of Duncan, has lost my fourpenny-piece that
was to buy that snuff, and James More must go wanting, and will think
his daughter has forgotten him."

I took sixpence from my pocket, gave it to Neil, and bade him go about
his errand. Then to her, "That sixpence came with me by Balwhidder,"
said I.

"Ah!" she said, "you are a friend to the Gregara!"

"I would not like to deceive you either," said I. "I know very little of
the Gregara and less of James More and his doings; but since the while I
have been standing in this close, I seem to know something of yourself;
and if you will just say 'a friend to Miss Catriona' I will see you are
the less cheated."

"The one cannot be without the other," said she.

"I will even try," said I.

"And what will you be thinking of myself?" she cried, "to be holding my
hand to the first stranger!"

"I am thinking nothing but that you are a good daughter," said I.

"I must not be without repaying it," she said; "where is it you stop?"

"To tell the truth, I am stopping nowhere yet," said I, "being not full
three hours in the city; but if you will give me your direction, I will
be so bold as come seeking my sixpence for myself."

"Will I can trust you for that?" she asked.

"You have little fear," said I.

"James More could not bear it else," said she. "I stop beyond the
village of Dean, on the north side of the water, with Mrs.
Drummond-Ogilvy of Allardyce, who is my near friend and will be glad to
thank you."

"You are to see me then, so soon as what I have to do permits," said I;
and the remembrance of Alan rolling in again upon my mind, I made haste
to say farewell.

I could not but think, even as I did so, that we had made extraordinary
free upon short acquaintance, and that a really wise young lady would
have shown herself more backward. I think it was the bank-porter that
put me from this ungallant train of thought.

"I thoucht ye had been a lad of some kind o' sense," he began, shooting
out his lips. "Ye're no likely to gang far this gate. A fule and his
siller's shune parted. Eh, but ye're a green callant!" he cried, "an' a
veecious, tae! Cleikin' up wi' baubee-joes!"

"If you dare to speak of the young lady ..." I began.

"Leddy!" he cried. "Haud us and safe us, whatten leddy? Ca' _thon_ a
leddy? The toun's fu' o' them. Leddies! Man, it's weel seen ye're no
very acquant in Embro'!"

A clap of anger took me.

"Here," said I, "lead me where I told you, and keep your foul mouth
shut!"

He did not wholly obey me, for though he no more addressed me directly,
he sang at me as he went in a very impudent manner of innuendo, and with
an exceedingly ill voice and ear--

    "As Mally Lee cam doun the street, her capuchin did flee.
    She cuist a look ahint her to see her negligee,
    And we're a' gaun east and wast, we're a' gaun ajee,
    We're a' gaun east and wast courtin' Mally Lee."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II

THE HIGHLAND WRITER


Mr. Charles Stewart the Writer dwelt at the top of the longest stair
that ever mason set a hand to; fifteen flights of it, no less; and when
I had come to his door, and a clerk had opened it, and told me his
master was within, I had scarce breath enough to send my porter packing.

"Awa' east and wast wi' ye!" said I, took the money bag out of his
hands, and followed the clerk in.

The outer room was an office with the clerk's chair at a table spread
with law papers. In the inner chamber, which opened from it, a little
brisk man sat poring on a deed, from which he scarce raised his eyes
upon my entrance; indeed, he still kept his finger in the place, as
though prepared to show me out and fall again to his studies. This
pleased me little enough; and what pleased me less, I thought the clerk
was in a good posture to overhear what should pass between us.

I asked if he was Mr. Charles Stewart the Writer.

"The same," says he; "and if the question is equally fair, who may you
be yourself?"

"You never heard tell of my name nor of me either," said I, "but I bring
you a token from a friend that you know well. That you know well," I
repeated, lowering my voice, "but maybe are not just so keen to hear
from at this present being. And the bits of business that I have to
propone to you are rather in the nature of being confidential. In short,
I would like to think we were quite private."

He rose without more words, casting down his paper like a man
ill-pleased, sent forth his clerk of an errand, and shut to the
house-door behind him.

"Now, sir," said he, returning, "speak out your mind and fear nothing;
though before you begin," he cries out, "I tell you mine misgives me! I
tell you beforehand, ye're either a Stewart or a Stewart sent ye. A good
name it is, and one it would ill-become my father's son to lightly. But
I begin to grue at the sound of it."

"My name is called Balfour," said I, "David Balfour of Shaws. As for him
that sent me, I will let his token speak." And I showed the silver
button.

"Put it in your pocket, sir!" cries he, "Ye need name no names. The
deevil's buckie, I ken the button of him! And de'il hae't! Where is he
now?"

I told him I knew not where Alan was, but he had some sure place (or
thought he had) about the north side, where he was to lie until a ship
was found for him; and how and where he had appointed to be spoken with.

"It's been always my opinion that I would hang in a tow for this family
of mine," he cried, "and, dod! I believe the day's come now! Get a ship
for him, quot' he! And who's to pay for it? The man's daft!"

"That is my part of the affair, Mr. Stewart," said I. "Here is a bag of
good money, and if more be wanted, more is to be had where it came
from."

"I needn't ask your politics," said he.

"Ye need not," said I, smiling, "for I'm as big a Whig as grows."

"Stop a bit, stop a bit," says Mr. Stewart. "What's all this? A Whig?
Then why are you here with Alan's button? and what kind of a black-foot
traffic is this that I find ye out in, Mr. Whig? Here is a forfeited
rebel and an accused murderer, with two hundred pounds on his life, and
ye ask me to meddle in his business, and then tell me ye're a Whig! I
have no mind of any such Whigs before, though I've kent plenty of them."

"He's a forfeited rebel, the more's the pity," said I, "for the man's my
friend." I can only wish he had been better guided. And an accused
murderer, that he is too, for his misfortune; but wrongfully accused."

"I hear you say so," said Stewart.

"More than you are to hear me say so, before long," said I. "Alan Breck
is innocent, and so is James."

"Oh!" says he, "the two cases hang together. If Alan is out, James can
never be in."

Hereupon I told him briefly of my acquaintance with Alan, of the
accident that brought me present at the Appin murder, and the various
passages of our escape among the heather, and my recovery of my estate.
"So, sir, you have now the whole train of these events," I went on, "and
can see for yourself how I come to be so much mingled up with the
affairs of your family and friends, which (for all of our sakes) I wish
had been plainer and less bloody. You can see for yourself, too, that I
have certain pieces of business depending, which were scarcely fit to
lay before a lawyer chosen at random. No more remains, but to ask if you
will undertake my service?"

"I have no great mind to it; but coming as you do with Alan's button,
the choice is scarcely left me," said he. "What are your instructions?"
he added, and took up his pen.

"The first point is to smuggle Alan forth of this country," said I, "but
I need not be repeating that."

"I am little likely to forget it," said Stewart.

"The next thing is the bit money I am owing to Cluny," I went on. "It
would be ill for me to find a conveyance, but that should be no stick to
you. It was two pounds five shillings and three-halfpence farthing
sterling."

He noted it.

"Then," said I, "there's a Mr. Henderland, a licensed preacher and
missionary in Ardgour, that I would like well to get some snuff into the
hands of; and as I daresay you keep touch with your friends in Appin (so
near by), it's a job you could doubtless overtake with the other."

"How much snuff are we to say?" he asked.

"I was thinking of two pounds," said I.

"Two," said he.

"Then there's the lass Alison Hastie, in Limekilns," said I. "Her that
helped Alan and me across the Forth. I was thinking if I could get her a
good Sunday gown, such as she could wear with decency in her degree, it
would be an ease to my conscience: for the mere truth is, we owe her our
two lives."

"I am glad to see you are thrifty, Mr. Balfour," says he, making his
notes.

"I would think shame to be otherwise the first day of my fortune," said
I. "And now, if you will compute the outlay and your own proper charges,
I would be glad to know if I could get some spending-money back. It's
not that I grudge the whole of it to get Alan safe; it's not that I lack
more; but having drawn so much the one day, I think it would have a very
ill appearance if I was back again seeking, the next. Only be sure you
have enough," I added, "for I am very undesirous to meet with you
again."

"Well, and I'm pleased to see you're cautious too," said the Writer.
"But I think ye take a risk to lay so considerable a sum at my
discretion."

He said this with a plain sneer.

"I'll have to run the hazard," I replied. "O, and there's another
service I would ask, and that's to direct me to a lodging, for I have no
roof to my head. But it must be a lodging I may seem to have hit upon by
accident, for it would never do if the Lord Advocate were to get any
jealousy of our acquaintance."

"Ye may set your weary spirit at rest," said he. "I will never name your
name, sir; and it's my belief the Advocate is still so much to be
sympathised with that he doesnae ken of your existence."

I saw I had got to the wrong side of the man.

"There's a braw day coming for him, then," said I, "for he'll have to
learn of it on the deaf side of his head no later than to-morrow, when I
call on him."

"When ye _call_ on him!" repeated Mr. Stewart. "Am I daft, or are you?
What takes ye near the Advocate?"

"O, just to give myself up," said I.

"Mr. Balfour," he cried, "are ye making a mock of me?"

"No, sir," said I, "though I think you have allowed yourself some such
freedom with myself. But I give you to understand once and for all that
I am in no jesting spirit."

"Nor yet me," says Stewart. "And I give you to understand (if that's to
be the word) that I like the looks of your behaviour less and less. You
come here to me with all sorts of propositions, which will put me in a
train of very doubtful acts and bring me among very undesirable persons
this many a day to come. And then you tell me you're going straight out
of my office to make your peace with the Advocate! Alan's button here or
Alan's button there, the four quarters of Alan wouldnae bribe me further
in."

"I would take it with a little more temper," said I, "and perhaps we can
avoid what you object to. I can see no way for it but to give myself up,
but perhaps you can see another; and if you could, I could never deny
but what I would be rather relieved. For I think my traffic with his
lordship is little likely to agree with my health. There's just the one
thing clear, that I have to give my evidence; for I hope it'll save
Alan's character (what's left of it), and James's neck, which is the
more immediate."

He was silent for a breathing-space, and then, "My man," said he,
"you'll never be allowed to give such evidence."

"We'll have to see about that," said I; "I'm stiff-necked when I like."

"Ye muckle ass!" cried Stewart, "it's James they want; James has got to
hang--Alan too, if they could catch him--but James whatever! Go near the
Advocate with any such business, and you'll see! he'll find a way to
muzzle ye."

"I think better of the Advocate than that," said I.

"The Advocate be damned!" cries he. "It's the Campbells, man! You'll
have the whole clanjamfry of them on your back; and so will the Advocate
too, poor body! It's extraordinar ye cannot see where ye stand! If
there's no fair way to stop your gab, there's a foul one gaping. They
can put ye in the dock, do ye no see that?" he cried, and stabbed me
with one finger in the leg.

"Ay," said I, "I was told that same no further back than this morning by
another lawyer."

"And who was he?" asked Stewart. "He spoke sense at least."

I told I must be excused from naming him, for he was a decent stout old
Whig, and had little mind to be mixed up in such affairs.

"I think all the world seems to be mixed up in it!" cries Stewart. "But
what said you?"

I told him what had passed between Rankeillor and myself before the
house of Shaws.

"Well, and so ye will hang!" said he. "Ye'll hang beside James Stewart.
There's your fortune told."

"I hope better of it yet than that," said I; "but I could never deny
there was a risk."

"Risk!" says he, and then sat silent again. "I ought to thank you for
your staunchness to my friends, to whom you show a very good spirit," he
says, "if you have the strength to stand by it. But I warn you that
you're wading deep. I wouldn't put myself in your place (me that's a
Stewart born!) for all the Stewarts that ever there were since Noah.
Risk? ay, I take over-many, but to be tried in court before a Campbell
jury and a Campbell judge, and that in a Campbell country and upon a
Campbell quarrel--think what you like of me, Balfour, it's beyond me."

"It's a different way of thinking, I suppose," said I; "I was brought up
to this one by my father before me."

"Glory to his bones! he has left a decent son to his name," says he.
"Yet I would not have you judge me over-sorely. My case is dooms hard.
See, sir! ye tell me ye're a Whig: I wonder what I am. No Whig to be
sure; I couldnae be just that. But--laigh in your ear, man--I'm maybe no
very keen on the other side."

"Is that a fact?" cried I. "It's what I would think of a man of your
intelligence."

"Hut! none of your whillywhas!"[4] cries he. "There's intelligence upon
both sides. But for my private part I have no particular desire to harm
King George; and as for King James, God bless him! he does very well for
me across the water. I'm a lawyer, ye see: fond of my books and my
bottle, a good plea, a well-drawn deed, a crack in the Parliament House
with other lawyer bodies, and perhaps a turn at the golf on a Saturday
at e'en. Where do ye come in with your Hieland plaids and claymores?"

"Well," said I, "it's a fact ye have little of the wild Highlandman."

"Little?" quoth he. "Nothing, man! And yet I'm Hieland born, and when
the clan pipes, who but me has to dance? The clan and the name, that
goes by all. It's just what you said yourself; my father learned it to
me, and a bonny trade I have of it. Treason and traitors, and the
smuggling of them out and in; and the French recruiting, weary fall it!
and the smuggling through of the recruits; and their pleas--a sorrow of
their pleas! Here haye I been moving one for young Ardshiel, my cousin;
claimed the estate under the marriage contract--a forfeited estate! I
told them it was nonsense: muckle they cared! And there was I cocking
behind a yadvocate that liked the business as little as myself, for it
was fair ruin to the pair of us--a black mark, _disaffected_, branded on
our hurdies, like folk's names upon their kye! And what can I do? I'm a
Stewart, ye see, and must fend for my clan and family. Then no later by
than yesterday there was one of our Stewart lads carried to the Castle.
What for? I ken fine: Act of 1736: recruiting for King Lewie. And you'll
see, he'll whistle me in to be his lawyer, and there'll be another black
mark on my chara'ter! I tell you fair: if I but kent the heid of a
Hebrew word from the hurdies of it be dammed but I would fling the whole
thing up and turn minister!"

"It's rather a hard position," said I.

"Dooms hard!" cries he. "And that's what makes me think so much of
ye--you that's no Stewart--to stick your head so deep in Stewart
business. And for what, I do not know; unless it was the sense of duty."

"I hope it will be that," said I.

"Well," says he, "it's a grand quality. But here is my clerk back; and,
by your leave, we'll pick a bit of dinner, all the three of us. When
that's done, I'll give you the direction of a very decent man, that'll
be very fain to have you for a lodger. And I'll fill your pockets to ye,
forbye, out of your ain bag. For this business'll not be near as dear as
ye suppose--not even the ship part of it."

I made him a sign that his clerk was within hearing.

"Hoot, ye neednae mind for Robbie," cries he. "A Stewart too, puir
deevil! and has smuggled out more French recruits and trafficking
Papists than what he has hairs upon his face. Why, it's Robin that
manages that branch of my affairs. Who will we have now, Rob, for across
the water?"

"There'll be Andie Scougal, in the _Thristle_," replied Rob. "I saw
Hoseason the other day, but it seems he's wanting the ship. Then
there'll be Tarn Stobo; but I'm none so sure of Tam. I've seen him
colloguing with some gey queer acquaintances; and if it was anybody
important, I would give Tam the go-by."

"The head's worth two hundred pounds, Robin," said Stewart.

"Gosh, that'll no be Alan Breck?" cried the clerk.

"Just Alan," said his master.

"Weary winds! that's sayrious," cried Robin. "I'll try Andie then;
Andie'll be the best."

"It seems it's quite a big business," I observed.

"Mr. Balfour, there's no end to it," said Stewart.

"There was a name your clerk mentioned," I went on: "Hoseason. That must
be my man, I think: Hoseason, of the brig _Covenant_. Would you set your
trust on him?"

"He didnae behave very well to you and Alan," said Mr. Stewart; "but my
mind of the man in general is rather otherwise. If he had taken Alan on
board his ship on an agreement, it's my notion he would have proved a
just dealer. How say ye, Rob?"

"No more honest skipper in the trade than Eli," said the clerk. "I would
lippen to[5] Eli's word--ay, if it was the Chevalier, or Appin himsel',"
he added.

"And it was him that brought the doctor, wasnae't?" asked the master.

"He was the very man," said the clerk.

"And I think he took the doctor back?" says Stewart.

"Ay, with his sporran full!" cried Robin. "And Eli kent of that!"[6]

"Well, it seems it's hard to ken folk rightly," said I.

"That was just what I forgot when ye came in, Mr. Balfour!" says the
Writer.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER III

I GO TO PILRIG


The next morning, I was no sooner awake in my new lodging than I was up
and into my new clothes; and no sooner the breakfast swallowed, than I
was forth on my adventures. Alan, I could hope, was fended for; James
was like to be a more difficult affair, and I could not but think that
enterprise might cost me dear, even as everybody said to whom I had
opened my opinion. It seemed I was come to the top of the mountain only
to cast myself down; that I had clambered up, through so many and hard
trials, to be rich, to be recognised, to wear city clothes and a sword
to my side, all to commit mere suicide at the last end of it, and the
worst kind of suicide besides, which is to get hanged at the King's
charges.

What was I doing it for? I asked, as I went down the High Street and out
north by Leith Wynd. First I said it was to save James Stewart, and no
doubt the memory of his distress, and his wife's cries, and a word or so
I had let drop on that occasion worked upon me strongly. At the same
time I reflected that it was (or ought to be) the most indifferent
matter to my father's son, whether James died in his bed or from a
scaffold. He was Alan's cousin, to be sure; but so far as regarded Alan,
the best thing would be to lie low, and let the King, and his Grace of
Argyll, and the corbie crows, pick the bones of his kinsman their own
way. Nor could I forget that, while we were all in the pot together,
James had shown no such particular anxiety whether for Alan or me.

Next it came upon me I was acting for the sake of justice: and I thought
that a fine word, and reasoned it out that (since we dwelt in polities,
at some discomfort to each one of us) the main thing of all must still
be justice, and the death of any innocent man a wound upon the whole
community. Next, again, it was the Accuser of the Brethren that gave me
a turn of his argument; bid me think shame for pretending myself
concerned in these high matters, and told me I was but a prating vain
child, who had spoken big words to Rankeillor and to Stewart, and held
myself bound upon my vanity to make good that boastfulness. Nay, and he
hit me with the other end of the stick; for he accused me of a kind of
artful cowardice, going about at the expense of a little risk to
purchase greater safety. No doubt, until I had declared and cleared
myself, I might any day encounter Mungo Campbell or the sheriff's
officer, and be recognised, and dragged into the Appin murder by the
heels; and, no doubt, in case I could manage my declaration with
success, I should breathe more free for ever after. But when I looked
this argument full in the face I could see nothing to be ashamed of. As
for the rest, "Here are the two roads," I thought, "and both go to the
same place. It's unjust that James should hang if I can save him; and it
would be ridiculous in me to have talked so much and then do nothing.
It's lucky for James of the Glens that I have boasted beforehand; and
none so unlucky for myself, because now I'm committed to do right. I
have the name of a gentleman and the means of one; it would be a poor
discovery that I was wanting in the essence." And then I thought this
was a Pagan spirit, and said a prayer in to myself, asking for what
courage I might lack, and that I might go straight to my duty like a
soldier to battle, and come off again scatheless as so many do.

This train of reasoning brought me to a more resolved complexion; though
it was far from closing up my sense of the dangers that surrounded me,
nor of how very apt I was (if I went on) to stumble on the ladder of the
gallows. It was a plain, fair morning, but the wind in the east. The
little chill of it sang in my blood, and gave me a feeling of the
autumn, and the dead leaves, and dead folks' bodies in their graves. It
seemed the devil was in it, if I was to die in that tide of my fortunes
and for other folks' affairs. On the top of the Calton Hill, though it
was not the customary time of year for that diversion, some children
were crying and running with their kites. These toys appeared very plain
against the sky; I remarked a great one soar on the wind to a high
altitude and then plump among the whins; and I thought to myself at
sight of it, "There goes Davie."

My way lay over Mouter's Hill, and through an end of a clachan on the
braeside among fields. There was a whirr of looms in it went from house
to house; bees bummed in the gardens; the neighbours that I saw at the
doorsteps talked in a strange tongue; and I found out later that this
was Picardy, a village where the French weavers wrought for the Linen
Company. Here I got a fresh direction for Pilrig, my destination; and a
little beyond, on the wayside, came by a gibbet and two men hanged in
chains. They were dipped in tar, as the manner is; the wind span them,
the chains clattered, and the birds hung about the uncanny jumping-jacks
and cried. The sight coming on me suddenly, like an illustration of my
fears, I could scarce be done with examining it and drinking in
discomfort. And as I thus turned and turned about the gibbet, what
should I strike on, but a weird old wife, that sat behind a leg of it,
and nodded, and talked aloud to herself with becks and courtesies.

"Who are these two, mother?" I asked, and pointed to the corpses.

"A blessing on your precious face!" she cried. "Twa joes[7] o' mine:
just twa o' my old joes, my hinny dear."

"What did they suffer for?" I asked.

"Ou, just for the guid cause," said she. "Aften I spaed to them the way
that it would end. Twa shillin' Scots; no pickle mair; and there are twa
bonny callants hingin' for 't! They took it frae a wean[8] belanged to
Brouchton."

"Ay!" said I to myself, and not to the daft limmer, "and did they come
to such a figure for so poor a business? This is to lose all indeed."

"Gie's your loof,[9] hinny," says she, "and let me spae your weird to
ye."

"No, mother," said I, "I see far enough the way I am. It's an unco thing
to see too far in front."

"I read it in your bree," she said. "There's a bonnie lassie that has
bricht een, and there's a wee man in a braw coat, and a big man in a
pouthered wig, and there's the shadow of the wuddy,[10] joe, that lies
braid across your path. Gie's your loof, hinny, and let Auld Merren spae
it to ye bonny."

The two chance shots that seemed to point at Alan and the daughter of
James More, struck me hard; and I fled from the eldritch creature,
casting her a baubee, which she continued to sit and play with under the
moving shadows of the hanged.

My way down the causeway of Leith Walk would have been more pleasant to
me but for this encounter. The old rampart ran among fields, the like of
them I had never seen for artfulness of agriculture; I was pleased,
besides, to be so far in the still countryside; but the shackles of the
gibbet clattered in my head; and the mops and mows of the old witch, and
the thought of the dead men, hag-rode my spirits. To hang on a gallows,
that seemed a hard case; and whether a man came to hang there for two
shillings Scots, or (as Mr. Stewart had it) from the sense of duty, once
he was tarred and shackled and hung up, the difference seemed small.
There might David Balfour hang, and other lads pass on their errands and
think light of him; and old daft limmers sit at leg-foot and spae their
fortunes; and the clean genty maids go by, and look to the other side,
and hold a nose. I saw them plain, and they had grey eyes, and their
screens upon their heads were of the Drummond colours.

I was thus in the poorest of spirits, though still pretty resolved, when
I came in view of Pilrig, a pleasant gabled house set by the walkside
among some brave young woods. The laird's horse was standing saddled at
the door as I came up, but himself was in the study, where he received
me in the midst of learned works and musical instruments, for he was not
only a deep philosopher but much of a musician. He greeted me at first
pretty well, and when he had read Rankeillor's letter, placed himself
obligingly at my disposal.

"And what is it, cousin David?" says he--"since it appears that we are
cousins--what is this that I can do for you? A word to Prestongrange?
Doubtless that is easily given. But what should be the word?"

"Mr. Balfour," said I, "if I were to tell you my whole story the way it
fell out, it's my opinion (and it was Rankeillor's before me) that you
would be very little made up with it."

"I am sorry to hear this of you, kinsman," says he.

"I must not take that at your hands, Mr. Balfour," said I; "I have
nothing to my charge to make me sorry, or you for me, but just the
common infirmities of mankind. 'The guilt of Adam's first sin, the want
of original righteousness, and the corruption of my whole nature,' so
much I must answer for, and I hope I have been taught where to look for
help," I said; for I judged from the look of the man he would think the
better of me if I knew my questions.[11] "But in the way of worldly
honour I have no great stumble to reproach myself with; and my
difficulties have befallen me very much against my will and (by all that
I can see) without my fault. My trouble is to have become dipped in a
political complication, which it is judged you would be blythe to avoid
a knowledge of."

"Why, very well, Mr. David," he replied, "I am pleased to see you are
all that Rankeillor represented. And for what you say of political
complications, you do me no more than justice. It is my study to be
beyond suspicion, and indeed outside the field of it. The question is,"
says he, "how, if I am to know nothing of the matter, I can very well
assist you?"

"Why, sir," said I, "I propose you should write to his lordship, that I
am a young man of reasonable good family and of good means: both of
which I believe to be the case."

"I have Rankeillor's word for it," said Mr. Balfour, "and I count that a
warrandice against all deadly."

"To which you might add (if you will take my word for so much) that I am
a good churchman, loyal to King George, and so brought up," I went on.

"None of which will do you any harm," said Mr. Balfour.

"Then you might go on to say that I sought his lordship on a matter of
great moment, connected with His Majesty's service and the
administration of justice," I suggested.

"As I am not to hear the matter," says the laird, "I will not take upon
myself to qualify its weight. 'Great moment' therefore falls, and
'moment' along with it. For the rest, I might express myself much as you
propose."

"And then, sir," said I, and rubbed my neck a little with my thumb,
"then I would be very desirous if you could slip in a word that might
perhaps tell for my protection."

"Protection?" says he. "For your protection? Here is a phrase that
somewhat dampens me. If the matter be so dangerous, I own I would be a
little loath to move in it blindfold."

"I believe I could indicate in two words where the thing sticks," said
I.

"Perhaps that would be the best," said he.

"Well, it's the Appin murder," said I.

He held up both the hands. "Sirs! sirs!" cried he.

I thought by the expression of his face and voice that I had lost my
helper.

"Let me explain ..." I began.

"I thank you kindly, I will hear no more of it," says he. "I decline _in
toto_ to hear more of it. For your name's sake and Rankeillor's, and
perhaps a little for your own, I will do what I can to help you; but I
will hear no more upon the facts. And it is my first clear duty to warn
you. These are deep waters, Mr. David, and you are a young man. Be
cautious and think twice."

"It is to be supposed I will have thought oftener than that, Mr.
Balfour," said I, "and I will direct your attention again to
Rankeillor's letter, where (I hope and believe) he has registered his
approval of that which I design."

"Well, well," said he; and then again, "Well, well! I will do what I can
for you." Therewith he took a pen and paper, sat awhile in thought, and
began to write with much consideration. "I understand that Rankeillor
approves of what you have in mind?" he asked presently.

"After some discussion, sir, he bade me to go forward in God's name,"
said I.

"That is the name to go in," said Mr. Balfour, and resumed his writing.
Presently, he signed, re-read what he had written, and addressed me
again. "Now here, Mr. David," said he, "is a letter of introduction,
which I will seal without closing, and give into your hands open, as the
form requires. But since I am acting in the dark, I will just read it to
you, so that you may see if it will secure your end--


     "PILRIG, _August 26th_, 1751.

     "MY LORD,--This is to bring to your notice my namesake and
     cousin, David Balfour Esquire of Shaws, a young gentleman
     of unblemished descent and good estate. He has enjoyed besides
     the more valuable advantages of a godly training, and his
     political
     principles are all that your lordship can desire. I am not in
     Mr. Balfour's confidence, but I understand him to have a
     matter
     to declare, touching His Majesty's service and the
     administration
     of justice: purposes for which your lordship's zeal is known.
     I should add that the young gentleman's intention is known to
     and approved by some of his friends, who will watch with
     hopeful
     anxiety the event of his success or failure.'


"Whereupon," continued Mr. Balfour, "I have subscribed myself with the
usual compliments. You observe I have said 'some of your friends;' I
hope you can justify my plural?"

"Perfectly, sir; my purpose is known and approved by more than one,"
said I. "And your letter, which I take a pleasure to thank you for, is
all I could have hoped."

"It was all I could squeeze out," said he; "and from what I know of the
matter you design to meddle in, I can only pray God that it may prove
sufficient."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER IV

LORD ADVOCATE PRESTONGRANGE


My kinsman kept me to a meal, "for the honour of the roof," he said; and
I believe I made the better speed on my return. I had no thought but to
be done with the next stage, and have myself fully committed; to a
person circumstanced as I was, the appearance of closing a door on
hesitation and temptation was itself extremely tempting; and I was the
more disappointed, when I came to Prestongrange's house, to be informed
he was abroad. I believe it was true at the moment, and for some hours
after; and then I have no doubt the Advocate came home again, and
enjoyed himself in a neighbouring chamber among friends, while perhaps
the very fact of my arrival was forgotten. I would have gone away a
dozen times, only for this strong drawing to have done with my
declaration out of hand and be able to lay me down to sleep with a free
conscience. At first I read, for the little cabinet where I was left
contained a variety of books. But I fear I read with little profit; and
the weather falling cloudy, the dusk coming up earlier than usual, and
my cabinet being lighted with but a loophole of a window, I was at last
obliged to desist from this diversion (such as it was), and pass the
rest of my time of waiting in a very burthensome vacuity. The sound of
people talking in a naer chamber, the pleasant note of a harpsichord,
and once the voice of a lady singing, bore me a kind of company.

I do not know the hour, but the darkness was long come, when the door of
the cabinet opened, and I was aware, by the light behind him, of a tall
figure of a man upon the threshold. I rose at once.

"Is anybody there?" he asked. "Who is that?"

"I am bearer of a letter from the laird of Pilrig to the Lord Advocate,"
said I.

"Have you been here long?" he asked.

"I would not like to hazard an estimate of how many hours," said I.

"It is the first I hear of it," he replied, with a chuckle. "The lads
must have forgotten you. But you are in the bit at last, for I am
Prestongrange."

So saying, he passed before me into the next room, whither (upon his
sign) I followed him, and where he lit a candle and took his place
before a business-table. It was a long room, of a good proportion,
wholly lined with books. That small spark of light in a corner struck
out the man's handsome person and strong face. He was flushed, his eye
watered and sparkled, and before he sat down I observed him to sway back
and forth. No doubt he had been supping liberally; but his mind and
tongue were under full control.

"Well, sir, sit ye down," said he, "and let us see Pilrig's letter."

He glanced it through in the beginning carelessly, looking up and bowing
when he came to my name; but at the last words I thought I observed his
attention to redouble, and I made sure he read them twice. All this
while you are to suppose my heart was beating, for I had now crossed my
Rubicon and was come fairly on the field of battle.

"I am pleased to make your acquaintance, Mr. Balfour," he said, when he
had done. "Let me offer you a glass of claret."

"Under your favour, my lord, I think it would scarce be fair on me,"
said I. "I have come here, as the letter will have mentioned, on a
business of some gravity to myself; and as I am little used with wine, I
might be the sooner affected."

"You shall be the judge," said he. "But if you will permit, I believe I
will even have the bottle in myself."

He touched a bell, and the footman came, as at a signal, bringing wine
and glasses.

"You are sure you will not join me?" asked the Advocate. "Well, here is
to our better acquaintance! In what way can I serve you?"

"I should perhaps begin by telling you, my lord, that I am here at your
own pressing invitation," said I.

"You have the advantage of me somewhere," said he, "for I profess I
think I never heard of you before this evening."

"Right, my lord; the name is indeed new to you," said I. "And yet you
have been for some time extremely wishful to make my acquaintance, and
have declared the same in public."

"I wish you would afford me a clue," says he. "I am no Daniel."

"It will perhaps serve for such," said I, "that if I was in a jesting
humour--which is far from the case--I believe I might lay a claim on
your lordship for two hundred pounds."

"In what sense?" he inquired.

"In the sense of rewards offered for my person," said I.

He thrust away his glass once and for all, and sat straight up in the
chair where he had been previously lolling. "What am I to understand?"
said he.

"_A tall strong lad of about eighteen_," I quoted, "_speaks like a
Lowlander, and has no beard_."

"I recognise those words," said he, "which, if you have come here with
any ill-judged intention of amusing yourself, are like to prove
extremely prejudicial to your safety."

"My purpose in this," I replied, "is just entirely as serious as life
and death, and you have understood me perfectly. I am the boy who was
speaking with Glenure when he was shot."

"I can only suppose (seeing you here) that you claim to be innocent,"
said he.

"The inference is clear," I said. "I am a very loyal subject to King
George, but if I had anything to reproach myself with, I would have had
more discretion than to walk into your den."

"I am glad of that," said he. "This horrid crime, Mr. Balfour, is of a
dye which cannot permit any clemency. Blood has been barbarously shed.
It has been shed in direct opposition to his Majesty and our whole frame
of laws, by those who are their known and public oppugnants. I take a
very high sense of this. I will not deny that I consider the crime as
directly personal to his Majesty."

"And unfortunately, my lord," I added a little drily, "directly personal
to another great personage who may be nameless."

"If you mean anything by those words, I must tell you I consider them
unfit for a good subject; and were they spoke publicly I should make it
my business to take note of them," said he. "You do not appear to me to
recognise the gravity of your situation, or you would be more careful
not to pejorate the same by words which glance upon the purity of
justice. Justice, in this country, and in my poor hands, is no respecter
of persons."

"You give me too great a share in my own speech, my lord," said I. "I
did but repeat the common talk of the country, which I have heard
everywhere, and from men of all opinions as I came along."

"When you are come to more discretion you will understand such talk is
not to be listened to, how much less repeated," says the Advocate. "But
I acquit you of an ill intention. That nobleman, whom we all honour and
who has indeed been wounded in a near place by the late barbarity, sits
too high to be reached by these aspersions. The Duke of Argyle--you see
that I deal plainly with you--takes it to heart as I do, and as we are
both bound to do by our judicial functions and the service of his
Majesty; and I could wish that all hands, in this ill age, were equally
clean of family rancour. But from the accident that this is a Campbell
who has fallen martyr to his duty--as who else but the Campbells have
ever put themselves foremost on that path? I may say it, who am no
Campbell--and that the chief of that great house happens (for all our
advantages) to be the present head of the College of Justice, small
minds and disaffected tongues are set agog in every changehouse in the
country; and I find a young gentleman like Mr. Balfour so ill-advised as
to make himself their echo." So much he spoke with a very oratorical
delivery, as if in court, and then declined again upon the manner of a
gentleman. "All this apart," said he. "It now remains that I should
learn what I am to do with you."

"I had thought it was rather I that should learn the same from your
lordship," said I.

"Ay, true," says the Advocate. "But, you see, you come to me well
recommended. There is a good honest Whig name to this letter," says he,
picking it up a moment from the table. "And--extra-judicially, Mr.
Balfour--there is always the possibility of some arrangement. I tell
you, and I tell you beforehand that you may be the more upon your guard,
your fate lies with me singly. In such a matter (be it said with
reverence) I am more powerful than the king's Majesty; and should you
please me--and of course satisfy my conscience--in what remains to be
held of our interview, I tell you it may remain between ourselves."

"Meaning how?" I asked.

"Why, I mean it thus, Mr. Balfour," said he, "that if you give
satisfaction, no soul need know so much as that you visited my house;
and you may observe that I do not even call my clerk."

I saw what way he was driving. "I suppose it is needless anyone should
be informed upon my visit," said I, "though the precise nature of my
gains by that I cannot see. I am not at all ashamed of coming here."

"And have no cause to be," says he, encouragingly. "Nor yet (if you are
careful) to fear the consequences."

"My lord," said I, "speaking under your correction, I am not very easy
to be frightened."

"And I am sure I do not seek to frighten you," says he. "But to the
interrogation; and let me warn you to volunteer nothing beyond the
questions I shall ask you. It may consist very immediately with your
safety. I have a great discretion, it is true, but there are bounds to
it."

"I shall try to follow your lordship's advice," said I.

He spread a sheet of paper on the table and wrote a heading. "It appears
you were present, by the way, in the wood of Lettermore at the moment of
the fatal shot," he began. "Was this by accident?"

"By accident," said I.

"How came you in speech with Colin Campbell?" he asked.

"I was inquiring my way of him to Aucharn," I replied.

I observed he did not write this answer down.

"H'm, true," said he, "I had forgotten that. And do you know, Mr.
Balfour, I would dwell, if I were you, as little as might be on your
relations with these Stewarts? It might be found to complicate our
business. I am not yet inclined to regard these matters as essential."

"I had thought, my lord, that all points of fact were equally material
in such a case," said I.

"You forget we are now trying these Stewarts," he replied, with great
significance. "If we should ever come to be trying you, it will be very
different; and I shall press these very questions that I am now willing
to glide upon. But to resume: I have it here in Mr. Mungo Campbell's
precognition that you ran immediately up the brae. How came that?"

"Not immediately, my lord, and the cause was my seeing of the murderer."

"You saw him, then?"

"As plain as I see your lordship, though not so near hand."

"You know him?"

"I should know him again."

"In your pursuit you were not so fortunate, then, as to overtake him?"

"I was not."

"Was he alone?"

"He was alone."

"There was no one else in that neighbourhood?"

"Alan Breck Stewart was not far off, in a piece of a wood."

The Advocate laid his pen down. "I think we are playing at cross
purposes," said he, "which you will find to prove a very ill amusement
for yourself."

"I content myself with following your lordship's advice, and answering
what I am asked," said I.

"Be so wise as to bethink yourself in time," said he. "I use you with
the most anxious tenderness, which you scarce seem to appreciate, and
which (unless you be more careful) may prove to be in vain."

"I do appreciate your tenderness, but conceive it to be mistaken," I
replied, with something of a falter, for I saw we were come to grips at
last. "I am here to lay before you certain information, by which I shall
convince you Alan had no hand whatever in the killing of Glenure."

The Advocate appeared for a moment at a stick, sitting with pursed lips,
and blinking his eyes upon me like an angry cat. "Mr. Balfour," he said
at last, "I tell you pointedly you go an ill way for your own
interests."

"My lord," I said, "I am as free of the charge of considering my own
interests in this matter as your lordship. As God judges me, I have but
the one design, and that is to see justice executed and the innocent go
clear. If in pursuit of that I come to fall under your lordship's
displeasure, I must bear it as I may."

At this he rose from his chair, lit a second candle, and for a while
gazed upon me steadily. I was surprised to see a great change of gravity
fallen upon his face, and I could have almost thought he was a little
pale.

"You are either very simple, or extremely the reverse, and I see that I
must deal with you more confidentially," says he. "This is a political
case--ah, yes, Mr. Balfour! whether we like it or no, the case is
political--and I tremble when I think what issues may depend from it. To
a political case, I need scarce tell a young man of your education, we
approach with very different thoughts from one which is criminal only.
_Salus populi suprema lex_ is a maxim susceptible of great abuse, but it
has that force which we find elsewhere only in the laws of nature: I
mean it has the force of necessity. I will open this out to you, if you
will allow me, at more length. You would have me believe--"

"Under your pardon, my lord, I would have you to believe nothing but
that which I can prove," said I.

"Tut! tut! young gentleman," says he, "be not so pragmatical, and suffer
a man who might be your father (if it was nothing more) to employ his
own imperfect language, and express his own poor thoughts, even when
they have the misfortune not to coincide with Mr. Balfour's. You would
have me to believe Breck innocent. I would think this of little account,
the more so as we cannot catch our man. But the matter of Breck's
innocence shoots beyond itself. Once admitted, it would destroy the
whole presumptions of our case against another and a very different
criminal; a man grown old in treason, already twice in arms against his
king and already twice forgiven; a fomenter of discontent, and (whoever
may have fired the shot) the unmistakable original of the deed in
question. I need not tell you that I mean James Stewart."

"And I can just say plainly that the innocence of Alan and of James is
what I am here to declare in private to your lordship, and what I am
prepared to establish at the trial by my testimony," said I.

"To which I can only answer by an equal plainness, Mr. Balfour," said
he, "that (in that case) your testimony will not be called by me, and I
desire you to withhold it altogether."

"You are at the head of Justice in this country," I cried, "and you
propose to me a crime!"

"I am a man nursing with both hands the interests of this country," he
replied, "and I press on you a political necessity. Patriotism is not
always moral in the formal sense. You might be glad of it, I think: it
is your own protection; the facts are heavy against you; and if I am
still trying to except you from a very dangerous place, it is in part of
course because I am not insensible to your honesty in coming here; in
part because of Pilrig's letter; but in part, and in chief part, because
I regard in this matter my political duty first and my judicial duty
only second. For the same reason--I repeat it to you in the same frank
words--I do not want your testimony."

"I desire not to be thought to make a repartee, when I express only the
plain sense of our position," said I. "But if your lordship has no need
of my testimony, I believe the other side would be extremely blythe to
get it."

Prestongrange arose and began to pace to and fro in the room. "You are
not so young," he said, "but what you must remember very clearly the
year '45 and the shock that went about the country. I read in Pilrig's
letter that you are sound in Kirk and State. Who saved them in that
fatal year? I do not refer to his Royal Highness and his ramrods, which
were extremely useful in their day; but the country had been saved and
the field won before ever Cumberland came upon Drummossie. Who saved it?
I repeat; who saved the Protestant religion and the whole frame of our
civil institutions? The late Lord President Culloden, for one; he played
a man's part, and small thanks he got for it--even as I, whom you see
before you, straining every nerve in the same service, look for no
reward beyond the conscience of my duties done. After the President, who
else? You know the answer as well as I do; 'tis partly a scandal, and
you glanced at it yourself, and I reproved you for it, when you first
came in. It was the Duke and the great clan of Campbell. Now here is a
Campbell foully murdered, and that in the King's service. The Duke and I
are Highlanders. But we are Highlanders civilised, and it is not so with
the great mass of our clans and families. They have still savage virtues
and defects. They are still barbarians, like these Stewarts; only the
Campbells were barbarians on the right side, and the Stewarts were
barbarians on the wrong. Now be you the judge. The Campbells expect
vengeance. If they do not get it--if this man James escape--there will
be trouble with the Campbells. That means disturbance in the Highlands,
which are uneasy and very far from being disarmed: the disarming is a
farce...."

"I can bear you out in that," said I.

"Disturbance in the Highlands makes the hour of our old watchful enemy,"
pursued his lordship, holding out a finger as he paced; "and I give you
my word we may have a '45 again with the Campbells on the other side. To
protect the life of this man Stewart--which is forfeit already on
half-a-dozen different counts if not on this--do you propose to plunge
your country in war, to jeopardise the faith of your fathers, and to
expose the lives and fortunes of how many thousand innocent persons? . . .
These are considerations that weigh with me, and that I hope will weigh
no less with yourself, Mr. Balfour, as a lover of your country, good
government, and religious truth."

"You deal with me very frankly, and I thank you for it," said I. "I will
try on my side to be no less honest. I believe your policy to be sound.
I believe these deep duties may lie upon your lordship; I believe you
may have laid them on your conscience when you took the oaths of the
high office which you hold. But for me, who am just a plain man--or
scarce a man yet--the plain duties must suffice. I can think but of two
things, of a poor soul in the immediate and unjust danger of a shameful
death, and of the cries and tears of his wife that still tingle in my
head. I cannot see beyond, my lord. It's the way that I am made. If the
country has to fall, it has to fall. And I pray God, if this be wilful
blindness, that he may enlighten me before too late."

He had heard me motionless, and stood so a while longer.

"This is an unexpected obstacle," says he, aloud, but to himself.

"And how is your lordship to dispose of me?" I asked.

"If I wished," said he, "you know that you might sleep in gaol?"

"My lord," says I, "I have slept in worse places."

"Well, my boy," said he, "there is one thing appears very plainly from
our interview, that I may rely on your pledged word. Give me your honour
that you will be wholly secret, not only on what has passed to-night,
but in the matter of the Appin case, and I let you go free."

"I will give it till to-morrow or any other near day that you may please
to set," said I. "I would not be thought too wily; but if I gave the
promise without qualification, your lordship would have attained his
end."

"I had no thought to entrap you," said he.

"I am sure of that," said I.

"Let me see," he continued. "To-morrow is the Sabbath. Come to me on
Monday by eight in the morning, and give me your promise until then."

"Freely given, my lord," said I. "And with regard to what has fallen
from yourself, I will give it for as long as it shall please God to
spare your days."

"You will observe," he said next, "that I have made no employment of
menaces."

"It was like your lordship's nobility," said I. "Yet I am not altogether
so dull but what I can perceive the nature of those you have not
uttered."

"Well," said he, "good-night to you. May you sleep well, for I think it
is more than I am like to do."

With that he sighed, took up a candle, and gave me his conveyance as far
as the street door.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER V

IN THE ADVOCATE'S HOUSE


The next day, Sabbath, August 27th, I had the occasion I had long looked
forward to, to hear some of the famous Edinburgh preachers, all well
known to me already by the report of Mr. Campbell. Alas! and I might
just as well have been at Essendean, and sitting under Mr. Campbell's
worthy self! the turmoil of my thoughts, which dwelt continually on the
interview with Prestongrange, inhibiting me from all attention. I was
indeed much less impressed by the reasoning of the divines than by the
spectacle of the thronged congregation in the churches, like what I
imagined of a theatre or (in my then disposition) of an assize of trial;
above all at the West Kirk, with its three tiers of galleries, where I
went in the vain hope that I might see Miss Drummond.

On the Monday I betook me for the first time to a barber's, and was very
well pleased with the result. Thence to the Advocate's, where the red
coats of the soldiers showed again about his door, making a bright place
in the close. I looked about for the young lady and her gillies; there
was never a sign of them. But I was no sooner shown into the cabinet or
antechamber, where I had spent so wearyful a time upon the Saturday,
than I was aware of the tall figure of James More in a corner. He seemed
a prey to a painful uneasiness, reaching forth his feet and hands, and
his eyes speeding here and there without rest about the walls of the
small chamber, which recalled to me with a sense of pity the man's
wretched situation. I suppose it was partly this, and partly my strong
continuing interest in his daughter, that moved me to accost him.

"Give you a good-morning, sir," said I.

"And a good-morning to you, sir," said he.

"You bide tryst with Prestongrange?" I asked.

"I do, sir, and I pray your business with that gentleman be more
agreeable than mine," was his reply.

"I hope at least that yours will be brief, for I suppose you pass before
me," said I.

"All pass before me," he said, with a shrug and a gesture upward of the
open hands. "It was not always so, sir, but times change. It was not so
when the sword was in the scale, young gentleman, and the virtues of the
soldier might sustain themselves."

There came a kind of Highland snuffle out of the man that raised my
dander strangely.

"Well, Mr. Macgregor," said I, "I understand the main thing for a
soldier is to be silent, and the first of his virtues never to
complain."

"You have my name, I perceive"--he bowed to me with his arms
crossed--"though it's one I must not use myself. Well, there is a
publicity--I have shown my face and told my name too often in the beards
of my enemies. I must not wonder if both should be known to many that I
know not."

"That you know not in the least, sir," said I, "nor yet anybody else;
but the name I am called, if you care to hear it, is Balfour."

"It is a good name," he replied, civilly; "there are many decent folk
that use it. And now that I call to mind, there was a young gentleman,
your namesake, that marched surgeon in the year '45 with my battalion."

"I believe that would be a brother to Balfour of Baith," said I, for I
was ready for the surgeon now.

"The same, sir," said James More. "And since I have been fellow-soldier
with your kinsman, you must suffer me to grasp your hand."

He shook hands with me long and tenderly, beaming on me the while as
though he had found a brother.

"Ah!" says he, "these are changed days since your cousin and I heard the
balls whistle in our lugs."

"I think he was a very far-away cousin," said I, drily, "and I ought to
tell you that I never clapped eyes upon the man."

"Well, well," said he, "it makes no change. And you--I do not think you
were out yourself, sir--I have no clear mind of your face, which is one
not probable to be forgotten."

"In the year you refer to, Mr. Macgregor, I was getting skelped in the
parish school," said I.

"So young!" cries he. "Ah, then you will never be able to think what
this meeting is to me. In the hour of my adversity, and in the house of
my enemy, to meet in with the blood of an old brother-in-arms--it
heartens me, Mr. Balfour, like the skirling of the Highland pipes! Sir,
this is a sad look-back that many of us have to make: some with falling
tears. I have lived in my own country like a king; my sword, my
mountains, and the faith of my friends and kinsmen sufficed for me. Now
I lie in a stinking dungeon; and do you know, Mr. Balfour," he went on,
taking my arm and beginning to lead me about, "do you know, sir, that I
lack mere necessaries? The malice of my foes has quite sequestered my
resources. I lie, as you know, sir, on a trumped-up charge, of which I
am as innocent as yourself. They dare not bring me to my trial, and in
the meanwhile I am held naked in my prison. I could have wished it was
your cousin I had met, or his brother Baith himself. Either would, I
know, have been rejoiced to help me; while a comparative stranger like
yourself--"

I would be ashamed to set down all he poured out to me in this beggarly
vein, or the very short and grudging answers that I made to him. There
were times when I was tempted to stop his mouth with some small change;
but whether it was from shame or pride--whether it was for my own sake
or Catriona's--whether it was because I thought him no fit father for
his daughter, or because I resented that grossness of immediate falsity
that clung about the man himself--the thing was clean beyond me. And I
was still being wheedled and preached to, and still being marched to and
fro, three steps and a turn, in that small chamber, and had already, by
some very short replies, highly incensed, although not finally
discouraged, my beggar, when Prestongrange appeared in the doorway and
bade me eagerly into his big chamber.

"I have a moment's engagement," said he; "and that you may not sit
empty-handed I am going to present you to my three braw daughters, of
whom perhaps you may have heard, for I think they are more famous than
papa. This way."

He led me into another long room above, where a dry old lady sat at a
frame of embroidery, and the three handsomest young women (I suppose) in
Scotland stood together by a window.

"This is my new friend, Mr. Balfour," said he, presenting me by the arm.
"David, here is my sister, Miss Grant, who is so good as keep my house
for me, and will be very pleased if she can help you. And here," says
he, turning to the three younger ladies, "here are my _three braw
dauchters_. A fair question to ye, Mr. Davie: which of the three is the
best favoured? And I wager he will never have the impudence to propound
honest Alan Ramsay's answer!"

Hereupon all three, and the old Miss Grant as well, cried out against
this sally, which (as I was acquainted with the verses he referred to)
brought shame into my own cheek. It seemed to me a citation unpardonable
in a father, and I was amazed that these ladies could laugh even while
they reproved, or made believe to.

Under cover of this mirth, Prestongrange got forth of the chamber, and I
was left, like a fish upon dry land, in that very unsuitable society. I
could never deny, in looking back upon what followed, that I was
eminently stockish; and I must say the ladies were well drilled to have
so long a patience with me. The aunt indeed sat close at her embroidery,
only looking now and again and smiling; but the misses, and especially
the eldest, who was besides the most handsome, paid me a score of
attentions which I was very ill able to repay. It was all in vain to
tell myself I was a young fellow of some worth as well as good estate,
and had no call to feel abashed before these lasses, the eldest not so
much older than myself, and no one of them by any probability half as
learned. Reasoning would not change the fact; and there were times when
the colour came into my face to think I was shaved that day for the
first time.

The talk going, with all their endeavours, very heavily, the eldest took
pity on my awkwardness, sat down to her instrument, of which she was a
passed mistress, and entertained me for a while with playing and
singing, both in the Scots and in the Italian manners; this put me more
at my ease, and being reminded of Alan's air that he had taught me in
the hole near Carriden, I made so bold as to whistle a bar or two, and
ask if she knew that.

She shook her head. "I never heard a note of it," said she. "Whistle it
all through. And now once again," she added, after I had done so.

Then she picked it out upon the keyboard, and (to my surprise) instantly
enriched the same with well-sounding chords, and sang, as she played,
with a very droll expression and broad accent:

    "Haenae I got just the lilt of it?
    Isnae this the tune that ye whustled?"

"You see," she says, "I can do the poetry too, only it won't rhyme." And
then again:

    "I am Miss Grant, sib to the Advocate:
    You, I believe, are Dauvit Balfour."

I told her how much astonished I was by her genius.

"And what do you call the name of it?" she asked.

"I do not know the real name," said I. "I just call it _Alan's air_."

She looked at me directly in the face. "I shall call it _David's air_,"
said she; "though if it's the least like what your namesake of Israel
played to Saul I would never wonder that the king got little good by it,
for it's but melancholy music. Your other name I do not like; so, if you
was ever wishing to hear your tune again you are to ask for it by mine."

This was said with a significance that gave my heart a jog. "Why that,
Miss Grant?" I asked.

"Why," says she, "if ever you should come to get hanged, I will set your
last dying speech and confession to that tune and sing it."

This put it beyond a doubt that she was partly informed of my story and
peril. How, or just how much, it was more difficult to guess. It was
plain she knew there was something of danger in the name of Alan, and
thus warned me to leave it out of reference; and plain she knew that I
stood under some criminal suspicion. I judged besides that the harshness
of her last speech (which besides she had followed up immediately with a
very noisy piece of music) was to put an end to the present
conversation. I stood beside her, affecting to listen and admire, but
truly whirled away by my own thoughts. I have always found this young
lady to be a lover of the mysterious; and certainly this first interview
made a mystery that was beyond my plummet. One thing I learned long
after, the hours of the Sunday had been well employed, the bank porter
had been found and examined, my visit to Charles Stewart was discovered,
and the deduction made that I was pretty deep with James and Alan, and
most likely in a continued correspondence with the last. Hence this
broad hint that was given me across the harpsichord.

In the midst of the piece of music, one of the younger misses, who was
at a window over the close, cried on her sisters to come quick, for
there was "_Grey eyes_ again." The whole family trooped there at once,
and crowded one another for a look. The window whither they ran was in
an odd corner of that room, gave above the entrance door, and flanked up
the close.

"Come, Mr. Balfour," they cried, "come and see. She is the most
beautiful creature! She hangs round the close-head these last days,
always with some wretched-like gillies, and yet seems quite a lady."

I had no need to look; neither did I look twice, or long. I was afraid
she might have seen me there, looking down upon her from that chamber of
music, and she without, and her father in the same house, perhaps
begging for his life with tears, and myself come but newly from
rejecting his petitions. But even that glance set me in a better conceit
of myself, and much less awe of the young ladies. They were beautiful,
that was beyond question, but Catriona was beautiful too, and had a kind
of brightness in her like a coal of fire. As much as the others cast me
down, she lifted me up. I remembered I had talked easily with her. If I
could make no hand of it with these fine maids, it was perhaps something
their own fault. My embarrassment began to be a little mingled and
lightened with a sense of fun; and when the aunt smiled at me from her
embroidery, and the three daughters unbent to me like a baby, all with
"papa's orders" written on their faces, there were times when I could
have found it in my heart to smile myself.

Presently papa returned, the same kind, happy-like, pleasant-spoken man.

"Now, girls," said he, "I must take Mr. Balfour away again; but I hope
you have been able to persuade him to return where I shall be always
gratified to find him."

So they each made me a little farthing compliment, and I was led away.

If this visit to the family had been meant to soften my resistance, it
was the worst of failures. I was no such ass but what I understood how
poor a figure I had made, and that the girls would be yawning their jaws
off as soon as my stiff back was turned. I felt I had shown how little I
had in me of what was soft and graceful; and I longed for a chance to
prove that I had something of the other stuff, the stern and dangerous.

Well, I was to be served to my desire, for the scene to which he was
conducting me was of a different character.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VI

UMQUILE THE MASTER OF LOVAT


There was a man waiting us in Prestongrange's study, whom I distasted at
the first look, as we distaste a ferret or an earwig. He was bitter
ugly, but seemed very much of a gentleman; had still manners, but
capable of sudden leaps and violences; and a small voice, which could
ring out shrill and dangerous when he so desired.

The Advocate presented us in a familiar, friendly way.

"Here, Fraser," said he, "here is Mr. Balfour whom we talked about. Mr.
David, this is Mr. Symon Fraser, whom we used to call by another title,
but that is an old song. Mr. Fraser has an errand to you."

With that he stepped aside to his book-shelves, and made believe to
consult a quarto volume in the far end.

I was thus left (in a sense) alone with perhaps the last person in the
world I had expected. There was no doubt upon the terms of introduction;
this could be no other than the forfeited Master of Lovat and chief of
the great clan Fraser. I knew he had led his men in the Rebellion; I
knew his father's head--my old lord's, that grey fox of the
mountains--to have fallen on the block for that offence, the lands of
the family to have been seized, and their nobility attainted. I could
not conceive what he should be doing in Grant's house; I could not
conceive that he had been called to the bar, had eaten all his
principles, and was now currying favour with the Government even to the
extent of acting Advocate-Depute in the Appin murder.

"Well, Mr. Balfour," said he, "what is all this I hear of ye?"

"It would not become me to prejudge," said I, "but if the Advocate was
your authority he is fully possessed of my opinions."

"I may tell you I am engaged in the Appin case," he went on; "I am to
appear under Prestongrange; and from my study of the precognitions I can
assure you your opinions are erroneous. The guilt of Breck is manifest;
and your testimony, in which you admit you saw him on the hill at the
very moment, will certify his hanging."

"It will be rather ill to hang him till you catch him," I observed. "And
for other matters I very willingly leave you to your own impressions."

"The Duke has been informed," he went on. "I have just come from his
Grace, and he expressed himself before me with an honest freedom like
the great nobleman he is. He spoke of you by name, Mr. Balfour, and
declared his gratitude beforehand in case you would be led by those who
understand your own interests and those of the country so much better
than yourself. Gratitude is no empty expression in that mouth: _experto
crede_. I daresay you know something of my name and clan, and the
damnable example and lamented end of my late father, to say nothing of
my own errata. Well, I have made my peace with that good Duke; he has
intervened for me with our friend Prestongrange; and here I am with my
foot in the stirrup again and some of the responsibility shared into my
hand of prosecuting King George's enemies and avenging the late daring
and barefaced insult to his Majesty."

"Doubtless a proud position for your father's son," says I.

He wagged his bald eyebrows at me. "You are pleased to make experiments
in the ironical, I think," said he. "But I am here upon duty, I am here
to discharge my errand in good faith, it is in vain you think to divert
me. And let me tell you, for a young fellow of spirit and ambition like
yourself, a good shove in the beginning will do more than ten years'
drudgery. The shove is now at your command; choose what you will to be
advanced in, the Duke will watch upon you with the affectionate
disposition of a father."

"I am thinking that I lack the docility of the son," says I.

"And do you really suppose, sir, that the whole policy of this country
is to be suffered to trip up and tumble down for an ill-mannered colt of
a boy?" he cried. "This has been made a test case, all who would prosper
in the future must put a shoulder to the wheel. Look at me! Do you
suppose it is for my pleasure that I put myself in the highly invidious
position of prosecuting a man that I have drawn the sword alongside of?
The choice is not left me."

"But I think, sir, that you forfeited your choice when you mixed in with
that unnatural rebellion," I remarked. "My case is happily otherwise; I
am a true man, and can look either the Duke or King George in the face
without concern."

"Is it so the wind sits?" says he. "I protest you are fallen in the
worst sort of error. Prestongrange has been hitherto so civil (he tells
me) as not to combat your allegations; but you must not think they are
not looked upon with strong suspicion. You say you are innocent. My dear
sir, the facts declare you guilty."

"I was waiting for you there," said I.

"The evidence of Mungo Campbell; your flight after the completion of the
murder; your long course of secresy--my good young man!" said Mr. Symon,
"here is enough evidence to hang a bullock, let be a David Balfour! I
shall be upon that trial; my voice shall be raised; I shall then speak
much otherwise from what I do to-day, and far less to your
gratification, little as you like it now! Ah, you look white!" cries he.
"I have found the key of your impudent heart. You look pale, your eyes
waver, Mr. David! You see the grave and the gallows nearer by than you
had fancied."

"I own to a natural weakness," said I. "I think no shame for that. Shame
. . ." I was going on.

"Shame waits for you on the gibbet," he broke in.

"Where I shall but be even'd with my lord your father," said I.

"Aha, but not so!" he cried, "and you do not yet see to the bottom of
this business. My father suffered in a great cause, and for dealing in
the affairs of kings. You are to hang for a dirty murder about
boddle-pieces. Your personal part in it, the treacherous one of holding
the poor wretch in talk, your accomplices a pack of ragged Highland
gillies. And it can be shown, my great Mr. Balfour--it can be shown, and
it _will_ be shown, trust _me_ that has a finger in the pie--it can be
shown, and shall be shown, that you were paid to do it. I think I can
see the looks go round the court when I adduce my evidence, and it shall
appear that you, a young man of education, let yourself be corrupted to
this shocking act for a suit of cast clothes, a bottle of Highland
spirits, and three-and-fivepence-halfpenny in copper money."

There was a touch of the truth in these words that knocked
me like a blow: clothes, a bottle of _usquebaugh_, and
three-and-fivepence-halfpenny in change made up, indeed, the most of what
Alan and I had carried from Aucharn; and I saw that some of James's
people had been blabbing in their dungeons.

"You see I know more than you fancied," he resumed in triumph. "And as
for giving it this turn, great Mr. David, you must not suppose the
Government of Great Britain and Ireland will ever be stuck for want of
evidence. We have men here in prison who will swear out their lives as
we direct them; as I direct, if you prefer the phrase. So now you are to
guess your part of glory if you choose to die. On the one hand, life,
wine, women, and a duke to be your hand-gun; on the other, a rope to
your craig, and a gibbet to clatter your bones on, and the lousiest,
lowest story to hand down to your namesakes in the future that was ever
told about a hired assassin. And see here!" he cried, with a formidable
shrill voice, "see this paper that I pull out of my pocket. Look at the
name there: it is the name of the great David, I believe, the ink scarce
dry yet. Can you guess its nature? It is the warrant for your arrest,
which I have but to touch this bell beside me to have executed on the
spot. Once in the Tolbooth upon this paper, may God help you, for the
die is cast!"

I must never deny that I was greatly horrified by so much baseness, and
much unmanned by the immediacy and ugliness of my danger. Mr. Symon had
already gloried in the changes of my hue; I make no doubt I was now no
ruddier than my shirt; my speech besides trembled.

"There is a gentleman in this room," cried I. "I appeal to him. I put my
life and credit in his hands."

Prestongrange shut his book with a snap. "I told you so, Symon," said
he; "you have played your hand for all it was worth, and you have lost.
Mr. David," he went on, "I wish you to believe it was by no choice of
mine you were subjected to this proof. I wish you could understand how
glad I am you should come forth from it with so much credit. You may not
quite see how, but it is a little of a service to myself. For had our
friend here been more successful than I was last night, it might have
appeared that he was a better judge of men than I; it might have
appeared we were altogether in the wrong situations, Mr. Symon and
myself. And I know our friend Symon to be ambitious," says he, striking
lightly on Fraser's shoulder. "As for this stage play, it is over; my
sentiments are very much engaged in your behalf; and whatever issue we
can find to this unfortunate affair, I shall make it my business to see
it is adopted with tenderness to you."

These were very good words, and I could see besides that there was
little love, and perhaps a spice of genuine ill-will, between those two
who were opposed to me. For all that, it was unmistakable this interview
had been designed, perhaps rehearsed, with the consent of both; it was
plain my adversaries were in earnest to try me by all methods; and now
(persuasion, flattery, and menaces having been tried in vain) I could
not but wonder what would be their next expedient. My eyes besides were
still troubled, and my knees loose under me, with the distress of the
late ordeal; and I could do no more than stammer the same form of words:
"I put my life and credit in your hands."

"Well, well," says he, "we must try to save them. And in the meanwhile
let us return to gentler methods. You must not bear any grudge upon my
friend, Mr. Symon, who did but speak by his brief. And even if you did
conceive some malice against myself, who stood by and seemed rather to
hold a candle, I must not let that extend to innocent members of my
family. These are greatly engaged to see more of you, and I cannot
consent to have my young women-folk disappointed. To-morrow they will be
going to Hope Park, where I think it very proper you should make your
bow. Call for me first, when I may possibly have something for your
private hearing; then you shall be turned abroad again under the conduct
of my misses; and until that time repeat to me your promise of secrecy."

I had done better to have instantly refused, but in truth I was beside
the power of reasoning; did as I was bid; took my leave I know not how;
and when I was forth again in the close, and the door had shut behind
me, was glad to lean on a house wall and wipe my face. That horrid
apparition (as I may call it) of Mr. Symon rang in my memory, as a
sudden noise rings after it is over on the ear. Tales of the man's
father, of his falseness, of his manifold perpetual treacheries, rose
before me from all that I had heard and read, and joined on with what I
had just experienced of himself. Each time it occurred to me, the
ingenious foulness of that calumny he had proposed to nail upon my
character startled me afresh. The case of the man upon the gibbet by
Leith Walk appeared scarce distinguishable from that I was now to
consider as my own. To rob a child of so little more than nothing was
certainly a paltry enterprise for two grown men; but my own tale, as it
was to be represented in a court by Symon Fraser, appeared a fair second
in every possible point of view of sordidness and cowardice.

The voices of two of Prestongrange's liveried men upon his doorstep
recalled me to myself.

"Ha'e," said the one, "this billet as fast as ye can link to the
captain."

"Is that for the cateran back again?" asked the other.

"It would seem sae," returned the first. "Him and Symon are seeking
him."

"I think Prestongrange is gane gyte," says the second. "He'll have James
More in bed with him next."

"Weel, it's neither your affair nor mine's," says the first.

And they parted, the one upon his errand, and the other back into the
house.

This looked as ill as possible. I was scarce gone and they were sending
already for James More, to whom I thought Mr. Symon must have pointed
when he spoke of men in prison and ready to redeem their lives by all
extremities. My scalp curdled among my hair, and the next moment the
blood leaped in me to remember Catriona. Poor lass! her father stood to
be hanged for pretty indefensible misconduct. What was yet more
unpalatable, it now seemed he was prepared to save his four quarters by
the worst of shame and the most foul of cowardly murders--murder by the
false oath; and to complete our misfortunes, it seemed myself was picked
out to be the victim.

I began to walk swiftly and at random, conscious only of a desire for
movement, air, and the open country.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VII

I MAKE A FAULT IN HONOR


I came forth, I vow I know not how, on the _Lang Dykes_.[12] This is a
rural road which runs on the north side over against the city. Thence I
could see the whole black length of it tail down, from where the castle
stands upon its crags above the loch in a long line of spires and gable
ends, and smoking chimneys, and at the sight my heart swelled in my
bosom. My youth, as I have told, was already inured to dangers; but such
danger as I had seen the face of but that morning, in the midst of what
they call the safety of a town, shook me beyond experience. Peril of
slavery, peril of shipwreck, peril of sword and shot, I had stood all of
these without discredit; but the peril there was in the sharp voice and
the fat face of Symon, properly Lord Lovat, daunted me wholly.

I sat by the lake side in a place where the rushes went down into the
water, and there steeped my wrists and laved my temples. If I could have
done so with any remains of self-esteem I would now have fled from my
foolhardy enterprise. But (call it courage or cowardice, and I believe
it was both the one and the other) I decided I was ventured out beyond
the possibility of a retreat. I had outfaced these men, I would continue
to outface them; come what might, I would stand by the word spoken.

The sense of my own constancy somewhat uplifted my spirits, but not
much. At the best of it there was an icy place about my heart, and life
seemed a black business to be at all engaged in. For two souls in
particular my pity flowed. The one was myself, to be so friendless and
lost among dangers. The other was the girl, the daughter of James More.
I had seen but little of her; yet my view was taken and my judgment
made. I thought her a lass of a clean honour, like a man's; I thought
her one to die of a disgrace; and now I believed her father to be at
that moment bargaining his vile life for mine. It made a bond in my
thoughts betwixt the girl and me. I had seen her before only as a
wayside appearance, though one that pleased me strangely; I saw her now
in a sudden nearness of relation, as the daughter of my blood foe, and I
might say, my murderer. I reflected it was hard I should be so plagued
and persecuted all my days for other folk's affairs, and have no manner
of pleasure myself. I got meals and a bed to sleep in when my concerns
would suffer it; beyond that my wealth was of no help to me. If I was to
hang, my days were like to be short; if I was not to hang but to escape
out of this trouble, they might yet seem long to me ere I was done with
them. Of a sudden her face appeared in my memory, the way I had first
seen it, with the parted lips; at that, weakness came in my bosom and
strength into my legs; and I set resolutely forward on the way to Dean.
If I was to hang to-morrow, and it was sure enough I might very likely
sleep that night in a dungeon, I determined I should hear and speak once
more with Catriona.

The exercise of walking and the thought of my destination braced me yet
more, so that I began to pluck up a kind of spirit. In the village of
Dean, where it sits in the bottom of a glen beside the river, I inquired
my way of a miller's man, who sent me up the hill upon the farther side
by a plain path, and so to a decent-like small house in a garden of
lawns and apple-trees. My heart beat high as I stepped inside the garden
hedge, but it fell low indeed when I came face to face with a grim and
fierce old lady, walking there in a white mutch with a man's hat
strapped upon the top of it.

"What do ye come seeking here?" she asked.

I told her I was after Miss Drummond.

"And what may be your business with Miss Drummond?" says she.

I told her I had met her on Saturday last, had been so fortunate as to
render her a trifling service, and was come now on the young lady's
invitation.

"Oh, so you're Saxpence!" she cried, with a very sneering manner. "A
braw gift, a bonny gentleman. And hae ye ony ither name and designation,
or were ye bapteesed Saxpence?" she asked.

I told my name.

"Preserve me!" she cried. "Has Ebenezer gotten a son?"

"No, ma'am," said I. "I am a son of Alexander's. It's I that am the
Laird of Shaws."

"Ye'll find your work cut out for ye to establish that," quoth she.

"I perceive you know my uncle," said I; "and I daresay you may be the
better pleased to hear that business is arranged."

"And what brings ye here after Miss Drummond?" she pursued.

"I'm come after my saxpence, mem," said I. "It's to be thought, being my
uncle's nephew, I would be found a careful lad."

"So ye have a spark of sleeness in ye," observed the old lady, with some
approval. "I thought ye had just been a cuif--you and your saxpence, and
your _lucky day_ and your _sake of Balwhidder_"--from which I was
gratified to learn that Catriona had not forgotten some of our talk.
"But all this is by the purpose," she resumed. "Am I to understand that
ye come here keeping company?"

"This is surely rather an early question," said I. "The maid is young,
so am I, worse fortune. I have but seen her the once. I'll not deny," I
added, making up my mind to try her with some frankness, "I'll not deny
but she has run in my head a good deal since I met in with her. That is
one thing; but it would be quite another, and I think I would look very
like a fool, to commit myself."

"You can speak out of your mouth, I see," said the old lady. "Praise
God, and so can I! I was fool enough to take charge of this rogue's
daughter: a fine charge I have gotten; but it's mine, and I'll carry it
the way I want to. Do ye mean to tell me, Mr. Balfour of Shaws, that you
would marry James More's daughter, and him hanged? Well, then, where
there's no possible marriage there shall be no manner of carryings on,
and take that for said. Lasses are bruckle things," she added, with a
nod; "and though ye would never think it by my wrunkled chafts, I was a
lassie mysel', and a bonny one."

"Lady Allardyce," said I, "for that I suppose to be your name, you seem
to do the two sides of the talking, which is a very poor manner to come
to an agreement. You give me rather a home thrust when you ask if I
would marry, at the gallows' foot, a young lady whom I have seen but the
once. I have told you already I would never be so untenty as to commit
myself. And yet I'll go some way with you. If I continue to like the
lass as well as I have reason to expect, it will be something more than
her father, or the gallows either, that keeps the two of us apart. As
for my family, I found it by the wayside like a lost bawbee! I owe less
than nothing to my uncle; and if ever I marry, it will be to please one
person: that's myself."

"I have heard this kind of talk before ye were born," said Mrs. Ogilvy,
"which is perhaps the reason that I think of it so little. There's much
to be considered. This James More is a kinsman of mine, to my shame be
it spoken. But the better the family, the mair men hanged or heided,
that's always been poor Scotland's story. And if it was just the
hanging! For my part, I think I would be best pleased with James upon
the gallows, which would be at least an end to him. Catrine's a good
lass enough, and a good-hearted, and lets herself be deaved all day with
a runt of an auld wife like me. But, ye see, there's the weak bit. She's
daft about that long, false, fleeching beggar of a father of hers, and
red-mad about the Gregara, and proscribed names, and King James, and a
wheen blethers. And you might think ye could guide her, ye would find
yourself sore mista'en. Ye say ye've seen her but the once..."

"Spoke with her but the once, I should have said," I interrupted. "I saw
her again this morning from a window at Prestongrange's."

This I daresay I put in because it sounded well; but I was properly paid
for my ostentation on the return.

"What's this of it?" cries the old lady, with a sudden pucker of her
face. "I think it was at the Advocate's door-cheek that ye met her
first."

I told her that was so.

"H'm," she said; and then suddenly, upon rather a scolding tone, "I have
your bare word for it," she cries, "as to who and what you are. By your
way of it, you're Balfour of the Shaws; but for what I ken you may be
Balfour of the Deevil's oxter. It's possible ye may come here for what
ye say, and it's equally possible ye may come here for deil care what!
I'm good enough whig to sit quiet, and to have keepit all my men-folk's
heads upon their shoulders. But I'm not just a good enough whig to be
made a fool of neither. And I tell you fairly, there's too much
Advocate's door and Advocate's window here for a man that comes taigling
after a Macgregor's daughter. Ye can tell that to the Advocate that sent
ye, with my fond love. And I kiss my loof to ye, Mr. Balfour," says she,
suiting the action to the word, "and a braw journey to ye back to where
ye cam frae."

"If you think me a spy," I broke out, and speech stuck in my throat. I
stood and looked murder at the old lady for a space, then bowed and
turned away.

"Here! Hoots! The callant's in a creel!" she cried. "Think ye a spy?
what else would I think ye--me that kens naething by ye? But I see that
I was wrong; and as I cannot fight, I'll have to apologise. A bonny
figure I would be with a broadsword. Ay! ay!" she went on, "you're none
such a bad lad in your way; I think ye'll have some redeeming vices.
But, oh, Davit Balfour, ye're damned countryfeed. Ye'll have to win over
that, lad; ye'll have to soople your back-bone, and think a wee pickle
less of your dainty self; and ye'll have to try to find out that
women-folk are nae grenadiers. But that can never be. To your last day
you'll ken no more of women-folk than what I do of sow-gelding."

I had never been used with such expressions from a lady's tongue, the
only two ladies I had known, Mrs. Campbell and my mother, being most
devout and most particular women; and I suppose my amazement must have
been depicted in my countenance, for Mrs. Ogilvy burst forth suddenly in
a fit of laughter.

"Keep me!" she cried, struggling with her mirth, "you have the finest
timber face--and you to marry the daughter of a Hieland cateran! Davie,
my dear, I think we'll have to make a match of it--if it was just to see
the weans. And now," she went on, "there's no manner of service in your
daidling here, for the young woman is from home, and it's my fear that
the old woman is no suitable companion for your father's son. Forbye
that I have nobody but myself to look after my reputation, and have been
long enough alone with a sedooctive youth. And come back another day for
your saxpence!" she cried after me as I left.

My skirmish with this disconcerting lady gave my thoughts a boldness
they had otherwise wanted. For two days the image of Catriona had mixed
in all my meditations; she made their background, so that I scarce
enjoyed my own company without a glint of her in a corner of my mind.
But now she came immediately near; I seemed to touch her, whom I had
never touched but the once; I let myself flow out to her in a happy
weakness, and looking all about, and before and behind, saw the world
like an undesirable desert, where men go as soldiers on a march,
following their duty with what constancy they have, and Catriona alone
there to offer me some pleasure of my days; I wondered at myself that I
could dwell on such considerations in that time of my peril and
disgrace; and when I remembered my youth I was ashamed. I had my studies
to complete; I had to be called into some useful business; I had yet to
take my part of service in a place where all must serve; I had yet to
learn, and know, and prove myself a man; and I had so much sense as
blush that I should be already tempted with these further-on and holier
delights and duties. My education spoke home to me sharply; I was never
brought up on sugar biscuits, but on the hard food of the truth. I knew
that he was quite unfit to be a husband who was not prepared to be a
father also; and for a boy like me to play the father was a mere
derision.

When I was in the midst of these thoughts and about half-way back to
town I saw a figure coming to meet me, and the trouble of my heart was
heightened. It seemed I had everything in the world to say to her, but
nothing to say first; and remembering how tongue-tied I had been that
morning at the Advocate's, I made sure that I would find myself struck
dumb. But when she came up my fears fled away; not even the
consciousness of what I had been privately thinking disconcerted me the
least; and I found I could talk with her as easily and rationally as I
might with Alan.

"O!" she cried, "you have been seeking your sixpence: did you get it?"

I told her no; but now I had met with her my walk was not in vain.
"Though I have seen you to-day already," said I, and told her where and
when.

"I did not see you," she said. "My eyes are big, but there are better
than mine at seeing far. Only I heard singing in the house."

"That was Miss Grant," said I, "the eldest and the bonniest."

"They say they are all beautiful," said she.

"They think the same of you, Miss Drummond," I replied, "and were all
crowding to the window to observe you."

"It is a pity about my being so blind," said she, "or I might have seen
them too. And you were in the house? You must have been having the fine
time with the fine music and the pretty ladies."

"There is just where you are wrong," said I; "for I was as uncouth as a
sea-fish upon the brae of a mountain. The truth is that I am better
fitted to go about with rudas men than pretty ladies."

"Well, I would think so too, at all events!" said she, at which we both
of us laughed.

"It is a strange thing, now," said I. "I am not the least afraid with
you, yet I could have run from the Miss Grants. And I was afraid of your
cousin too."

"O, I think any man will be afraid of her," she cried. "My father is
afraid of her himself."

The name of her father brought me to a stop. I looked at her as she
walked by my side; I recalled the man, and the little I knew and the
much I guessed of him; and comparing the one with the other, felt like a
traitor to be silent.

"Speaking of which," said I, "I met your father no later than this
morning."

"Did you?" she cried, with a voice of joy that seemed to mock at me.
"You saw James More? You will have spoken with him, then?"

"I did even that," said I.

Then I think things went the worst way for me that was humanly possible.
She gave me a look of mere gratitude. "Ah, thank you for that!" says
she.

"You thank me for very little," said I, and then stopped. But it seemed
when I was holding back so much, something at least had to come out. "I
spoke rather ill to him," said I; "I did not like him very much; I spoke
him rather ill, and he was angry."

"I think you had little to do then, and less to tell it to his
daughter!" she cried out. "But those that do not love and cherish him I
will not know."

"I will take the freedom of a word yet," said I, beginning to tremble.
"Perhaps neither your father nor I are in the best of good spirits at
Prestongrange's. I daresay we both have anxious business there, for it's
a dangerous house. I was sorry for him too, and spoke to him the first,
if I could but have spoken the wiser. And for one thing, in my opinion,
you will soon find that his affairs are mending."

"It will not be through your friendship, I am thinking," said she; "and
he is much made up to you for your sorrow."

"Miss Drummond," cried I, "I am alone in this world...."

"And I am not wondering at that," said she.

"O, let me speak!" said I. "I will speak but the once, and then leave
you, if you will, for ever. I came this day in the hopes of a kind word
that I am sore in want of. I know that what I said must hurt you, and I
knew it then. It would have been easy to have spoken smooth, easy to lie
to you; can you not think how I was tempted to the same? Cannot you see
the truth of my heart shine out?"

"I think here is a great deal of work, Mr. Balfour," said she. "I think
we will have met but the once, and will can part like gentle-folk."

"O, let me have one to believe in me!" I pleaded, "I cannae bear it
else. The whole world is clanned against me. How am I to go through with
my dreadful fate? If there's to be none to believe in me I cannot do it.
The man must just die, for I cannot do it."

She had still looked straight in front of her, head in air; but at my
words or the tone of my voice she came to a stop. "What is this you
say?" she asked. "What are you talking of?"

"It is my testimony which may save an innocent life," said I, "and they
will not suffer me to bear it. What would you do yourself? You know what
this is, whose father lies in danger. Would you desert the poor soul?
They have tried all ways with me. They have sought to bribe me; they
offered me hills and valleys. And to-day that sleuth-hound told me how I
stood, and to what a length he would go to butcher and disgrace me. I am
to be brought in a party to the murder; I am to have held Glenure in
talk for money and old clothes; I am to be killed and shamed. If this is
the way I am to fall, and me scarce a man--if this is the story to be
told of me in all Scotland--if you are to believe it too, and my name is
to be nothing but a by-word--Catriona, how can I go through with it? The
thing's not possible; it's more than a man has in his heart."

I poured my words out in a whirl, one upon the other; and when I stopped
I found her gazing on me with a startled face.

"Glenure! It is the Appin murder," she said softly, but with a very deep
surprise.

I had turned back to bear her company, and we were now come near the
head of the brae above Dean village. At this word I stepped in front of
her like one suddenly distracted.

"For God's sake!" I cried, "for God's sake, what is this that I have
done?" and carried my fists to my temples. "What made me do it? Sure, I
am bewitched to say these things!"

"In the name of heaven, what ails you now?" she cried.

"I gave my honour," I groaned, "I gave my honour and now I have broke
it. O, Catriona!"

"I am asking you what it is," she said; "was it these things you should
not have spoken? And do you think _I_ have no honour, then? or that I am
one that would betray a friend? I hold up my right hand to you and
swear."

"O, I knew you would be true!" said I. "It's me--it's here. I that stood
but this morning and out-faced them, that risked rather to die disgraced
upon the gallows than do wrong--and a few hours after I throw my honour
away by the roadside in common talk! 'There is one thing clear upon our
interview,' says he, 'that I can rely on your pledged word.' Where is my
word now? Who could believe me now? _You_ could not believe me. I am
clean fallen down; I had best die!" All this I said with a weeping
voice, but I had no tears in my body.

"My heart is sore for you," said she, "but be sure you are too nice. I
would not believe you, do you say? I would trust you with anything. And
these men? I would not be thinking of them! Men who go about to entrap
and to destroy you! Fy! this is no time to crouch. Look up! Do you not
think I will be admiring you like a great hero of the good--and you a
boy not much older than myself? And because you said a word too much in
a friend's ear, that would die ere she betrayed you--to make such a
matter! It is one thing that we must both forget."

"Catriona," said I, looking at her, hang-dog, "is this true of it? Would
ye trust me yet?"

"Will you not believe the tears upon my face?" she cried. "It is the
world I am thinking of you, Mr. David Balfour. Let them hang you; I will
never forget, I will grow old and still remember you. I think it is
great to die so; I will envy you that gallows."

"And maybe all this while I am but a child frighted with bogles," said
I. "Maybe they but make a mock of me."

"It is what I must know," she said. "I must hear the whole. The harm is
done at all events, and I must hear the whole."

I had sat down on the wayside, where she took a place beside me, and I
told her all that matter much as I have written it, my thoughts about
her father's dealing being alone omitted.

"Well," she said, when I had finished, "you are a hero, surely, and I
never would have thought that same! And I think you are in peril, too.
O, Symon Fraser! to think upon that man! For his life and the dirty
money, to be dealing in such traffic!" And just then she called out
aloud with a queer word that was common with her, and belongs, I
believe, to her own language. "My torture!" says she, "look at the sun!"

Indeed, it was already dipping towards the mountains.

She bid me come again soon, gave me her hand, and left me in a turmoil
of glad spirits. I delayed to go home to my lodging, for I had a terror
of immediate arrest; but got some supper at a change house, and the
better part of that night walked by myself in the barley-fields, and had
such a sense of Catriona's presence that I seemed to bear her in my
arms.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VIII

THE BRAVO


The next day, August 29th, I kept my appointment at the Advocate's in a
coat that I had made to my own measure, and was but newly ready.

"Aha," says Prestongrange, "you are very fine to-day; my misses are to
have a fine cavalier. Come, I take that kind of you. I take that kind of
you, Mr. David. O, we shall do very well yet, and I believe your
troubles are nearly at an end."

"You have news for me?" cried I.

"Beyond anticipation," he replied. "Your testimony is after all to be
received; and you may go, if you will, in my company to the trial, which
is to be held at Inverary, Thursday, 21st _proximo_."

I was too much amazed to find words.

"In the meanwhile," he continued, "though I will not ask you to renew
your pledge, I must caution you strictly to be reticent. To-morrow your
precognition must be taken; and outside of that, do you know, I think
least said will be soonest mended."

"I shall try to go discreetly," said I. "I believe it is yourself that I
must thank for this crowning mercy, and I do thank you gratefully. After
yesterday, my lord, this is like the doors of Heaven. I cannot find it
in my heart to get the thing believed."

"Ah, but you must try and manage, you must try and manage to believe
it," says he, soothing-like, "and I am very glad to hear your
acknowledgment of obligation, for I think you may be able to repay me
very shortly"--he coughed--"or even now. The matter is much changed.
Your testimony, which I shall not trouble you for to-day, will doubtless
alter the complexion of the case for all concerned, and this makes it
less delicate for me to enter with you on a side issue."

"My lord," I interrupted, "excuse me for interrupting you, but how has
this been brought about? The obstacles you told me of on Saturday
appeared even to me to be quite insurmountable; how has it been
contrived?"

"My dear Mr. David," said he, "it would never do for me to divulge (even
to you, as you say) the councils of the Government; and you must content
yourself, if you please, with the gross fact."

He smiled upon me like a father as he spoke, playing the while with a
new pen; methought it was impossible there could be any shadow of
deception in the man: yet when he drew to him a sheet of paper, dipped
his pen among the ink, and began again to address me, I was somehow not
so certain, and fell instinctively into an attitude of guard.

"There is a point I wish to touch upon," he began. "I purposely left it
before upon one side, which need be now no longer necessary. This is
not, of course, a part of your examination, which is to follow by
another hand; this is a private interest of my own. You say you
encountered Breck upon the hill?"

"I did, my lord," said I.

"This was immediately after the murder?"

"It was."

"Did you speak to him?"

"I did."

"You had known him before, I think?" says my lord, carelessly.

"I cannot guess your reason for so thinking, my lord," I replied, "but
such is the fact."

"And when did you part with him again?" said he.

"I reserve my answer," said I. "The question will be put to me at the
assize."

"Mr. Balfour," said he, "will you not understand that all this is
without prejudice to yourself? I have promised you life and honour; and,
believe me, I can keep my word. You are therefore clear of all anxiety.
Alan, it appears, you suppose you can protect; and you talk to me of
your gratitude, which I think (if you push me) is not ill-deserved.
There are a great many different considerations all pointing the same
way; and I will never be persuaded that you could not help us (if you
chose) to put salt on Alan's tail."

"My lord," said I, "I give you my word I do not so much as guess where
Alan is."

He paused a breath. "Nor how he might be found?" he asked.

I sat before him like a log of wood.

"And so much for your gratitude, Mr. David!" he observed. Again there
was a piece of silence. "Well," said he, rising, "I am not fortunate,
and we are a couple at cross purposes. Let us speak of it no more; you
will receive notice when, where, and by whom we are to take your
precognition. And in the meantime, my misses must be waiting you. They
will never forgive me if I detain their cavalier."

Into the hands of these graces I was accordingly offered up, and found
them dressed beyond what I had thought possible, and looking fair as a
posy.

As we went forth from the doors a small circumstance occurred which came
afterwards to look extremely big. I heard a whistle sound loud and brief
like a signal, and looking all about, spied for one moment the red head
of Neil of the Tom, the son of Duncan. The next moment he was gone
again, nor could I see so much as the skirt-tail of Catriona, upon whom
I naturally supposed him to be then attending.

My three keepers led me out by Bristo and the Bruntsfield Links; whence
a path carried us to Hope Park, a beautiful pleasance, laid with
gravel-walks, furnished with seats and summer-sheds, and warded by a
keeper.

The way there was a little longsome; the two younger misses affected an
air of genteel weariness that damped me cruelly, the eldest considered
me with something that at times appeared like mirth; and though I
thought I did myself more justice than the day before, it was not
without some effort. Upon our reaching the park I was launched on a bevy
of eight or ten young gentlemen (some of them cockaded officers, the
rest chiefly advocates) who crowded to attend upon these beauties; and
though I was presented to all of them in very good words, it seemed I
was by all immediately forgotten. Young folk in a company are like to
savage animals: they fall upon or scorn a stranger without civility, or
I may say, humanity; and I am sure, if I had been among baboons, they
would have shown me quite as much of both. Some of the advocates set up
to be wits, and some of the soldiers to be rattles; and I could not tell
which of these extremes annoyed me most. All had a manner of handling
their swords and coat-skirts, for the which (in mere black envy) I could
have kicked them from that park. I daresay, upon their side, they
grudged me extremely the fine company in which I had arrived; and
altogether I had soon fallen behind, and stepped stiffly in the rear of
all that merriment with my own thoughts.

From these I was recalled by one of the officers, Lieutenant Hector
Duncansby, a gawky, leering, Highland boy, asking if my name was not
"Palfour."

I told him it was, not very kindly, for his manner was scant civil.

"Ha, Palfour," says he, and then, repeating it, "Palfour, Palfour!"

"I am afraid you do not like my name, sir," says I, annoyed with myself
to be annoyed with such a rustical fellow.

"No," says he, "but I wass thinking."

"I would not advise you to make a practice of that, sir," says I. "I
feel sure you would not find it to agree with you."

"Tit you effer hear where Alan Grigor fand the tangs?" said he.

I asked him what he could possibly mean, and he answered, with a
heckling laugh, that he thought I must have found the poker in the same
place and swallowed it.

There could be no mistake about this, and my cheek burned.

"Before I went about to put affronts on gentlemen," said I, "I think I
would learn the English language first."

He took me by the sleeve with a nod and a wink, and led me quietly
outside Hope Park. But no sooner were we beyond the view of the
promenaders, than the fashion of his countenance changed. "You tam
lowland scoon'rel!" cries he, and hit me a buffet on the jaw with his
closed fist.

I paid him as good or better on the return; whereupon he stepped a
little back and took off his hat to me decorously.

"Enough plows I think," says he. "I will be the offended shentleman, for
who effer heard of such suffeeciency as tell a shentlemans that is the
king's officer he cannae speak Cot's English? We have swords at our
hurdies, and here is the King's Park at hand. Will ye walk first, or let
me show ye the way?"

I returned his bow, told him to go first, and followed him. As he went I
heard him grumble to himself about _Cot's English_ and the _King's
coat_, so that I might have supposed him to be seriously offended. But
his manner at the beginning of our interview was there to belie him. It
was manifest he had come prepared to fasten a quarrel on me, right or
wrong; manifest that I was taken in a fresh contrivance of my enemies;
and to me (conscious as I was of my deficiencies) manifest enough that I
should be the one to fall in our encounter.

As we came into that rough rocky desert of the King's Park I was tempted
half-a-dozen times to take to my heels and run for it, so loath was I to
show my ignorance in fencing, and so much averse to die or even to be
wounded. But I considered if their malice went as far as this, it would
likely stick at nothing; and that to fall by the sword, however
ungracefully, was still an improvement on the gallows. I considered
besides that by the unguarded pertness of my words and the quickness of
my blow I had put myself quite out of court; and that even if I ran, my
adversary would, probably pursue and catch me, which would add disgrace
to my misfortune. So that, taking all in all, I continued marching
behind him, much as a man follows the hangman, and certainly with no
more hope.

We went about the end of the long craigs, and came into the Hunter's
Bog. Here, on a piece of fair turf, my adversary drew. There was nobody
there to see us but some birds; and no resource for me but to follow his
example, and stand on guard with the best face I could display. It seems
it was not good enough for Mr. Duncansby, who spied some flaw in my
manoeuvres, paused, looked upon me sharply, and came off and on, and
menaced me with his blade in the air. As I had seen no such proceedings
from Alan, and was besides a good deal affected with the proximity of
death, I grew quite bewildered, stood helpless, and could have longed to
run away.

"Fat, deil, ails her?" cries the lieutenant.

And suddenly engaging, he twitched the sword out of my grasp and sent it
flying far among the rushes.

Twice was this manoeuvre repeated; and the third time when I brought
back my humiliated weapon, I found he had returned his own to the
scabbard, and stood awaiting me with a face of some anger, and his hands
clasped under his skirt.

"Pe tamned if I touch you!" he cried, and asked me bitterly what right I
had to stand up before "shentlemans" when I did not know the back of a
sword from the front of it.

I answered that was the fault of my upbringing; and would he do me the
justice to say I had given him all the satisfaction it was unfortunately
in my power to offer, and had stood up like a man?

"And that is the truth," said he. "I am fery prave myself, and pold as a
lions. But to stand up there--and you ken naething of fence!--the way
that you did, I declare it was peyond me. And I am sorry for the plow;
though I declare I pelief your own was the elder brother, and my held
still sings with it. And I declare if I had kent what way it wass, I
would not put a hand to such a piece of pusiness."

"That is handsomely said," I replied, "and I am sure you will not stand
up a second time to be the actor for my private enemies."

"Indeed, no, Palfour," said he; "and I think I was used extremely
suffeeciently myself to be set up to fecht with an auld wife, or all the
same as a bairn whateffer! And I will tell the Master so, and fecht him,
by Cot, himself!"

"And if you knew the nature of Mr. Symon's quarrel with me," said I,
"you would be yet the more affronted to be mingled up with such
affairs."

He swore he could well believe it; that all the Lovats were made of the
same meal and the devil was the miller that ground that; then suddenly
shaking me by the hand, he vowed I was a pretty enough fellow after all,
that it was a thousand pities I had been neglected, and that if he could
find the time, he would give an eye himself to have me educated.

"You can do me a better service than even what you propose," said I; and
when he had asked its nature--"Come with me to the house of one of my
enemies, and testify how I have carried myself this day," I told him.
"That will be the true service. For though he has sent me a gallant
adversary for the first, the thought in Mr. Symon's mind is merely
murder. There will be a second and then a third; and by what you have
seen of my cleverness with the cold steel, you can judge for yourself
what is like to be upshot."

"And I would not like it myself, if I was no more of a man than what you
wass!" he cried. "But I will do you right, Palfour. Lead on!"

If I had walked slowly on the way into that accursed park my heels were
light enough on the way out. They kept time to a very good old air, that
is as ancient as the Bible, and the words of it are: "_Surely the
bitterness of death is passed_." I mind that I was extremely thirsty,
and had a drink at Saint Margaret's well on the road down, and the
sweetness of that water passed belief. We went through the sanctuary, up
the Canongate, in by the Netherbow, and straight to Prestongrange's
door, talking as we came and arranging the details of our affair. The
footman owned his master was at home, but declared him engaged with
other gentlemen on very private business, and his door forbidden.

"My business is but for three minutes, and it cannot wait," said I. "You
may say it is by no means private, and I shall be even glad to have some
witnesses."

As the man departed unwillingly enough upon this errand, we made so bold
as to follow him to the antechamber, whence I could hear for a while the
murmuring of several voices in the room within. The truth is, they were
three at the one table--Prestongrange, Symon Fraser, and Mr. Erskine,
Sheriff of Perth; and as they were met in consultation on the very
business of the Appin murder, they were a little disturbed at my
appearance, but decided to receive me.

"Well, well, Mr. Balfour, and what brings you here again? and who is
this you bring with you?" says Prestongrange.

As for Fraser, he looked before him on the table.

"He is here to bear a little testimony in my favour, my lord, which I
think it very needful you should hear," said I, and turned to Duncansby.

"I have only to say this," said the lieutenant, "that I stood up this
day with Palfour in the Hunter's Pog, which I am now fery sorry for, and
he behaved himself as pretty as a shentlemans could ask it. And I have
creat respects for Palfour," he added.

"I thank you for your honest expressions," said I.

Whereupon Duncansby made his bow to the company, and left the chamber,
as we had agreed upon before.

"What have I to do with this?" says Prestongrange.

"I will tell your lordship in two words," said I. "I have brought this
gentleman, a King's officer, to do me so much justice. Now I think my
character is covered, and until a certain date, which your lordship can
very well supply, it will be quite in vain to despatch against me any
more officers. I will not consent to fight my way through the garrison
of the castle."

The veins swelled on Prestongrange's brow, and he regarded me with fury.

"I think the devil uncoupled this dog of a lad between my legs!" he
cried; and then, turning fiercely on his neighbour, "This is some of
your work, Symon," he said. "I spy your hand in the business, and, let
me tell you, I resent it. It is disloyal, when we are agreed upon one
expedient, to follow another in the dark. You are disloyal to me. What!
you let me send this lad to the place with my very daughters! And
because I let drop a word to you ... Fy, sir, keep your dishonours to
yourself!"

Symon was deadly pale. "I will be a kick-ball between you and the Duke
no longer," he exclaimed. "Either come to an agreement, or come to a
differ, and have it out among yourselves. But I will no longer fetch and
carry, and get your contrary instructions, and be blamed by both. For if
I were to tell you what I think of all your Hanover business it would
make your head sing."

But Sheriff Erskine had preserved his temper, and now intervened
smoothly. "And in the meantime," says he, "I think we should tell Mr.
Balfour that his character for valour is quite established. He may sleep
in peace. Until the date he was so good as to refer to it shall be put
to the proof no more."

His coolness brought the others to their prudence; and they made haste,
with a somewhat distracted civility, to pack me from the house.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER IX

THE HEATHER ON FIRE


When I left Prestongrange that afternoon I was for the first time angry.
The Advocate had made a mock of me. He had pretended my testimony was to
be received and myself respected; and in that very hour, not only was
Symon practising against my life by the hands of the Highland soldier,
but (as appeared from his own language) Prestongrange himself had some
design in operation. I counted my enemies: Prestongrange with all the
King's authority behind him; and the Duke with the power of the West
Highlands; and the Lovat interest by their side to help them with so
great a force in the north, and the whole clan of old Jacobite spies and
traffickers. And when I remembered James More, and the red head of Neil
the son of Duncan, I thought there was perhaps a fourth in the
confederacy, and what remained of Rob Roy's old desperate sept of
caterans would be banded against me with the others. One thing was
requisite, some strong friend or wise adviser. The country must be full
of such, both able and eager to support me, or Lovat and the Duke and
Prestongrange had not been nosing for expedients; and it made me rage to
think that I might brush against my champions in the street and be no
wiser.

And just then (like an answer) a gentleman brushed against me going by,
gave me a meaning look, and turned into a close. I knew him with the
tail of my eye--it was Stewart the Writer; and, blessing my good
fortune, turned in to follow him. As soon as I had entered the close I
saw him standing in the mouth of a stair, where he made me a signal and
immediately vanished. Seven storeys up, there he was again in a house
door, the which he locked behind us after we had entered. The house was
quite dismantled, with not a stick of furniture; indeed, it was one of
which Stewart had the letting in his hands.

"We'll have to sit upon the floor," said he; "but we're safe here for
the time being, and I've been wearying to see ye, Mr. Balfour."

"How's it with Alan?'" I asked.

"Brawly," said he. "Andie picks him up at Gillane Sands to-morrow,
Wednesday. He was keen to say good-by to ye, but the way that things
were going, I was feared the pair of ye was maybe best apart. And that
brings me to the essential: how does your business speed?"

"Why," said I, "I was told only this morning that my testimony was
accepted, and I was to travel to Inverary with the Advocate, no less."

"Hout awa!" cried Stewart. "I'll never believe that."

"I have maybe a suspicion of my own," says I, "but I would like fine to
hear your reasons."

"Well, I tell ye fairly, I'm horn-mad," cries Stewart. "If my one hand
could pull their Government down I would pluck it like a rotten apple.
I'm doer for Appin and for James of the Glens; and, of course, it's my
duty to defend my kinsman for his life. Hear how it goes with me, and
I'll leave the judgment of it to yourself. The first thing they have to
do is to get rid of Alan. They cannae bring in James as art and part
until they've brought in Alan first as principal; that's sound law: they
could never put the cart before the horse."

"And how are they to bring in Alan till they can catch him?" says I.

"Ah, but there is a way to evite that arrestment," said he. "Sound law,
too. It would be a bonny thing if, by the escape of one ill-doer another
was to go scatheless, and the remeid is to summon the principal and put
him to outlawry for the non-compearance. Now there's four places where a
person can be summoned: at his dwelling-house; at a place where he has
resided forty days; at the head burgh of the shire where he ordinarily
resorts; or lastly (if there be ground to think him forth of Scotland),
_at the cross of Edinburgh, and the pier and shore of Leith, for sixty
days_. The purpose of which last provision is evident upon its face:
being that outgoing ships may have time to carry news of the
transaction, and the summonsing be something other than a form. Now take
the case of Alan. He has no dwelling-house that ever I could hear of; I
would be obliged if anyone would show me where he has lived forty days
together since the '45; there is no shire where he resorts whether
ordinarily or extraordinarily; if he has a domicile at all, which I
misdoubt, it must be with his regiment in France; and if he is not yet
forth of Scotland (as we happen to know and they happen to guess) it
must be evident to the most dull it's what he's aiming for. Where, then,
and what way should he be summoned? I ask it at yourself, a layman."

"You have given the very words," said I. "Here at the cross, and at the
pier and shore of Leith, for sixty days."

"Ye're a sounder Scots lawyer than Prestongrange, then!" cries the
Writer. "He has had Alan summoned once; that was on the twenty-fifth,
the day that we first met. Once, and done with it. And where? Where, but
at the cross of Inverary, the head burgh of the Campbells. A word in
your ear, Mr. Balfour--they're not seeking Alan."

"What do you mean?" I cried. "Not seeking him?"

"By the best that I can make of it," said he. "Not wanting to find him,
in my poor thought. They think perhaps he might set up a fair defence,
upon the back of which James, the man they're really after, might climb
out. This is not a case, ye see, it's a conspiracy."

"Yet I can tell you Prestongrange asked after Alan keenly," said I;
"though, when I come to think of it, he was something of the easiest put
by."

"See that!" says he. "But there! I may be right or wrong, that's
guesswork at the best, and let me get to my facts again. It comes to my
ears that James and the witnesses--the witnesses, Mr. Balfour!--lay in
close dungeons, and shackled forbye, in the military prison at Fort
William; none allowed in to them, nor they to write. The witnesses, Mr.
Balfour; heard ye ever the match of that? I assure ye, no old, crooked
Stewart of the gang ever outfaced the law more impudently. It's clean in
the two eyes of the Act of Parliament of 1700, anent wrongous
imprisonment. No sooner did I get the news than I petitioned the Lord
Justice Clerk. I have his word to-day. There's law for ye! here's
justice!"

He put a paper in my hand, that same mealy-mouthed, false-faced paper
that was printed since in the pamphlet "by a bystander," for behoof (as
the title says) of James's "poor widow and five children."

"See," said Stewart, "he couldn't dare to refuse me access to my client,
so he _recommends the commanding officer to let me in_. Recommends!--the
Lord Justice Clerk of Scotland recommends. Is not the purpose of such
language plain? They hope the officer may be so dull, or so very much
the reverse, as to refuse the recommendation. I would have to make the
journey back again betwixt here and Fort William. There would follow a
fresh delay till I got fresh authority, and they had disavowed the
officer--military man, notoriously ignorant of the law, and that--I ken
the cant of it. Then the journey a third time; and there we should be on
the immediate heels of the trial before I had received my first
instruction. Am I not right to call this a conspiracy?"

"It will bear that colour," said I.

"And I'll go on to prove it you outright," said he. "They have the right
to hold James in prison, yet they cannot deny me to visit him. They have
no right to hold the witnesses; but am I to get a sight of them, that
should be as free as the Lord Justice Clerk himself? See--read: _For the
rest, refuses to give any orders to keepers of prisons who are not
accused as having done anything contrary to the duties of their office_.
Anything contrary! Sirs! And the Act of seventeen hunner! Mr. Balfour,
this makes my heart to burst. The heather is on fire inside my wame."

"And the plain English of that phrase," said I, "is that the witnesses
are still to lie in prison and you are not to see them?"

"And I am not to see them until Inverary, when the court is set!" cries
he, "and then to hear Prestongrange upon _the anxious responsibilities
of his office and the great facilities afforded the defence!_ But I'll
begowk them there, Mr. David. I have a plan to waylay the witnesses upon
the road, and see if I cannae get a little harle of justice out of the
_military man notoriously ignorant of the law_ that shall command the
party."

It was actually so--it was actually on the wayside near Tynedrum, and by
the connivance of a soldier officer, that Mr. Stewart first saw the
witnesses upon the case.

"There is nothing that would surprise me in this business," I remarked.

"I'll surprise you ere I'm done!" cries he. "Do ye see this?"--producing
a print still wet from the press. "This is the libel: see, there's
Prestongrange's name to the list of witnesses, and I find no word of any
Balfour. But here is not the question. Who do ye think paid for the
printing of this paper?"

"I suppose it would likely be King George," said I.

"But it happens it was me!" he cried. "Not but it was printed by and for
themselves, for the Grants and the Erskines, and yon thief of the black
midnight, Symon Fraser. But could _I_ win to get a copy? No! I was to go
blindfold to my defence; I was to hear the charges for the first time in
court alongst the jury."

"Is not this against the law?" I asked.

"I cannot say so much," he replied. "It was a favour so natural and so
constantly rendered (till this nonesuch business) that the law has never
looked to it. And now admire the hand of Providence! A stranger is in
Fleming's printing house, spies a proof on the floor, picks it up, and
carries it to me. Of all things, it was just this libel. Whereupon I had
it set again--printed at the expense of the defence: _sumptibus moesti
rei_; heard ever man the like of it?--and here it is for anybody, the
muckle secret out--all may see it now. But how do you think I would
enjoy this, that has the life of my kinsman on my conscience?"

"Troth, I think you would enjoy it ill," said I.

"And now you see how it is," he concluded, "and why, when you tell me
your evidence is to be let in, I laugh aloud in your face."

It was now my turn. I laid before him in brief Mr. Symon's threats and
offers, and the whole incident of the bravo, with the subsequent scene
at Prestongrange's. Of my first talk, according to promise, I said
nothing, nor indeed was it necessary. All the time I was talking Stewart
nodded his head like a mechanical figure; and no sooner had my voice
ceased, than he opened his mouth and gave me his opinion in two words,
dwelling strong on both of them.

"Disappear yourself," said he.

"I do not take you," said I.

"Then I'll carry you there," said he. "By my view of it you're to
disappear whatever. O, that's outside debate. The Advocate, who is not
without some spunks of a remainder decency, has wrung your life-safe out
of Symon and the Duke. He has refused to put you on your trial, and
refused to have you killed; and there is the clue to their ill words
together, for Symon and the Duke can keep faith with neither friend nor
enemy. Ye're not to be tried then, and ye're not to be murdered; but I'm
in bitter error if ye're not to be kidnapped and carried away like the
Lady Grange. Bet me what you please--there was their _expedient!_"

"You make me think," said I, and told him of the whistle and the
red-headed retainer, Neil.

"Wherever James More is there's one big rogue, never be deceived on
that," said he. "His father was none so ill a man, though a kenning on
the wrong side of the law, and no friend to my family, that I should
waste my breath to be defending him! But as for James he's a brock and a
blagyard. I like the appearing of this red-headed Neil as little as
yourself. It looks uncanny: fiegh! it smells bad. It was old Lovat that
managed the Lady Grange affair, if young Lovat is to handle yours, it'll
be all in the family. What's James More in prison for? The same offence:
abduction. His men have had practice in the business. He'll be to lend
them to be Symon's instruments; and the next thing we'll be hearing,
James will have made his peace, or else he'll have escaped; and you'll
be in Benbecula or Applecross."

"Ye make a strong case," I admitted.

"And what I want," he resumed, "is that you should disappear yourself
ere they can get their hands upon ye. Lie quiet until just before the
trial, and spring upon them at the last of it when they'll be looking
for you least. This is always supposing, Mr. Balfour, that your evidence
is worth so very great a measure of both risk and fash."

"I will tell you one thing," said I. "I saw the murderer and it was not
Alan."

"Then, by God, my cousin's saved!" cried Stewart. "You have his life
upon your tongue; and there's neither time, risk, nor money to be spared
to bring you to the trial." He emptied his pockets on the floor. "Here
is all that I have by me," he went on. "Take it, ye'll want it ere ye're
through. Go straight down this close, there's a way out by there to the
Lang Dykes, and by my will of it! see no more of Edinburgh till the
clash is over."

"Where am I to go, then?" I inquired.

"And I wish that I could tell ye!" says he, "but all the places that I
could send ye to, would be just the places they would seek. No, ye must
fend for yourself, and God be your guiding! Five days before the trial,
September the sixteen, get word to me at the _King's Arms_ in Stirling;
and if ye've managed for yourself as long as that, I'll see that ye
reach Inverary."

"One thing more," said I. "Can I no see Alan?"

He seemed boggled. "Hech, I would rather you wouldnae," said he. "But I
can never deny that Alan is extremely keen of it, and is to lie this
night by Silvermills on purpose. If you're sure that you're not
followed, Mr. Balfour--but make sure of that--lie in a good place and
watch your road for a clear hour before ye risk it. It would be a
dreadful business if both you and him was to miscarry!"

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER X

THE RED-HEADED MAN


It was about half-past three when I came forth on the Lang Dykes. Dean
was where I wanted to go. Since Catriona dwelled there, and the Glengyle
Macgregors appeared almost certainly to be employed against me, it was
just one of the few places I should have kept away from; and being a
very young man, and beginning to be very much in love, I turned my face
in that direction without pause. As a salve to my conscience and common
sense, however, I took a measure of precaution. Coming over the crown of
a bit of a rise in the road, I clapped down suddenly among the barley
and lay waiting. After a while, a man went by that looked to be a
Highlandman, but I had never seen him till that hour. Presently after
came Neil of the red head. The next to go past was a miller's cart, and
after that nothing but manifest country people. Here was enough to have
turned the most foolhardy from his purpose, but my inclination ran too
strong the other way. I argued it out that if Neil was on that road, it
was the right road to find him in, leading direct to his chief's
daughter; as for the other Highlandman, if I was to be startled off by
every Highlandman I saw, I would scarce reach anywhere. And having quite
satisfied myself with this disingenuous debate, I made the better speed
of it, and came a little after four to Mrs. Drummond-Ogilvy's.

Both ladies were within the house; and upon my perceiving them together
by the open door, I plucked off my hat and said, "Here was a lad come
seeking saxpence," which I thought might please the dowager.

Catriona ran out to greet me heartily, and, to my surprise, the old lady
seemed scarce less forward than herself. I learned long afterwards that
she had despatched a horseman by daylight to Rankeillor at the
Queensferry, whom she knew to be the doer for Shaws, and had then in her
pocket a letter from that good friend of mine, presenting, in the most
favourable view, my character and prospects. But had I read it I could
scarce have seen more clear in her designs. Maybe I was _countryfeed_;
at least, I was not so much so as she thought; and it was plain enough,
even to my homespun wits, that she was bent to hammer up a match between
her cousin and a beardless boy that was something of a laird in Lothian.

"Saxpence had better take his broth with us, Catrine," says she. "Run
and tell the lasses."

And for the little while we were alone was at a good deal of pains to
flatter me; always cleverly, always with the appearance of a banter,
still calling me Saxpence, but with such a turn that should rather
uplift me in my own opinion. When Catriona returned the design became if
possible more obvious, and she showed off the girl's advantages like a
horse-couper with a horse. My face flamed that she should think me so
obtuse. Now I would fancy the girl was being innocently made a show of,
and then I could have beaten the old carline wife with a cudgel; and
now, that perhaps these two had set their heads together to entrap me,
and at that I sat and gloomed betwixt them like the very image of
ill-will. At last the matchmaker had a better device, which was to leave
the pair of us alone. When my suspicions are anyway roused it is
sometimes a little the wrong side of easy to allay them. But though I
knew what breed she was of, and that was a breed of thieves, I could
never look in Catriona's face and disbelieve her.

"I must not ask?" says she, eagerly, the same moment we were left alone.

"Ah, but to-day I can talk with a free conscience," I replied. "I am
lightened of my pledge, and indeed (after what has come and gone since
morning) I would not have renewed it were it asked."

"Tell me," she said. "My cousin will not be so long."

So I told her the tale of the lieutenant from the first step to the last
of it, making it as mirthful as I could, and, indeed, there was matter
of mirth in that absurdity.

"And I think you will be as little fitted for the rudas men as for the
pretty ladies, after all!" says she, when I had done. "But what was your
father that he could not learn you to draw the sword? It is most
ungentle; I have not heard the match of that in anyone."

"It is most misconvenient at least," said I; "and I think my father
(honest man!) must have been wool-gathering to learn me Latin in the
place of it. But you see I do the best I can, and just stand up like
Lot's wife and let them hammer at me."

"Do you know what makes me smile?" said she. "Well, it is this. I am
made this way, that I should have been a man child. In my own thoughts
it is so I am always; and I go on telling myself about this thing that
is to befall and that. Then it comes to the place of the fighting, and
it comes over me that I am only a girl at all events, and cannot hold a
sword or give one good blow; and then I have to twist my story round
about, so that the fighting is to stop, and yet me have the best of it,
just like you and the lieutenant; and I am the boy that makes the fine
speeches all through, like Mr. David Balfour."

"You are a bloodthirsty maid," said I.

"Well, I know it is good to sew and spin, and to make samplers," she
said, "but if you were to do nothing else in the great world, I think
you will say yourself it is a driech business; and it is not that I want
to kill, I think. Did ever you kill anyone?"

"That I have, as it chances. Two, no less, and me still a lad that
should be at the college," said I. "But yet, in the look-back, I take no
shame for it."

"But how did you feel, then--after it?" she asked.

"'Deed, I sat down and grat like a bairn," said I.

"I know that, too," she cried. "I feel where these tears should come
from. And at any rate, I would not wish to kill, only to be Catherine
Douglas that put her arm through the staples of the bolt, where it was
broken. That is my chief hero. Would you not love to die so--for your
king?" she asked.

"Troth," said I, "my affection for my king, God bless the puggy face of
him, is under more control; and I thought I saw death so near to me this
day already, that I am rather taken up with the notion of living."

"Right," she said, "the right mind of a man! Only you must learn arms; I
would not like to have a friend that cannot strike. But it will not have
been with the sword that you killed these two?"

"Indeed, no," said I, "but with a pair of pistols. And a fortunate thing
it was the men were so near-hand to me, for I am about as clever with
the pistols as I am with the sword."

So then she drew from me the story of our battle in the brig, which I
had omitted in my first account of my affairs.

"Yes," said she, "you are brave. And your friend, I admire and love
him."

"Well, and I think any one would!" said I. "He has his faults like other
folk; but he is brave and staunch and kind, God bless him! That will be
a strange day when I forget Alan." And the thought of him, and that it
was within my choice to speak with him that night, had almost overcome
me.

"And where will my head be gone that I have not told my news!" she
cried, and spoke of a letter from her father, bearing that she might
visit him to-morrow in the castle whither he was now transferred, and
that his affairs were mending. "You do not like to hear it," said she.
"Will you judge my father and not know him?"

"I am a thousand miles from judging," I replied. "And I give you my word
I do rejoice to know your heart is lightened. If my face fell at all, as
I suppose it must, you will allow this is rather an ill day for
compositions, and the people in power extremely ill persons to be
compounding with. I have Symon Fraser extremely heavy on my stomach
still."

"Ah!" she cried, "you will not be evening these two; and you should bear
in mind that Prestongrange and James More, my father, are of the one
blood."

"I never heard tell of that," said I.

"It is rather singular how little you are acquainted with," said she.
"One part may call themselves Grant, and one Macgregor, but they are
still of the same clan. They are all the sons of Alpin, from whom, I
think, our country has its name."

"What country is that?" I asked.

"My country and yours," said she.

"This is my day for discoveries, I think," said I, "for I always thought
the name of it was Scotland."

"Scotland is the name of what you call Ireland," she replied. "But the
old ancient true name of this place that we have our foot-soles on, and
that our bones are made of, will be Alban. It was Alban they called it
when our forefathers will be fighting for it against Rome and Alexander;
and it is called so still in your own tongue that you forget."

"Troth," said I, "and that I never learned!" For I lacked heart to take
her up about the Macedonian.

"But your fathers and mothers talked it, one generation with another,"
said she. "And it was sung about the cradles before you or me were ever
dreamed of; and your name remembers it still. Ah, if you could talk that
language you would find me another girl. The heart speaks in that
tongue."

I had a meal with the two ladies, all very good, served in fine old
plate, and the wine excellent, for it seems that Mrs. Ogilvy was rich.
Our talk, too, was pleasant enough; but as soon as I saw the sun decline
sharply and the shadows to run out long, I rose to take my leave. For my
mind was now made up to say farewell to Alan; and it was needful I
should see the trysting wood, and reconnoitre it, by daylight. Catriona
came with me as far as to the garden gate.

"It is long till I see you now?" she asked.

"It is beyond my judging," I replied. "It will be long, it may be
never."

"It may be so," said she. "And you are sorry?"

I bowed my head, looking upon her.

"So am I, at all events," said she. "I have seen you but a small time,
but I put you very high. You are true, you are brave; in time I think
you will be more of a man yet. I will be proud to hear of that. If you
should speed worse, if it will come to fall as we are afraid--O well!
think you have the one friend. Long after you are dead and me an old
wife, I will be telling the bairns about David Balfour, and my tears
running. I will be telling how we parted, and what I said to you, and
did to you. _God go with you and guide you, prays your little friend_:
so I said--I will be telling them--and here is what I did."

She took up my hand and kissed it. This so surprised my spirits that I
cried out like one hurt. The colour came strong in her face, and she
looked at me and nodded.

"O yes, Mr. David," said she, "that is what I think of you. The heart
goes with the lips."

I could read in her face high spirit, and a chivalry like a brave
child's; not anything besides. She kissed my hand, as she had kissed
Prince Charlie's, with a higher passion than the common kind of clay has
any sense of. Nothing before had taught me how deep I was her lover, nor
how far I had yet to climb to make her think of me in such a character.
Yet I could tell myself I had advanced some way, and that her heart had
beat and her blood flowed at thoughts of me.

After that honour she had done me I could offer no more trivial
civility. It was even hard for me to speak; a certain lifting in her
voice had knocked directly at the door of my own tears.

"I praise God for your kindness, dear," said I. "Farewell, my little
friend!" giving her that name which she had given to herself; with which
I bowed and left her.

My way was down the glen of the Leith River, towards Stockbridge and
Silvermills. A path led in the foot of it, the water bickered and sang
in the midst; the sunbeams overhead struck out of the west among long
shadows and (as the valley turned) made like a new scene and a new world
of it at every corner. With Catriona behind and Alan before me, I was
like one lifted up. The place besides, and the hour, and the talking of
the water, infinitely pleased me; and I lingered in my steps and looked
before and behind me as I went. This was the cause, under providence,
that I spied a little in my rear a red head among some bushes.

Anger sprang in my heart, and I turned straight about and walked at a
stiff pace to where I came from. The path lay close by the bushes where
I had remarked the head. The cover came to the wayside, and as I passed
I was all strung up to meet and to resist an onfall. No such thing
befell, I went by unmeddled with; and at that fear increased upon me. It
was still day indeed, but the place exceeding solitary. If my haunters
had let slip that fair occasion I could but judge they aimed at
something more than David Balfour. The lives of Alan and James weighed
upon my spirit with the weight of two grown bullocks.

Catriona was yet in the garden walking by herself.

"Catriona," said I, "you see me back again."

"With a changed face," said she.

"I carry two men's lives besides my own," said I. "It would be a sin and
a shame not to walk carefully. I was doubtful whether I did right to
come here. I would like it ill, if it was by that means we were brought
to harm."

"I could tell you one that would be liking it less, and will like little
enough to hear you talking at this very same time," she cried. "What
have I done, at all events?"

"O, you! you are not alone," I replied. "But since I went off I have
been dogged again, and I can give you the name of him that follows me.
It is Neil, son of Duncan, your man or your father's."

"To be sure you are mistaken there," she said, with a white face. "Neil
is in Edinburgh on errands from my father."

"It is what I fear," said I, "the last of it. But for his being in
Edinburgh I think I can show you another of that. For sure you have some
signal, a signal of need, such as would bring him to your help, if he
was anywhere within the reach of ears and legs?"

"Why, how will you know that?" says she.

"By means of a magical talisman God gave to me when I was born, and the
name they call it by is Common-sense," said I. "Oblige me so far as to
make your signal, and I will show you the red head of Neil."

No doubt but I spoke bitter and sharp. My heart was bitter. I blamed
myself and the girl and hated both of us: her for the vile crew that she
was come of, myself for my wanton folly to have stuck my head in such a
byke of wasps.

Catriona set her fingers to her lips and whistled once, with an
exceeding clear, strong, mounting note, as full as a ploughman's. A
while we stood silent; and I was about to ask her to repeat the same,
when I heard the sound of some one bursting through the bushes below on
the braeside. I pointed in that direction with a smile, and presently
Neil leaped into the garden. His eyes burned, and he had a black knife
(as they call it on the Highland side) naked in his hand; but, seeing me
beside his mistress, stood like a man struck.

"He has come to your call," said I; "judge how near he was to Edinburgh,
or what was the nature of your father's errands. Ask himself. If I am to
lose my life, or the lives of those that hang by me, through the means
of your clan, let me go where I have to go with my eyes open."

She addressed him tremulously in the Gaelic. Remembering Alan's anxious
civility in that particular, I could have laughed out loud for
bitterness; here, sure, in the midst of these suspicions, was the hour
she should have stuck by English.

Twice or thrice they spoke together, and I could make out that Neil (for
all his obsequiousness) was an angry man.

Then she turned to me. "He swears it is not," she said.

"Catriona," said I, "do you believe the man yourself?"

She made a gesture like wringing the hands.

"How will I can know?" she cried.

"But I must find some means to know," said I. "I cannot continue to go
dovering round in the black night with two men's lives at my girdle!
Catriona, try to put yourself in my place, as I vow to God I try hard to
put myself in yours. This is no kind of talk that should ever have
fallen between me and you; no kind of talk; my heart is sick with it.
See, keep him here till two of the morning, and I care not. Try him with
that."

They spoke together once more in the Gaelic.

"He says he has James More my father's errand," said she. She was whiter
than ever, and her voice faltered as she said it.

"It is pretty plain now," said I, "and may God forgive the wicked!"

She said never anything to that, but continued gazing at me with the
same white face.

"This is a fine business," said I again. "Am I to fall, then, and those
two along with me?"

"O, what am I to do?" she cried. "Could I go against my father's orders,
and him in prison, in the danger of his life?"

"But perhaps we go too fast," said I. "This may be a lie too. He may
have no right orders; all may be contrived by Symon, and your father
knowing nothing."

She burst out weeping between the pair of us; and my heart smote me
hard, for I thought this girl was in a dreadful situation.

"Here," said I, "keep him but the one hour; and I'll chance it, and say
God bless you."

She put out her hand to me. "I will be needing one good word," she
sobbed.

"The full hour, then?" said I, keeping her hand in mine. "Three lives of
it, my lass!"

"The full hour!" she said, and cried aloud on her Redeemer to forgive
her.

I thought it no fit place for me, and fled.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XI

THE WOOD BY SILVERMILLS


I lost no time, but down through the valley and by Stockbrig and
Silvermills as hard as I could stave. It was Alan's tryst to lie every
night between twelve and two "in a bit scrog of wood by east of
Silvermills and by south the south mill-lade." This I found easy enough,
where it grew on a steep brae, with the mill-lade flowing swift and deep
along the foot of it; and here I began to walk slower and to reflect
more reasonably on my employment. I saw I had made but a fool's bargain
with Catriona. It was not to be supposed that Neil was sent alone upon
his errand, but perhaps he was the only man belonging to James More; in
which case, I should have done all I could to hang Catriona's father,
and nothing the least material to help myself. To tell the truth, I
fancied neither one of these ideas. Suppose, by holding back Neil, the
girl should have helped to hang her father, I thought she would never
forgive herself this side of time. And suppose there were others
pursuing me that moment, what kind of a gift was I come bringing to
Alan? and how would I like that?

I was up with the west end of that wood when these two considerations
struck me like a cudgel. My feet stopped of themselves and my heart
along with them. "What wild game is this that I have been playing?"
thought I; and turned instantly upon my heels to go elsewhere.

This brought my face to Silvermills; the path came past the village with
a crook, but all plainly visible; and, Highland or Lowland, there was
nobody stirring. Here was my advantage, here was just such a conjuncture
as Stewart had counselled me to profit by, and I ran by the side of the
mill-lade, fetched about beyond the east corner of the wood, threaded
through the midst of it, and returned to the west selvage, whence I
could again command the path, and yet be myself unseen. Again it was all
empty, and my heart began to rise.

For more than an hour I sat close in the border of the trees, and no
hare or eagle could have kept a more particular watch. When that hour
began the sun was already set, but the sky still all golden and the
daylight clear; before the hour was done it had fallen to be half mirk,
the images and distances of things were mingled, and observation began
to be difficult. All that time not a foot of man had come east from
Silvermills, and the few that had gone west were honest countryfolk and
their wives upon the road to bed. If I were tracked by the most cunning
spies in Europe, I judged it was beyond the course of nature they could
have any jealousy of where I was; and going a little further home into
the wood I lay down to wait for Alan.

The strain of my attention had been great, for I had watched not the
path only, but every bush and field within my vision. That was now at an
end. The moon, which was in her first quarter, glinted a little in the
wood; all round there was a stillness of the country; and as I lay there
on my back, the next three or four hours, I had a fine occasion to
review my conduct.

Two things became plain to me first: that I had had no right to go that
day to Dean, and (having gone there) had now no right to be lying where
I was. This (where Alan was to come) was just the one wood in all broad
Scotland that was, by every proper feeling, closed against me; I
admitted that, and yet stayed on, wondering at myself. I thought of the
measure with which I had meted to Catriona that same night; how I had
prated of the two lives I carried, and had thus forced her to enjeopardy
her father's; and how I was here exposing them again, it seemed in
wantonness. A good conscience is eight parts of courage. No sooner had I
lost conceit of my behaviour, than I seemed to stand disarmed amidst a
throng of terrors. Of a sudden I sat up. How if I went now to
Prestongrange, caught him (as I still easily might) before he slept, and
made a full submission? Who could blame me? Not Stewart the writer; I
had but to say that I was followed, despaired of getting clear, and so
gave in. Not Catriona: here, too, I had my answer ready; that I could
not bear she should expose her father. So, in a moment, I could lay all
these troubles by, which were after all and truly none of mine; swim
clear of the Appin murder; get forth out of handstroke of all the
Stewarts and Campbells, all the whigs and tories, in the land; and live
thenceforth to my own mind, and be able to enjoy and to improve my
fortunes, and devote some hours of my youth to courting Catriona, which
would be surely a more suitable occupation than to hide and run and be
followed like a hunted thief, and begin over again the dreadful miseries
of my escape with Alan.

At first I thought no shame of this capitulation; I was only amazed I
had not thought upon the thing and done it earlier; and began to inquire
into the causes of the change. These I traced to my lowness of spirits,
that back to my late recklessness, and that again to the common, old,
public, disconsidered sin of self-indulgence. Instantly the text came in
my head, "_How can Satan cast out Satan?_" What? (I thought) I had, by
self-indulgence, and the following of pleasant paths, and the lure of a
young maid, cast myself wholly out of conceit with my own character, and
jeopardised the lives of James and Alan? And I was to seek the way out
by the same road as I had entered in? No; the hurt that had been caused
by self-indulgence must be cured by self-denial; the flesh I had
pampered must be crucified. I looked about me for that course which I
least liked to follow: this was to leave the wood without waiting to see
Alan, and go forth again alone, in the dark and in the midst of my
perplexed and dangerous fortunes.

I have been the more careful to narrate this passage of my reflections,
because I think it is of some utility, and may serve as an example to
young men. But there is reason (they say) in planting kale, and even in
ethic and religion, room for common sense. It was already close on
Alan's hour, and the moon was down. If I left (as I could not very
decently whistle to my spies to follow me) they might miss me in the
dark and tack themselves to Alan by mistake. If I stayed, I could at the
least of it set my friend upon his guard which might prove his mere
salvation. I had adventured other peoples' safety in a course of
self-indulgence; to have endangered them again, and now on a mere design
of penance, would have been scarce rational. Accordingly, I had scarce
risen from my place ere I sat down again, but already in a different
frame of spirits, and equally marvelling at my past weakness and
rejoicing in my present composure.

Presently after came a crackling in the thicket. Putting my mouth near
down to the ground, I whistled a note or two of Alan's air; an answer
came, in the like guarded tone, and soon we had thralled together in the
dark.

"Is this you at last, Davie?" he whispered.

"Just myself," said I.

"God, man, but I've been wearying to see ye!" says he. "I've had the
longest kind of a time. A' day, I've had my dwelling into the inside of
a stack of hay, where I couldnae see the nebs of my ten fingers; and
then two hours of it waiting here for you, and you never coming! Dod,
and ye're none too soon the way it is, with me to sail the morn! The
morn? what am I saying?--the day, I mean."

"Ay, Alan, man, the day, sure enough," said I. "It's past twelve now,
surely, and ye sail the day. This'll be a long road you have before
you."

"We'll have a long crack of it first," said he.

"Well, indeed, and I have a good deal it will be telling you to hear,"
said I.

And I told him what behooved, making rather a jumble of it, but clear
enough when done. He heard me out with very few questions, laughing here
and there like a man delighted: and the sound of his laughing (above all
there, in the dark, where neither one of us could see the other) was
extraordinary friendly to my heart.

"Ay, Davie, ye're a queer character," says he, when I had done: "a queer
bitch after a', and I have no mind of meeting with the like of ye. As
for your story, Prestongrange is a Whig like yoursel', so I'll say the
less of him; and, dod! I believe he was the best friend ye had, if ye
could only trust him. But Symon Fraser and James More are my ain kind of
cattle, and I'll give them the name that they deserve. The muckle black
de'il was father to the Frasers, a'body kens that; and as for the
Gregara, I never could abye the reek of them since I could stotter on
two feet. I bloodied the nose of one, I mind, when I was still so wambly
on my legs that I cowped upon the top of him. A proud man was my father
that day, God rest him! and I think he had the cause. I'll never can
deny but what Robin was something of a piper," he added; "but as for
James More, the de'il guide him for me!"

"One thing we have to consider," said I. "Was Charles Stewart right or
wrong? Is it only me they're after, or the pair of us?"

"And what's your ain opinion, you that's a man of so much experience?"
said he.

"It passes me," said I.

"And me too," says Alan. "Do ye think this lass would keep her word to
ye?" he asked.

"I do that," said I.

"Well, there's nae telling," said he. "And anyway, that's over and done:
he'll be joined to the rest of them lang syne."

"How many would ye think there would be of them?" I asked.

"That depends," said Alan. "If it was only you, they would likely send
two-three lively, brisk young birkies, and if they thought that I was to
appear in the employ, I daresay ten or twelve," said he.

It was no use, I gave a little crack of laughter.

"And I think your own two eyes will have seen me drive that number, or
the double of it, nearer hand!" cries he.

"It matters the less," said I, "because I am well rid of them for this
time."

"Nae doubt that's your opinion," said he; "but I wouldnae be the least
surprised if they were hunkering this wood. Ye see, David man, they'll
be Hieland folk. There'll be some Frasers, I'm thinking, and some of the
Gregara; and I would never deny but what the both of them, and the
Gregara in especial, were clever experienced persons. A man kens little
till he's driven a spreagh of neat cattle (say) ten miles through a
throng lowland country and the black soldiers maybe at his tail. It's
there that I learned a great part of my penetration. And ye need nae
tell me: it's better than war; which is the next best, however, though
generally rather a bauchle of a business. Now the Gregara have had grand
practice."

"No doubt that's a branch of education that was left out with me," said
I.

"And I can see the marks of it upon ye constantly," said Alan. "But
that's the strange thing about you folk of the college learning: ye're
ignorant, and ye cannae see 't. Wae's me for my Greek and Hebrew; but,
man, I ken that I dinnae ken them--there's the differ of it. Now, here's
you. Ye lie on your wame a bittie in the bield of this wood, and ye tell
me that ye've cuist off these Frasers and Macgregors. Why! _Because I
couldnae see them_, says you. Ye blockhead, that's their livelihood."

"Take the worst of it," said I, "and what are we to do?"

"I am thinking of that same," said he. "We might twine. It wouldnae be
greatly to my taste; and forbye that, I see reasons against it. First,
it's now unco dark, and it's just humanly possible we might give them
the clean slip. If we keep together, we make but the ae line of it; if
we gang separate, we make twae of them: the more likelihood to stave in
upon some of these gentry of yours. And then, second, if they keep the
track of us, it may come to a fecht for it yet, Davie; and then, I'll
confess I would be blythe to have you at my oxter, and I think you would
be none the worse of having me at yours. So, by my way of it, we should
creep out of this wood no further gone than just the inside of next
minute, and hold away east for Gillane, where I'm to find my ship. It'll
be like old days while it lasts, Davie; and (come the time) we'll have
to think what you should be doing. I'm wae to leave ye here, wanting
me."

"Have with ye, then!" says I. "Do ye gang back where you were stopping."

"De'il a fear!" said Alan. "They were good folks to me, but I think they
would be a good deal disappointed if they saw my bonny face again. For
(the way times go) I amnae just what ye could call a Walcome Guest.
Which makes me the keener for your company, Mr. David Balfour of the
Shaws, and set ye up! For, leave aside twa cracks here in the wood with
Charlie Stewart, I have scarce said black or white since the day we
parted at Corstorphine."

With which he rose from his place, and we began to move quietly eastward
through the wood.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XII

ON THE MARCH AGAIN WITH ALAN


It was likely between one and two; the moon (as I have said) was down; a
strongish wind, carrying a heavy wrack of cloud, had set in suddenly
from the west; and we began our movement in as black a night as ever a
fugitive or a murderer wanted. The whiteness of the path guided us into
the sleeping town of Broughton, thence through Picardy, and beside my
old acquaintance the gibbet of the two thieves. A little beyond we made
a useful beacon, which was a light in an upper window of Lochend.
Steering by this, but a good deal at random, and with some trampling of
the harvest, and stumbling and falling down upon the banks, we made our
way across country, and won forth at last upon the linky, boggy muirland
that they call the Figgate Whins. Here, under a bush of whin, we lay
down the remainder of that night and slumbered.

The day called us about five. A beautiful morning it was, the high
westerly wind still blowing strong, but the clouds all blown away to
Europe. Alan was already sitting up and smiling to himself. It was my
first sight of my friend since we were parted, and I looked upon him
with enjoyment. He had still the same big great-coat on his back; but
(what was new) he had now a pair of knitted boot-hose drawn above the
knee. Doubtless these were intended for disguise; but, as the day
promised to be warm, he made a most unseasonable figure.

"Well, Davie," said he, "is this no a bonny morning? Here is a day that
looks the way that a day ought to. This is a great change of it from the
belly of my haystack; and while you were there sottering and sleeping I
have done a thing that maybe I do over seldom."

"And what was that?" said I.

"O, just said my prayers," said he.

"And where are my gentry, as ye call them?" I asked.

"Gude kens," says he; "and the short and the long of it is that we must
take our chance of them. Up with your foot-soles, Davie! Forth, Fortune,
once again of it! And a bonny walk we are like to have."

So we went east by the beach of the sea, towards where the salt-pans
were smoking in by the Esk mouth. No doubt there was a by-ordinary bonny
blink of morning sun on Arthur's Seat and the green Pentlands; and the
pleasantness of the day appeared to set Alan among nettles.

"I feel like a gomeral," says he, "to be leaving Scotland on a day like
this. It sticks in my head; I would maybe like it better to stay here
and hing."

"Ay, but ye wouldnae, Alan," said I.

"No but what France is a good place too," he explained; "but it's some
way no the same. It's brawer, I believe, but it's no Scotland. I like it
fine when I'm there, man; yet I kind of weary for Scots divots and the
Scots peat-reek."

"If that's all you have to complain of, Alan, it's no such great
affair," said I.

"And it sets me ill to be complaining, whatever," said he, "and me but
new out of yon de'il's haystack."

"And so you were unco' weary of your haystack?" I asked.

"Weary's nae word for it," said he. "I'm not just precisely a man that's
easily cast down; but I do better with caller air and the lift above my
head. I'm like the auld Black Douglas (wasnae't?) that likit better to
hear the laverock sing than the mouse cheep. And yon place, ye see,
Davie--whilk was a very suitable place to hide in, as I'm free to
own--was pit mirk from dawn to gloaming. There were days (or nights, for
how would I tell one from other?) that seemed to me as long as a long
winter."

"How did you know the hour to bide your tryst?" I asked.

"The goodman brought me my meat and a drop brandy, and a candle-dowp to
eat it by, about eleeven," said he. "So, when I had swallowed a bit, it
would be time to be getting to the wood. There I lay and wearied for ye
sore, Davie," says he, laying his hand on my shoulder, "and guessed when
the two hours would be about by--unless Charlie Stewart would come and
tell me on his watch--and then back to the dooms haystack. Na, it was a
driech employ, and praise the Lord that I have warstled through with
it!"

"What did you do with yourself?" I asked.

"Faith," said he, "the best I could! Whiles I played at the
knucklebones. I'm an extraordinar good hand at the knucklebones, but
it's a poor piece of business playing with naebody to admire ye. And
whiles I would make songs."

"What were they about?" says I.

"O, about the deer and the heather," says he, "and about the ancient old
chiefs that are all by with it long syne, and just about what songs are
about in general. And then whiles I would make believe I had a set of
pipes and I was playing. I played some grand springs, and I thought I
played them awful bonny; I vow whiles that I could hear the squeal of
them! But the great affair is that it's done with."

With that he carried me again to my adventures, which he heard all over
again with more particularity, and extraordinary approval, swearing at
intervals that I was "a queer character of a callant."

"So ye were frich'ened of Sym Fraser?" he asked once.

"In troth was I!" cried I.

"So would I have been, Davie," said he. "And that is indeed a dreidful
man. But it is only proper to give the de'il his due; and I can tell you
he is a most respectable person on the field of war."

"Is he so brave?" I asked.

"Brave!" said he. "He is as brave as my steel sword."

The story of my duel set him beside himself.

"To think of that!" he cried. "I showed ye the trick in Corrynakiegh
too. And three times--three times disarmed! It's a disgrace upon my
character that learned ye! Here, stand up, out with your airn; ye shall
walk no step beyond this place upon the road till ye can do yoursel' and
me mair credit."

"Alan," said I, "this is midsummer madness. Here is no time for fencing
lessons."

"I cannae well say no to that," he admitted. "But three times, man! And
you standing there like a straw bogle and rinning to fetch your ain
sword like a doggie with a pocket-napkin! David, this man Duncansby must
be something altogether by-ordinar! He maun be extraordinar skilly. If I
had the time, I would gang straight back and try a turn at him mysel'.
The man must be a provost."

"You silly fellow," said I, "you forget it was just me."

"Na," said he, "but three times!"

"When ye ken yourself that I am fair incompetent," I cried.

"Well, I never heard tell the equal of it," said he.

"I promise you the one thing, Alan," said I. "The next time that we
forgather, I'll be better learned. You shall not continue to bear the
disgrace of a friend that cannot strike."

"Ay, the next time!" says he. "And when will that be, I would like to
ken?"

"Well, Alan, I have had some thoughts of that, too," said I; "and my
plan is this. It's my opinion to be called an advocate."

"That's but a weary trade, Davie," says Alan, "and rather a blagyard one
forby. Ye would be better in a king's coat than that."

"And no doubt that would be the way to have us meet," cried I. "But as
you'll be in King Lewie's coat, and I'll be in King Geordie's, we'll
have a dainty meeting of it."

"There's some sense in that," he admitted.

"An advocate, then, it'll have to be," I continued, "and I think it a
more suitable trade for a gentleman that was _three times_ disarmed. But
the beauty of the thing is this: that one of the best colleges for that
kind of learning--and the one where my kinsman, Pilrig, made his
studies--is the college of Leyden in Holland. Now, what say you, Alan?
Could not a cadet of _Royal Ecossais_ get a furlough, slip over the
marches, and call in upon a Leyden student!"

"Well, and I would think he could!" cried he. "Ye see, I stand well in
with my colonel, Count Drummond-Melfort; and, what's mair to the
purpose, I have a cousin of mine lieutenant-colonel in a regiment of the
Scots-Dutch. Naething could be mair proper than what I would get a leave
to see Lieutenant-Colonel Stewart of Halkett's. And Lord Melfort, who is
a very scienteefic kind of a man, and writes books like Csar, would be
doubtless very pleased to have the advantage of my observes."

"Is Lord Melfort an author, then?" I asked, for much as Alan thought of
soldiers, I thought more of the gentry that write books.

"The very same, Davie," said he. "One would think a colonel would have
something better to attend to. But what can I say that make songs?"

"Well, then," said I, "it only remains you should give me an address to
write you at in France; and as soon as I am got to Leyden I will send
you mine."

"The best will be to write me in the care of my chieftain," said he,
"Charles Stewart, of Ardsheil, Esquire, at the town of Melons, in the
Isle of France. It might take long, or it might take short, but it would
aye get to my hands at the last of it."

We had a haddock to our breakfast in Musselburgh, where it amused me
vastly to hear Alan. His great-coat and boot-hose were extremely
remarkable this warm morning, and perhaps some hint of an explanation
had been wise; but Alan went into that matter like a business, or I
should rather say, like a diversion. He engaged the goodwife of the
house with some compliments upon the rizzoring of our haddocks; and the
whole of the rest of our stay held her in talk about a cold he had taken
on his stomach, gravely relating all manner of symptoms and sufferings,
and hearing with a vast show of interest all the old wives' remedies she
could supply him with in return.

We left Musselburgh before the first ninepenny coach was due from
Edinburgh, for (as Alan said) that was a rencounter we might very well
avoid. The wind, although still high, was very mild, the sun shone
strong, and Alan began to suffer in proportion. From Prestonpans he had
me aside to the field of Gladsmuir, where he exerted himself a great
deal more than needful to describe the stages of the battle. Thence, at
his old round pace, we travelled to Cockenzie. Though they were building
herring-busses there at Mrs. Cadell's, it seemed a desert-like,
back-going town, about half full of ruined houses; but the ale-house was
clean, and Alan, who was now in a glowing heat, must indulge himself
with a bottle of ale, and carry on to the new luckie with the old story
of the cold upon his stomach, only now the symptoms were all different.

I sat listening; and it came in my mind that I had scarce ever heard him
address three serious words to any woman, but he was always drolling and
fleering and making a private mock of them, and yet brought to that
business a remarkable degree of energy and interest. Something to this
effect I remarked to him, when the good wife (as chanced) was called
away.

"What do ye want?" says he. "A man should aye put his best foot forrit
with the womenkind; he should aye give them a bit of a story to divert
them, the poor lambs! It's what ye should learn to attend to, David; ye
should get the principles, it's like a trade. Now, if this had been a
young lassie, or onyways bonnie, she would never have heard tell of my
stomach, Davie. But aince they're too old to be seeking joes, they a'
set up to be apotecaries. Why? What do I ken? They'll be just the way
God made them, I suppose. But I think a man would be a gomeral that
didnae give his attention to the same."

And here, the luckie coming back, he turned from me as if with
impatience to renew their former conversation. The lady had branched
some while before from Alan's stomach to the case of a goodbrother of
her own in Aberlady, whose last sickness and demise she was describing
at extraordinary length. Sometimes it was merely dull, sometimes both
dull and awful, for she talked with unction. The upshot was that I fell
in a deep muse, looking forth of the window on the road, and scarce
marking what I saw. Presently had any been looking they might have seen
me to start.

"We pit a fomentation to his feet," the goodwife was saying, "and a het
stane to his wame, and we gied him hyssop and water of pennyroyal, and
fine, clean balsam of sulphur for the hoast...."

"Sir," says I, cutting very quietly in, "there's a friend of mine gone
by the house."

"Is that e'en sae?" replies Alan, as though it were a thing of
small-account. And then, "Ye were saying, mem?" says he; and the
wearyful wife went on.

Presently, however, he paid her with a half-crown piece, and she must go
forth after the change.

"Was it him with the red head?" asked Alan.

"Ye have it," said I.

"What did I tell you in the wood?" he cried. "And yet it's strange he
should be here too! Was he his lane?"

"His lee-lane for what I could see," said I.

"Did he gang by?" he asked.

"Straight by," said I, "and looked neither to the right nor left."

"And that's queerer yet," said Alan. "It sticks in my mind, Davie, that
we should be stirring. But where to?--deil hae't! This is like old days
fairly," cries he.

"There is one big differ, though," said I, "that now we have money in
our pockets."

"And another big differ, Mr. Balfour," says he, "that now we have dogs
at our tail. They're on the scent; they're in full cry, David. It's a
bad business and be damned to it." And he sat thinking hard with a look
of his that I knew well.

"I'm saying, Luckie," says he, when the goodwife returned, "have ye a
back road out of this change house?"

She told him there was and where it led to.

"Then, sir," says he to me, "I think that will be the shortest road for
us. And here's good-bye to ye, my braw woman; and I'll no forget thon of
the cinnamon water."

We went out by way of the woman's kale yard, and up a lane among fields.
Alan looked sharply to all sides, and seeing we were in a little hollow
place of the country, out of view of men, sat down.

"Now for a council of war, Davie," said he. "But first of all, a bit
lesson to ye. Suppose that I had been like you, what would yon old wife
have minded of the pair of us? Just that we had gone out by the back
gate. And what does she mind now? A fine, canty, friendly, cracky man,
that suffered with the stomach, poor body! and was real ta'en up about
the goodbrother. O man, David, try and learn to have some kind of
intelligence!"

"I'll try, Alan," said I.

"And now for him of the red head," says he; "was he gaun fast or slow?"

"Betwixt and between," said I.

"No kind of a hurry about the man?" he asked.

"Never a sign of it," said I.

"Nhm!" said Alan, "it looks queer. We saw nothing of them this morning
on the Whins; he's passed us by, he doesnae seem to be looking, and yet
here he is on our road! Dod, Davie, I begin to take a notion. I think
it's no you they're seeking, I think it's me; and I think they ken fine
where they're gaun."

"They ken?" I asked.

"I think Andie Scougal's sold me--him or his mate wha kent some part of
the affair--or else Chairlie's clerk callant, which would be a pity
too," says Alan; "and if you askit me for just my inward private
conviction, I think there'll be heads cracked on Gillane sands."

"Alan," I cried, "if you're at all right there'll be folk there and to
spare. It'll be small service to crack heads."

"It would aye be a satisfaction though," says Alan. "But bide a bit,
bide a bit; I'm thinking--and thanks to this bonny westland wind, I
believe I've still a chance of it. It's this way, Davie. I'm no trysted
with this man Scougal till the gloaming comes. _But_," says he, "_if I
can get a bit of a wind out of the west I'll be there long or that_," he
says, "_and lie-to for ye behind the Isle of Fidra_. Now if your gentry
kens the place, they ken the time forbye. Do ye see me coming, Davie?
Thanks to Johnnie Cope and other red-coat gomerals, I should ken this
country like the back of my hand; and if ye're ready for another bit run
with Alan Breck, we'll can cast back inshore, and come down to the
seaside again by Dirleton. If the ship's there, we'll try and get on
board of her. If she's no there, I'll just have to get back to my weary
haystack. But either way of it, I think we will leave your gentry
whistling on their thumbs."

"I believe there's some chance in it," said I. "Have on with ye, Alan!"

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XIII

GILLANE SANDS


I did not profit by Alan's pilotage as he had done by his marchings
under General Cope; for I can scarce tell what way we went. It is my
excuse that we travelled exceeding fast. Some part we ran, some trotted,
and the rest walked at a vengeance of a pace. Twice, while we were at
top speed, we ran against country-folk; but though we plumped into the
first from round a corner, Alan was as ready as a loaded musket.

"Hae ye seen my horse?" he gasped.

"Na, man, I haenae seen nae horse the day," replied the countryman.

And Alan spared the time to explain to him that we were travelling "ride
and tie"; that our charger had escaped, and it was feared he had gone
home to Linton. Not only that, but he expended some breath (of which he
had not very much left) to curse his own misfortune and my stupidity
which was said to be its cause.

"Them that cannae tell the truth," he observed to myself as we went on
again, "should be aye mindfu' to leave an honest, handy lee behind them.
If folk dinnae ken what ye're doing, Davie, they're terrible taken up
with it; but if they think they ken, they care nae mair for it than what
I do for pease porridge."

As we had first made inland, so our road came in the end to lie very
near due north; the old Kirk of Aberlady for a landmark on the left; on
the right, the top of the Berwick Law; and it was thus we struck the
shore again, not far from Dirleton. From North Berwick west to Gillane
Ness there runs a string of four small islets, Craiglieth, the Lamb,
Fidra, and Eyebrough, notable by their diversity of size and shape.
Fidra is the most particular, being a strange grey islet of two humps,
made the more conspicuous by a piece of ruin; and I mind that (as we
drew closer to it) by some door or window of these ruins the sea peeped
through like a man's eye. Under the lee of Fidra there is a good
anchorage in westerly winds, and there, from a far way off, we could see
the _Thistle_ riding.

The shore in face of these islets is altogether waste. Here is no
dwelling of man, and scarce any passage, or at most of vagabond children
running at their play. Gillane is a small place on the far side of the
Ness, the folk of Dirleton go to their business in the inland fields,
and those of North Berwick straight to the sea-fishing from their haven;
so that few parts of the coast are lonelier. But I mind, as we crawled
upon our bellies into that multiplicity of heights and hollows, keeping
a bright eye upon all sides, and our hearts hammering at our ribs, there
was such a shining of the sun and the sea, such a stir of the wind in
the bent grass, and such a bustle of down-popping rabbits and up-flying
gulls, that the desert seemed to me like a place alive. No doubt it was
in all ways well chosen for a secret embarcation, if the secret had been
kept; and even now that it was out, and the place watched, we were able
to creep unperceived to the front of the sandhills, where they look down
immediately on the beach and sea.

But here Alan came to a full stop.

"Davie," said he, "this is a kittle passage! As long as we lie here
we're safe; but I'm nane sae muckle nearer to my ship or the coast of
France. And as soon as we stand up and signal the brig, it's another
matter. For where will your gentry be, think ye?"

"Maybe they're no come yet," said I. "And even if they are, there's one
clear matter in our favour. They'll be all arranged to take us, that's
true. But they'll have arranged for our coming from the east, and here
we are upon their west."

"Ay," says Alan, "I wish we were in some force, and this was a battle,
we would have bonnily out-manoeuvred them! But it isnae, Davit; and the
way it is, is a wee thing less inspiring to Alan Breck. I swither,
Davie."

"Time flies, Alan," said I.

"I ken that," said Alan. "I ken naething else, as the French folk say.
But this is a dreidful case of heids or tails. O! if I could but ken
where your gentry were!"

"Alan," said I, "this is no like you. It's got to be now or never."

    "This is no me, quo' he,"

sang Alan, with a queer face betwixt shame and drollery.

    "Neither you nor me, quo' he, neither you nor me,
    Wow, na, Johnnie man! neither you nor me."

And then of a sudden he stood straight up where he was, and with a
handkerchief flying in his right hand, marched down upon the beach. I
stood up myself, but lingered behind him, scanning the sandhills to the
east. His appearance was at first unremarked: Scougal not expecting him
so early, and _my gentry_ watching on the other side. Then they awoke on
board the _Thistle_, and it seemed they had all in readiness, for there
was scarce a second's bustle on the deck before we saw a skiff put round
her stern and begin to pull lively for the coast. Almost at the same
moment of time, and perhaps half a mile away towards Gillane Ness, the
figure of a man appeared for a blink upon a sandhill, waving with his
arms; and though he was gone again in the same flash, the gulls in that
part continued a little longer to fly wild.

Alan had not seen this, looking straight to seaward at the ship and
skiff.

"It maun be as it will!" said he, when I had told him. "Weel may yon
boatie row, or my craig'll have to thole a raxing."

That part of the beach was long and flat, and excellent walking when the
tide was down; a little cressy burn flowed over it in one place to the
sea; and the sandhills ran along the head of it like the rampart of a
town. No eye of ours could spy what was passing behind there in the
bents, no hurry of ours could mend the speed of the boat's coming: time
stood still with us through that uncanny period of waiting.

"There is one thing I would like to ken," says Alan. "I would like fine
to ken these gentry's orders. We're worth four hunner pound the pair of
us: how if they took the guns to us, Davie? They would get a bonny shot
from the top of that lang sandy bank."

"Morally impossible," said I. "The point is that they can have no guns.
This thing has been gone about too secret; pistols they may have, but
never guns."

"I believe ye'll be in the right," says Alan. "For all which I am
wearying a good deal for yon boat."

And he snapped his fingers and whistled to it like a dog.

It was now perhaps a third of the way in, and we ourselves already hard
on the margin of the sea, so that the soft sand rose over my shoes.
There was no more to do whatever but to wait, to look as much as we were
able at the creeping nearer of the boat, and as little as we could
manage at the long impenetrable front of the sandhills, over which the
gulls twinkled and behind which our enemies were doubtless marshalling.

"This is a fine, bright, caller place to get shot in," says Alan,
suddenly; "and, man, I wish that I had your courage!"

"Alan!" I cried, "what kind of talk is this of it? You're just made of
courage; it's the character of the man, as I could prove myself if there
was nobody else."

"And you would be the more mistaken," said he. "What makes the differ
with me is just my great penetration and knowledge of affairs. But for
auld, cauld, dour, deidly courage, I am not fit to hold a candle to
yourself. Look at us two here upon the sands. Here am I, fair hotching
to be off; here's you (for all that I ken) in two minds of it whether
you'll no stop. Do you think that I could do that, or would? No me!
Firstly, because I havenae got the courage and wouldnae daur; and
secondly, because I am a man of so much penetration and would see ye
damned first."

"It's there ye're coming, is it?" I cried. "Ah, man Alan, you can wile
your old wives, but you never can wile me."

Remembrance of my temptation in the wood made me strong as iron.

"I have a tryst to keep," I continued. "I am trysted with your cousin
Charlie; I have passed my word."

"Braw trysts that you'll can keep," said Alan. "Ye'll just mistryst
aince and for a' with the gentry in the bents. And what for?" he went on
with an extreme threatening gravity. "Just tell me that, my mannie! Are
ye to be speerited away like Lady Grange? Are they to drive a dirk in
your inside and bury ye in the bents? Or is it to be the other way, and
are they to bring ye in with James? Are they folk to be trustit? Would
ye stick your head in the mouth of Sim Fraser and the ither Whigs?" he
added with extraordinary bitterness.

"Alan," cried I, "they're all rogues and liars, and I'm with ye there.
The more reason there should be one decent man in such a land of
thieves! My word is passed, and I'll stick to it. I said long syne to
your kinswoman that I would stumble at no risk. Do ye mind of that?--the
night Red Colin fell, it was. No more I will, then. Here I stop.
Prestongrange promised me my life; if he's to be mansworn, here I'll
have to die."

"Aweel, aweel," said Alan.

All this time we had seen or heard no more of our pursuers. In truth we
had caught them unawares; their whole party (as I was to learn
afterwards) had not yet reached the scene; what there was of them was
spread among the bents towards Gillane. It was quite an affair to call
them in and bring them over, and the boat was making speed. They were
besides but cowardly fellows: a mere leash of Highland cattle thieves,
of several clans, no gentleman there to be the captain: and the more
they looked at Alan and me upon the beach, the less (I must suppose)
they liked the looks of us.

Whoever had betrayed Alan it was not the captain: he was in the skiff
himself, steering and stirring up his oarsmen, like a man with his heart
in his employ. Already he was near in, and the boat scouring--already
Alan's face had flamed crimson with the excitement of his deliverance,
when our friends in the bents, either in despair to see their prey
escape them or with some hope of scaring Andie, raised suddenly a shrill
cry of several voices.

This sound, arising from what appeared to be a quite deserted coast, was
really very daunting, and the men in the boat held water instantly.

"What's this of it?" sings out the captain, for he was come within an
easy hail.

"Freens o' mine," says Alan, and began immediately to wade forth in the
shallow water towards the boat. "Davie," he said, pausing, "Davie, are
ye no coming? I am swier to leave ye."

"Not a hair of me," said I.

He stood part of a second where he was to his knees in the salt water,
hesitating.

"He that will to Cupar, maun to Cupar," said he, and swashing in deeper
than his waist, was hauled into the skiff, which was immediately
directed for the ship.

I stood where he had left me, with my hands behind my back; Alan sat
with his head turned watching me; and the boat drew smoothly away. Of a
sudden I came the nearest hand to shedding tears, and seemed to myself
the most deserted, solitary lad in Scotland. With that I turned my back
upon the sea and faced the sand hills. There was no sight or sound of
man; the sun shone on the wet sand and the dry, the wind blew in the
bents, the gulls made a dreary piping. As I passed higher up the beach,
the sand-lice were hopping nimbly about the stranded tangles. The devil
any other sight or sound in that unchancy place. And yet I knew there
were folk there, observing me, upon some secret purpose. They were no
soldiers, or they would have fallen on and taken us ere now; doubtless
they were some common rogues hired for my undoing, perhaps to kidnap,
perhaps to murder me outright. From the position of those engaged, the
first was the more likely; from what I knew of their character and
ardency in this business, I thought the second very possible; and the
blood ran cold about my heart.

I had a mad idea to loosen my sword in the scabbard; for though I was
very unfit to stand up like a gentleman blade to blade, I thought I
could do some scathe in a random combat. But I perceived in time the
folly of resistance. This was no doubt the joint "expedient" on which
Prestongrange and Fraser were agreed. The first, I was very sure, had
done something to secure my life; the second was pretty likely to have
slipped in some contrary hints into the ears of Neil and his companions;
and if I were to show bare steel I might play straight into the hands of
my worst enemy and seal my own doom.

These thoughts brought me to the head of the beach. I cast a look
behind, the boat was nearing the brig, and Alan flew his handkerchief
for a farewell, which I replied to with the waving of my hand. But Alan
himself was shrunk to a small thing in my view, alongside of this pass
that lay in front of me. I set my hat hard on my head, clenched my
teeth, and went right before me up the face of the sand-wreath. It made
a hard climb, being steep, and the sand like water underfoot. But I
caught hold at last by the long bent grass on the brae-top, and pulled
myself to a good footing. The same moment men stirred and stood up here
and there, six or seven of them, ragged-like knaves, each with a dagger
in his hand. The fair truth is, I shut my eyes and prayed. When I opened
them again, the rogues were crept the least thing nearer without speech
or hurry. Every eye was upon mine, which struck me with a strange
sensation of their brightness, and of the fear with which they continued
to approach me. I held out my hands empty: whereupon one asked, with a
strong Highland brogue, if I surrendered.

"Under protest," said I, "if ye ken what that means, which I misdoubt."

At that word, they came all in upon me like a flight of birds upon a
carrion, seized me, took my sword, and all the money from my pockets,
bound me hand and foot with some strong line, and cast me on a tussock
of bent. There they sat about their captive in a part of a circle and
gazed upon him silently like something dangerous, perhaps a lion or a
tiger on the spring. Presently this attention was relaxed. They drew
nearer together, fell to speech in the Gaelic, and very cynically
divided my property before my eyes. It was my diversion in this time
that I could watch from my place the progress of my friend's escape. I
saw the boat come to the brig and be hoisted in, the sails fill, and the
ship pass out seaward behind the isles and by North Berwick.

In the course of two hours or so, more and more ragged Highlandmen kept
collecting, Neil among the first, until the party must have numbered
near a score. With each new arrival there was a fresh bout of talk, that
sounded like complaints and explanations; but I observed one thing, none
of those that came late had any share in the division of my spoils. The
last discussion was very violent and eager, so that once I thought they
would have quarrelled; on the heels of which their company parted, the
bulk of them returning westward in a troop, and only three, Neil and two
others, remaining sentries on the prisoner.

"I could name one who would be very ill pleased with your day's work,
Neil Duncanson," said I, when the rest had moved away.

He assured me in answer I should be tenderly used, for he knew he was
"acquent wi' the leddy."

This was all our talk, nor did any other son of man appear upon that
portion of the coast until the sun had gone down among the Highland
mountains, and the gloaming was beginning to grow dark. At which hour I
was aware of a long, lean, bony-like Lothian man of a very swarthy
countenance, that came towards us among the bents on a farm horse.

"Lads," cried he, "hae ye a paper like this?" and held up one in his
hand. Neil produced a second, which the new comer studied through a pair
of horn spectacles, and saying all was right and we were the folk he was
seeking, immediately dismounted. I was then set in his place, my feet
tied under the horse's belly, and we set forth under the guidance of the
Lowlander. His path must have been very well chosen, for we met but one
pair--a pair of lovers--the whole way, and these, perhaps taking us to
be free-traders, fled on our approach. We were at one time close at the
foot of Berwick Law on the south side; at another, as we passed over
some open hills, I spied the lights of a clachan and the old tower of a
church among some trees not far off, but too far to cry for help, if I
had dreamed of it. At last we came again within sound of the sea. There
was moonlight, though not much; and by this I could see the three huge
towers and broken battlements of Tantallon, that old chief place of the
Red Douglases. The horse was picketed in the bottom of the ditch to
graze, and I was led within, and forth into the court, and thence into a
tumble-down stone hall. Here my conductors built a brisk fire in the
midst of the pavement, for there was a chill in the night. My hands were
loosed, I was set by the wall in the inner end, and (the Lowlander
having produced provisions) I was given oatmeal bread and a pitcher of
French brandy. This done, I was left once more alone with my three
Highlandmen. They sat close by the fire drinking and talking; the wind
blew in by the breaches, cast about the smoke and flames, and sang in
the tops of the towers; I could hear the sea under the cliffs, and my
mind being reassured as to my life, and my body and spirits wearied with
the day's employment, I turned upon one side and slumbered.

I had no means of guessing at what hour I was wakened, only the moon was
down and the fire low. My feet were now loosed, and I was carried
through the ruins and down the cliff-side by a precipitous path to where
I found a fisher's boat in a haven of the rocks. This I was had on board
of, and we began to put forth from the shore in a fine starlight.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XIV

THE BASS


I had no thought where they were taking me; only looked here and there
for the appearance of a ship; and there ran the while in my head a word
of Ransome's--the _twenty-pounders_. If I were to be exposed a second
time to that same former danger of the plantations, I judged it must
turn ill with me; there was no second Alan, and no second shipwreck and
spare yard to be expected now; and I saw myself hoe tobacco under the
whip's lash. The thought chilled me; the air was sharp upon the water,
the stretchers of the boat drenched with a cold dew; and I shivered in
my place beside the steersman. This was the dark man whom I have called
hitherto the Lowlander; his name was Dale, ordinarily called Black
Andie. Feeling the thrill of my shiver, he very kindly handed me a rough
jacket full of fish-scales, with which I was glad to cover myself.

"I thank you for this kindness," said I, "and will make so free as to
repay it with a warning. You take a high responsibility in this affair.
You are not like these ignorant, barbarous Highlanders, but know what
the law is and the risks of those that break it."

"I am no just exactly what ye would ca' an extremist for the law," says
he, "at the best of times; but in this business I act with a good
warranty."

"What are you going to do with me?" I asked.

"Nae harm," said he, "nae harm ava'. Ye'll hae strong freens, I'm
thinking. Ye'll be richt eneuch yet."

There began to fall a greyness on the face of the sea; little dabs of
pink and like coals of slow fire came in the east; and at the same time
the geese awakened, and began crying about the top of the Bass. It is
just the one crag of rock, as everybody knows, but great enough to carve
a city from. The sea was extremely little, but there went a hollow
plowter round the base of it. With the growing of the dawn I could see
it clearer and clearer; the straight crags painted with sea-birds'
droppings like a morning frost, the sloping top of it green with grass,
the clan of white geese that cried about the sides, and the black,
broken buildings of the prison sitting close on the sea's edge.

At the sight the truth came in upon me in a clap.

"It's there you're taking me!" I cried.

"Just to the Bass, mannie," said he: "whaur the auld sants were afore
ye, and I misdoubt if ye have come so fairly by your preeson."

"But none dwells there now," I cried; "the place is long a ruin."

"It'll be the mair pleisand a change for the solan geese, then," quoth
Andie dryly.

The day coming slowly brighter I observed on the bilge, among the big
stones with which fisherfolk ballast their boats, several kegs and
baskets, and a provision of fuel. All these were discharged upon the
crag. Andie, myself, and my three Highlanders (I call them mine,
although it was the other way about), landed along with them. The sun
was not yet up when the boat moved away again, the noise of the oars on
the thole-pins echoing from the cliffs, and left us in our singular
reclusion.

Andie Dale was the Prefect (as I would jocularly call him) of the Bass,
being at once the shepherd and the gamekeeper of that small and rich
estate. He had to mind the dozen or so of sheep that fed and fattened on
the grass of the sloping part of it, like beasts grazing the roof of a
cathedral. He had charge besides of the solan geese that roosted in the
crags; and from these an extraordinary income is derived. The young are
dainty eating, as much as two shillings a-piece being a common price,
and paid willingly by epicures; even the grown birds are valuable for
their oil and feathers; and a part of the minister's stipend of North
Berwick is paid to this day in solan geese, which makes it (in some
folks' eyes) a parish to be coveted. To perform these several
businesses, as well as to protect the geese from poachers, Andie had
frequent occasion to sleep and pass days together on the crag; and we
found the man at home there like a farmer in his steading. Bidding us
all shoulder some of the packages, a matter in which I made haste to
bear a hand, he led us in by a locked gate, which was the only admission
to the island, and through the ruins of the fortress, to the governor's
house. There we saw, by the ashes in the chimney and a standing
bed-place in one corner, that he made his usual occupation.

This bed he now offered me to use, saying he supposed I would set up to
be gentry.

"My gentrice has nothing to do with where I lie," said I. "I bless God I
have lain hard ere now, and can do the same again with thankfulness.
While I am here, Mr. Andie, if that be your name, I will do my part and
take my place beside the rest of you; and I ask you on the other hand to
spare me your mockery, which I own I like ill."

He grumbled a little at this speech, but seemed upon reflection to
approve it. Indeed, he was a long-headed, sensible man, and a good Whig
and Presbyterian; read daily in a pocket Bible, and was both able and
eager to converse seriously on religion, leaning more than a little
towards the Cameronian extremes. His morals were of a more doubtful
colour. I found he was deep in the free trade, and used the ruins of
Tantallon for a magazine of smuggled merchandise. As for a gauger, I do
not believe he valued the life of one at half-a-farthing. But that part
of the coast of Lothian is to this day as wild a place, and the commons
there as rough a crew as any in Scotland.

One incident of my imprisonment is made memorable by a consequence it
had long after. There was a warship at this time stationed in the Firth,
the _Seahorse_, Captain Palliser. It chanced she was cruising in the
month of September, plying between Fife and Lothian, and sounding for
sunk dangers. Early one fine morning she was seen about two miles to
east of us, where she lowered a boat, and seemed to examine the Wildfire
Rocks and Satan's Bush, famous dangers of that coast. And presently,
after having got her boat again, she came before the wind and was headed
directly for the Bass. This was very troublesome to Andie and the
Highlanders; the whole business of my sequestration was designed for
privacy, and here, with a navy captain perhaps blundering ashore, it
looked to become public enough, if it were nothing worse. I was in a
minority of one, I am no Alan to fall upon so many, and I was far from
sure that a warship was the least likely to improve my condition. All
which considered, I gave Andie my parole of good behaviour and
obedience, and was had briskly to the summit of the rock, where we all
lay down, at the cliff's edge, in different places of observation and
concealment. The _Seahorse_ came straight on till I thought she would
have struck, and we (looking giddily down) could see the ship's company
at their quarters and hear the leadsman singing at the lead. Then she
suddenly wore and let fly a volley of I know not how many great guns.
The rock was shaken with the thunder of the sound, the smoke flowed over
our heads, and the geese rose in number beyond computation or belief. To
hear their screaming and to see the twinkling of their wings, made a
most inimitable curiosity: and I suppose it was after this somewhat
childish pleasure that Captain Palliser had come so near the Bass. He
was to pay dear for it in time. During his approach I had the
opportunity to make a remark upon the rigging of that ship by which I
ever after knew it miles away; and this was a means (under Providence)
of my averting from a friend a great calamity, and inflicting on Captain
Palliser himself a sensible disappointment.

All the time of my stay on the rock we lived well. We had small ale and
brandy, and oatmeal of which we made our porridge night and morning. At
times a boat came from the Castleton and brought us a quarter of mutton,
for the sheep upon the rock we must not touch, these being specially fed
to market. The geese were unfortunately out of season, and we let them
be. We fished ourselves, and yet more often made the geese to fish for
us: observing one when he had made a capture and scaring him from his
prey ere he had swallowed it.

The strange nature of this place, and the curiosities with which it
abounded, held me busy and amused. Escape being impossible, I was
allowed my entire liberty, and continually explored the surface of the
isle wherever it might support the foot of man. The old garden of the
prison was still to be observed, with flowers and pot-herbs running
wild, and some ripe cherries on a bush. A little lower stood a chapel or
a hermit's cell; who built or dwelt in it, none may know, and the
thought of its age made a ground of many meditations. The prison too,
where I now bivouacked with Highland cattle thieves, was a place full of
history, both human and divine. I thought it strange so many saints and
martyrs should have gone by there so recently, and left not so much as a
leaf out of their Bibles, or a name carved upon the wall, while the
rough soldier lads that mounted guard upon the battlements had filled
the neighbourhood with their mementoes--broken tobacco-pipes for the
most part, and that in a surprising plenty, but also metal buttons from
their coats. There were times when I thought I could have heard the
pious sound of psalms out of the martyrs' dungeons, and seen the
soldiers tramp the ramparts with their glinting pipes, and the dawn
rising behind them out of the North Sea.

No doubt it was a good deal Andie and his tales that put these fancies
in my head. He was extraordinary well acquainted with the story of the
rock in all particulars, down to the names of private soldiers, his
father having served there in that same capacity. He was gifted besides
with a natural genius for narration, so that the people seemed to speak
and the things to be done before your face. This gift of his and my
assiduity to listen brought us the more close together. I could not
honestly deny but what I liked him; I soon saw that he liked me; and
indeed, from the first I had set myself out to capture his good will. An
odd circumstance (to be told presently) effected this beyond my
expectation; but even in early days we made a friendly pair to be a
prisoner and his gaoler.

I should trifle with my conscience if I pretended my stay upon the Bass
was wholly disagreeable. It seemed to me a safe place, as though I was
escaped there out of my troubles. No harm was to be offered me; a
material impossibility, rock and the deep sea, prevented me from fresh
attempts; I felt I had my life safe and my honour safe, and there were
times when I allowed myself to gloat on them like stolen waters. At
other times my thoughts were very different. I recalled how strong I had
expressed myself both to Rankeillor and to Stewart; I reflected that my
captivity upon the Bass, in view of a great part of the coasts of Fife
and Lothian, was a thing I should be thought more likely to have
invented than endured; and in the eyes of these two gentlemen, at least,
I must pass for a boaster and a coward. Now I would take this lightly
enough; tell myself that so long as I stood well with Catriona Drummond,
the opinion of the rest of man was but moonshine and spilled water; and
thence pass off into those meditations of a lover which are so
delightful to himself and must always appear so surprisingly idle to a
reader. But anon the fear would take me otherwise; I would be shaken
with a perfect panic of self-esteem, and these supposed hard judgments
appear an injustice impossible to be supported. With that another train
of thought would be presented, and I had scarce begun to be concerned
about men's judgments of myself, than I was haunted with the remembrance
of James Stewart in his dungeon and the lamentations of his wife. Then,
indeed, passion began to work in me; I could not forgive myself to sit
there idle; it seemed (if I were a man at all) that I could fly or swim
out of my place of safety; and it was in such humours and to amuse my
self-reproaches that I would set the more particularly to win the good
side of Andie Dale.

At last, when we two were alone on the summit of the rock on a bright
morning, I put in some hint about a bribe. He looked at me, cast back
his head, and laughed out loud.

"Ay, you're funny, Mr. Dale," said I, "but perhaps if you glance an eye
upon that paper you may change your note."

The stupid Highlanders had taken from me at the time of my seizure
nothing but hard money, and the paper I now showed Andie was an
acknowledgment from the British Linen Company for a considerable sum.

He read it. "Troth, and ye're nane sae ill aff," said he.

"I thought that would maybe vary your opinions," said I.

"Hout!" said he. "It shaws me ye can bribe; but I'm no to be bribit."

"We'll see about that yet a while," says I. "And first, I'll show you
that I know what I am talking. You have orders to detain me here till
Thursday, 21st September."

"Ye're no a'thegether wrong either," says Andie. "I'm to let ye gang,
bar orders contrair, on Saturday, the 23rd."

I could not but feel there was something extremely insidious in this
arrangement. That I was to reappear precisely in time to be too late
would cast the more discredit on my tale, if I were minded to tell one;
and this screwed me to fighting point.

"Now then, Andie, you that kens the world, listen to me, and think while
ye listen," said I. "I know there are great folks in the business, and I
make no doubt you have their names to go upon. I have seen some of them
myself since this affair began, and said my say into their faces too.
But what kind of a crime would this be that I had committed? or what
kind of a process is this that I am fallen under? To be apprehended by
some ragged John-Hielandmen on August 30th, carried to a rickle of old
stones that is now neither fort nor gaol (whatever it once was) but just
the gamekeeper's lodge of the Bass Rock, and set free again, September
23d, as secretly as I was first arrested--does that sound like law to
you? or does it sound like justice? or does it not sound honestly like a
piece of some low dirty intrigue, of which the very folk that meddle
with it are ashamed?"

"I canna gainsay ye, Shaws. It looks unco underhand," says Andie. "And
werenae the folk guid sound Whigs and true-blue Presbyterians I would
hae seen them ayont Jordan and Jeroozlem or I would have set hand to
it."

"The Master of Lovat'll be a braw Whig," says I, "and a grand
Presbyterian."

"I ken naething by him," said he. "I hae nae trokings wi' Lovats."

"No, it'll be Prestongrange that you'll be dealing with," said I.

"Ah, but I'll no tell ye that," said Andie.

"Little need when I ken," was my retort.

"There's just the ae thing ye can be fairly sure of, Shaws," says Andie.
"And that is that (try as ye please) I'm no dealing wi' yoursel'; nor
yet I amnae goin' to," he added.

"Well, Andie, I see I'll have to be speak out plain with you," I
replied. And I told him so much as I thought needful of the facts.

He heard me out with serious interest, and when I had done, seemed to
consider a little with himself.

"Shaws," said he at last, "I deal with the naked hand. It's a queer
tale, and no vary creditable, the way you tell it; and I'm far frae
minting that is other than the way that ye believe it. As for yoursel',
ye seems to me rather a dacent-like young man. But me, that's aulder and
mair judeecious, see perhaps a wee bit further forrit in the job than
what ye can dae. And here is the maitter clear and plain to ye. There'll
be nae skaith to yoursel' if I keep ye here; far frae that, I think
ye'll be a hantle better by it. There'll be nae skaith to the
kintry--just ae mair Hielantman hangit--Gude kens, a guid riddance! On
the ither hand it would be considerable skaith to me if I would let you
free. Sae, speakin' as a guid Whig, an honest freen' to you, and an
anxious freen' to my ainsel', the plain fact is that I think ye'll just
have to bide here wi' Andie an' the solans."

"Andie," said I, laying my hand upon his knee, "this Hielantman's
innocent."

"Ay, it's a peety about that," said he. "But ye see in this warld, the
way God made it, we cannae just get a'thing that we want."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XV

BLACK ANDIE'S TALE OF TOD LAPRAIK


I have yet said little of the Highlanders. They were all three of the
followers of James More, which bound the accusation very tight about
their master's neck. All understood a word or two of English; but Neil
was the only one who judged he had enough of it for general converse, in
which (when once he got embarked) his company was often tempted to the
contrary opinion. They were tractable, simple creatures; showed much
more courtesy than might have been expected from their raggedness and
their uncouth appearance, and fell spontaneously to be like three
servants for Andie and myself.

Dwelling in that isolated place, in the old falling ruins of a prison,
and among endless strange sounds of the sea and the sea-birds, I thought
I perceived in them early the effects of superstitious fear. When there
was nothing doing they would either lie and sleep, for which their
appetite appeared insatiable, or Neil would entertain the others with
stories which seemed always of a terrifying strain. If neither of these
delights were within reach--if perhaps two were sleeping and the third
could find no means to follow their example--I would see him sit and
listen and look about him in a progression of uneasiness, starting, his
face blenching, his hands clutched, a man strung like a bow. The nature
of these fears I had never an occasion to find out, but the sight of
them was catching, and the nature of the place that we were in
favourable to alarms. I can find no word for it in the English, but
Andie had an expression for it in the Scots from which he never varied.

"Ay," he would say, "_it's an unco place, the Bass_." It is so I always
think of it. It was an unco place by night, unco by day; and these were
unco sounds, of the calling of the solans, and the plash of the sea and
the rock echoes, that hung continually in our ears. It was chiefly so in
moderate weather. When the waves were anyway great they roared about the
rock like thunder and the drums of armies, dreadful but merry to hear;
and it was in the calm days that a man could daunt himself with
listening--not a Highlandman only, as I several times experimented on
myself, so many still, hollow noises haunted and reverberated in the
porches of the rock.

This brings me to a story I heard, and a scene I took part in, which
quite changed our terms of living, and had a great effect on my
departure. It chanced one night I fell in a muse beside the fire and
(that little air of Alan's coming back to my memory) began to whistle. A
hand was laid upon my arm, and the voice of Neil bade me to stop, for it
was not "canny musics."

"Not canny?" I asked. "How can that be?"

"Na," said he; "it will be made by a bogle and her wanting ta heid upon
his body."[13]

"Well," said I, "there can be no bogles here, Neil; for it's not likely
they would fash themselves to frighten solan geese."

"Ay?" says Andie, "is that what ye think of it? But I'll can tell ye
there's been waur nor bogles here."

"What's waur than bogles, Andie?" said I.

"Warlocks," said he. "Or a warlock at the least of it. And that's a
queer tale, too," he added. "And if ye would like, I'll tell it ye."

To be sure we were all of the one mind, and even the Highlander that had
the least English of the three set himself to listen with all his might.


THE TALE OF TOD LAPRAIK

My faither, Tam Dale, peace to his banes, was a wild, sploring lad in
his young days, wi' little wisdom and less grace. He was fond of a lass
and fond of a glass, and fond of a ran-dan; but I could never hear tell
that he was muckle use for honest employment. Frae ae thing to anither,
he listed at last for a sodger and was in the garrison of this fort,
which was the first way that ony of the Dales cam to set foot upon the
Bass. Sorrow upon that service! The governor brewed his ain ale; it
seems it was the warst conceivable. The rock was proveesioned frae the
shore with vivers, the thing was ill-guided, and there were whiles when
they but to fish and shoot solans for their diet. To crown a', thir was
the Days of the Persecution. The perishin' cauld chalmers were all
occupeed wi' sants and martyrs, the saut of the yearth, of which it
wasnae worthy. And though Tam Dale carried a firelock there, a single
sodger, and liked a lass and a glass, as I was sayin', the mind of the
man was mair just than set with his position. He had glints of the glory
of the kirk; there were whiles when his dander rase to see the Lord's
sants misguided, and shame covered him that he should be haulding a
can'le (or carrying a firelock) in so black a business. There were
nights of it when he was here on sentry, the place a' wheesht, the
frosts o' winter maybe riving in the wa's, and he would hear are o' the
prisoners strike up a psalm, and the rest join in, and the blessed
sounds rising from the different chalmers--or dungeons, I would raither
say--so that this auld craig in the sea was like a pairt of Heev'n.
Black shame was on his saul; his sins hove up before him muckle as the
Bass, and above a', that chief sin, that he should have a hand in
hagging and hashing at Christ's Kirk. But the truth is that he resisted
the spirit. Day cam, there were the rousing companions, and his guid
resolves depairtit.

In thir days, dwalled upon the Bass a man of God, Peden the Prophet was
his name. Ye'll have heard tell of Prophet Peden. There was never the
wale of him sinsyne, and it's a question wi' mony if there ever was his
like afore. He was wild 's a peat-hag, fearsome to look at, fearsome to
hear, his face like the day of judgment. The voice of him was like a
solan's and dinnle'd in folks' lugs, and the words of him like coals of
fire.

Now there was a lass on the rock, and I think she had little to do, for
it was nae place far dacent weemen; but it seems she was bonny, and her
and Tam Dale were very well agreed. It befell that Peden was in the
gairden his lane at the praying when Tam and the lass cam by; and what
should the lassie do but mock with laughter at the sant's devotions? He
rose and lookit at the twa o' them, and Tam's knees knoitered thegether
at the look of him. But whan he spak, it was mair in sorrow than in
anger. "Poor thing, poor thing!" says he, and it was the lass he lookit
at. "I hear you skirl and laugh," he says, "but the Lord has a deid shot
prepared for you, and at that surprising judgment ye shall skirl but the
ae time!" Shortly thereafter she was daundering on the craigs wi'
twa-three sodgers, and it was a blawy day. There cam a gowst of wind,
claught her by the coats, and awa' wi' her bag and baggage. And it was
remarked by the sodgers that she gied but the ae skirl.

Nae doubt this judgment had some weicht upon Tam Dale; but it passed
again and him none the better. Ae day he was flyting wi' anither
sodger-lad. "Deil hae me!" quo' Tam, for he was a profane swearer. And
there was Peden glowering at him, gash an' waefu'; Peden wi' his lang
chafts an' luntin' een, the maud happed about his kist, and the hand of
him held out wi' the black nails upon the finger-nebs--for he had nae
care of the body. "Fy, fy, poor man!" cries he, "the poor fool man!
_Deil hae me_, quo' he; an' I see the deil at his oxter." The conviction
of guilt and grace cam in on Tam like the deep sea; he flang doun the
pike that was in his hands--"I will nae mair lift arms against the cause
o' Christ!" says he, and was as gude's word. There was a sair fyke in
the beginning, but the governor, seeing him resolved, gied him his
dischairge, and he went and dwallt and merried in North Berwick, and had
aye a gude name with honest folk frae that day on.

It was in the year seeventeen hunner and sax that the Bass cam in the
hands o' the Da'rymples, and there was twa men soucht the chairge of it.
Baith were weel qualified, for they had baith been sodgers in the
garrison, and kent the gate to handle solans, and the seasons and values
of them. Forby that they were baith--or they baith seemed--earnest
professors and men of comely conversation. The first of them was just
Tam Dale, my faither. The second was ane Lapraik, whom the folk ca'd Tod
Lapraik maistly, but whether for his name or his nature I could never
hear tell. Weel, Tam gaed to see Lapraik upon this business, and took
me, that was a toddlin' laddie, by the hand. Tod had his dwallin' in the
lang loan benorth the kirkyaird. It's a dark uncanny loan, forby that
the kirk has aye had an ill name since the days o' James the Saxt and
the deevil's cantrips played therein when the Queen was on the seas; and
as for Tod's house, it was in the mirkest end, and was little liked by
some that kenned the best. The door was on the sneck that day, and me
and my faither gaed straucht in. Tod was a wabster to his trade; his
loom stood in the but. There he sat, a muckle fat, white hash of a man
like creish, wi' a kind of a holy smile that gart me scunner. The hand
of him aye cawed the shuttle, but his een was steeked. We cried to him
by his name, we skirled in the deid lug of him, we shook him by the
shou'ther. Nae mainner o' service! There he sat on his dowp, an' cawed
the shuttle and smiled like creish.

"God be guid to us," says Tam Dale, "this is no canny!"

He had jimp said the word, when Tod Lapraik cam to himsel'.

"Is this you, Tam?" says he. "Haith, man! I'm blythe to see ye. I whiles
fa' into a bit dwam like this," he says; "it's frae the stamach."

Weel, they began to crack about the Bass and which of them twa was to
get the warding o't, and by little and little cam to very ill words, and
twined in anger. I mind weel, that as my faither and me gaed hame again,
he cam ower and ower the same expression, how little he likit Tod
Lapraik and his dwams.

"Dwam!" says he. "I think folk hae brunt far dwams like yon."

Aweel, my faither got the Bass and Tod had to go wantin'. It was
remembered sinsyne what way he had ta'en the thing. "Tam," says he, "ye
hae gotten the better o'me aince mair, and I hope," says he, "ye'll find
at least a' that ye expeckit at the Bass." Which have since been thought
remarkable expressions. At last the time came for Tam Dale to take young
solans. This was a business he was weel used wi', he had been a
craigsman frae a laddie, and trustit nane but himsel'. So there was he
hingin' by a line an' speldering on the craig face, whaur it's hieest
and steighest. Fower tenty lads were on the tap, hauldin' the line and
mindin' for his signals. But whaur Tam hung there was naething but the
craig, and the sea belaw, and the solans skirling and flying. It was a
braw spring morn, and Tam whustled as he claught in the young geese.
Mony's the time I heard him tell of this experience, and aye the swat
ran upon the man.

It chanced, ye see, that Tam keeked up, and he was awaur of a muckle
solan, and the solan pyking at the line. He thocht this by-ordinar and
outside the creature's habits. He minded that ropes was unco saft
things, and the solan's neb and the Bass Rock unco hard, and that twa
hunner feet were raither mair than he would care to fa'.

"Shoo!" says Tam. "Awa', bird! Shoo, awa' wi' ye!" says he.

The solan keekit doun into Tam's face, and there was something unco in
the creature's ee. Just the ae keek it gied, and back to the rope. But
now it wroucht and warstl't like a thing dementit. There never was the
solan made that wroucht as that solan wroucht; and it seemed to
understand it's employ brawly, birzing the saft rope between the neb of
it and a crunkled jag o' stane.

There gaed a cauld stend o' fear into Tam's heart. "This thing is nae
bird," thinks he. His een turnt backward in his heid and the day gaed
black about him. "If I get a dwam here," he thoucht, "it's by wi' Tam
Dale." And he signalled for the lads to pu' him up.

And it seemed the solan understood about signals. For nae sooner was the
signal made than he let be the rope, spried his wings, squawked out
loud, took a turn flying, and dashed straucht at Tam Dale's een. Tam had
a knife, he gart the cauld steel glitter. And it seemed the solan
understood about knives, for nae suner did the steel glint in the sun
than he gied the ae squawk, but laigher, like a body disappointit, and
flegged aff about the roundness of the craig, and Tam saw him nae mair.
And as sune as that thing was gane, Tam's held drapt upon his shouther,
and they pu'd him up like a deid corp, dadding on the craig.

A dram of brandy (which he went never without) broucht him to his mind,
or what was left of it. Up he sat.

"Rin, Geordie, rin to the boat, mak' sure of the boat, man--rin!" he
cries, "or yon solan 'll have it awa'," says he.

The fower lads stared at ither, an' tried to whilly-wha him to be quiet.
But naething, would satisfy Tam Dale, till ane o' them had startit on
aheid to stand sentry on the boat. The ithers askit if he was for down
again.

"Na," says he, "and niether you nor me," says he, "and as sune as I can
win to stand on my twa feet we'll be aff frae this craig o' Sawtan."

Sure eneuch, nae time was lost, and that was ower muckle; for before
they won to North Berwick Tam was in a crying fever. He lay a' the
simmer; and wha was sae kind as come speiring for him, but Tod Lapraik!
Folk thocht afterwards that ilka time Tod cam near the house the fever
had worsened. I kenna for that; but what I ken the best, that was the
end of it.

It was about this time o' the year; my grandfaither was out at the white
fishing; and like a bairn, I but to gang wi' him. We had a grand take, I
mind, and the way that the fish lay broucht us near in by the Bass,
whaur we forgaithered wi' anither boat that belanged to a man Sandie
Fletcher in Castleton. He's no lang deid niether, or ye could spier at
himsel'. Weel, Sandie hailed.

"What's yon on the Bass?" says he.

"On the Bass?" says grandfaither.

"Ay," says Sandie, "on the green side o't."

"Whatten kind of a thing?" says grandfaither. "There cannae be naething
on the Bass but just the sheep."

"It looks unco like a body," quo' Sandie, who was nearer in.

"A body!" says we, and we nane of us likit that. For there was nae boat
that could have broucht a man, and the key o' the prison yett hung ower
my faither's held at hame in the press bed.

We keept the twa boats closs for company, and crap in nearer hand.
Grandfaither had a gless, for he had been a sailor, and the captain of a
smack, and had lost her on the sands of Tay. And when we took the gless
to it, sure eneuch there was a man. He was in a crunkle o' green brae, a
wee below the chaipel, a' by his lee lane, and lowped and flang and
danced like a daft quean at a waddin'.

"It's Tod," says grandfaither, and passed the gless to Sandie.

"Ay, it's him," says Sandie.

"Or ane in the likeness o' him,'' says grandfaither.

"Sma' is the differ," quo' Sandie. "De'il or warlock, I'll try the gun
at him," quo' he, and broucht up a fowling-piece that he aye carried,
for Sandie was a notable famous shot in all that country.

"Haud your hand, Sandie," says grandfaither; "we maun see clearer
first," says he, "or this may be a dear day's wark to the baith of us."

"Hout!" says Sandie, "this is the Lord's judgments surely, and be damned
to it!" says he.

"Maybe ay, and maybe no," says my grandfaither, worthy man! "But have
you a mind of the Procurator Fiscal, that I think ye'll have
forgaithered wi' before," says he.

This was ower true, and Sandie was a wee thing set ajee. "Aweel, Edie,"
says he, "and what would be your way of it?"

"Ou, just this," says grandfaither. "Let me that has the fastest boat
gang back to North Berwick, and let you bide here and keep an eye on
Thon. If I cannae find Lapraik, I'll join ye and the twa of us'll have a
crack wi' him. But if Lapraik's at hame, I'll rin up the flag at the
harbour, and ye can try Thon Thing wi' the gun."

Aweel, so it was agreed between them twa. I was just a bairn, an' clum
in Sandie's boat, whaur I thoucht I would see the best of the employ. My
grandsire gied Sandie a siller tester to pit in his gun wi' the leid
draps, bein' mair deidly again bogles. And then the ae boat set aff for
North Berwick, an' the tither lay whaur it was and watched the wanchancy
thing on the braeside.

A' the time we lay there it lowped and flang and capered and span like a
teetotum, and whiles we could hear it skelloch as it span. I hae seen
lassies, the daft queans, that would lowp and dance a winter's nicht,
and still be lowping and dancing when the winter's day cam in. But there
would be folk there to hauld them company, and the lads to egg them on;
and this thing was its lee-lane. And there would be a fiddler diddling
his elbock in the chimney-side; and this thing had nae music but the
skirling of the solans. And the lassies were bits o' young things wi'
the reid life dinnling and stending in their members; and this was a
muckle, fat, crieshy man, and him fa'n in the vale o' years. Say what ye
like, I maun say what I believe. It was joy was in the creature's heart;
the joy o' hell, I daursay: joy whatever. Mony a time I have askit
mysel', why witches and warlocks should sell their sauls (whilk are
their maist dear possessions) and be auld, duddy, wrunkl't wives or
auld, feckless, doddered men; and then I mind upon Tod Lapraik dancing
a' they hours by his lane in the black glory of his heart. Nae doubt
they burn for it in muckle hell, but they have a grand time here of it,
whatever!--and the Lord forgie us!

Weel, at the hinder end, we saw the wee flag yirk up to the mast-held
upon the harbour rocks. That was a' Sandie waited for. He up wi' the
gun, took a deleeberate aim, an' pu'd the trigger. There cam' a bang and
then ae waefu' skirl frae the Bass. And there were we rubbin' our een
and lookin' at ither like daft folk. For wi' the bang and the skirl the
thing had clean disappeared. The sun glintit, the wund blew, and there
was the bare yaird whaur the Wonder had been lowping and flinging but ae
second syne.

The hale way hame I roared and grat wi' the terror of that dispensation.
The grawn folk were nane sae muckle better; there was little said in
Sandie's boat but just the name of God; and when we won in by the pier,
the harbour rocks were fair black wi' the folk waitin' us. It seems they
had fund Lapraik in ane of his dwams, cawing the shuttle and smiling. Ae
lad they sent to hoist the flag, and the rest abode there in the
wabster's house. You may be sure they liked it little; but it was a
means of grace to severals that stood there praying in to themsel's (for
nane cared to pray out loud) and looking on thon awesome thing as it
cawed the shuttle. Syne, upon a suddenty, and wi' the ae driedfu'
skelloch, Tod sprang up frae his hinderlands and fell forrit on the wab,
a bluidy corp.

When the corp was examined the leid draps hadnae played buff upon the
warlock's body; sorrow a leid drap was to be fund; but there was
grandfather's siller tester in the puddock's heart of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Andie had scarce done when there befell a mighty silly affair that had
its consequence. Neil, as I have said, was himself a great narrator. I
have heard since that he knew all the stories in the Highlands; and
thought much of himself, and was thought much of by others, on the
strength of it. Now Andie's tale reminded him of one he had already
heard.

"She would ken that story afore," he said. "She was the story of Uistean
More M'Gillie Phadrig and the Gavar Vore."

"It is no sic a thing," cried Andie. "It is the story of my faither (now
wi' God) and Tod Lapraik. And the same in your beard," says he; "and
keep the tongue of ye inside your Hielant chafts!"

In dealing with Highlanders it will be found, and has been shown in
history, how well it goes with Lowland gentlefolk; but the thing appears
scarce feasible for Lowland commons. I had already remarked that Andie
was continually on the point of quarrelling with our three Macgregors,
and now, sure enough, it was to come.

"Thir will be no words to use to shentlemans," says Neil.

"Shentlemans!" cries Andie. "Shentlemans, ye hielant stot! If God would
give ye the grace to see yoursel' the way that ithers see ye, ye would
throw your denner up."

There came some kind of a Gaelic oath from Neil, and the black knife was
in his hand that moment.

There was no time to think; and I caught the Highlander by the leg, and
had him down, and his armed hand pinned out, before I knew what I was
doing. His comrades sprang to rescue him, Andie and I were without
weapons, the Gregara three to two. It seemed we were beyond salvation,
when Neil screamed in his own tongue, ordering the others back, and made
his submission to myself in a manner the most abject, even giving me up
his knife which (upon a repetition of his promises) I returned to him on
the morrow.

Two things I saw plain: the first, that I must not build too high on
Andie, who had shrunk against the wall and stood there, as pale as
death, till the affair was over; the second, the strength of my own
position with the Highlanders, who must have received extraordinary
charges to be tender of my safety. But if I thought Andie came not very
well out in courage, I had no fault to find with him upon the account of
gratitude. It was not so much that he troubled me with thanks, as that
his whole mind and manner appeared changed; and as he preserved ever
after a great timidity of our companions, he and I were yet more
constantly together.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XVI

THE MISSING WITNESS


On the seventeenth, the day I was trysted with the Writer, I had much
rebellion against fate. The thought of him waiting in the _King's Arms_,
and of what he would think, and what he would say when next we met,
tormented and oppressed me. The truth was unbelievable, so much I had to
grant, and it seemed cruel hard I should be posted as a liar and a
coward, and have never consciously omitted what it was possible that I
should do. I repeated this form of words with a kind of bitter relish,
and re-examined in that light the steps of my behaviour. It seemed I had
behaved to James Stewart as a brother might; all the past was a picture
that I could be proud of, and there was only the present to consider. I
could not swim the sea, nor yet fly in the air, but there was always
Andie. I had done him a service, he liked me; I had a lever there to
work on; if it were just for decency, I must try once more with Andie.

It was late afternoon; there was no sound in all the Bass but the lap
and bubble of a very quiet sea; and my four companions were all crept
apart, the three Macgregors higher on the rock, and Andie with his Bible
to a sunny place among the ruins; there I found him in deep sleep, and,
as soon as he was awake, appealed to him with some fervour of manner and
a good show of argument.

"If I thoucht it was to do guid to ye, Shaws!" said he, staring at me
over his spectacles.

"It's to save another," said I, "and to redeem my word. What would be
more good than that? Do ye no mind the scripture, Andie? And you with
the Book upon your lap! _What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world?"_

"Ay," said he, "that's grand for you. But where do I come in? I have my
word to redeem the same's yoursel'. And what are ye asking me to do, but
just to sell it ye for siller?"

"Andie! have I named the name of siller?" cried I.

"Ou, the name's naething," said he; "the thing is there, whatever. It
just comes to this; if I am to service ye the way that you propose, I'll
loss my lieihood. Then it's clear ye'll have to make it up to me, and a
pickle mair, for your ain credit like. And what's that but just a bribe?
And if even I was certain of the bribe! But by a' that I can learn, it's
far frae that; and if _you_ were to hang, where would _I_ be? Na: the
thing's no possible. And just awa' wi' ye like a bonny lad! and let
Andie read his chapter."

I remember I was at bottom a good deal gratified with this result; and
the next humour I fell into was one (I had near said) of gratitude to
Prestongrange, who had saved me, in this violent, illegal manner, out of
the midst of my dangers, temptations, and perplexities. But this was
both too flimsy and too cowardly to last me long, and the remembrance of
James began to succeed to the possession of my spirits. The 21st, the
day set for the trial, I passed in such misery of mind as I can scarce
recall to have endured, save perhaps upon Isle Earraid only. Much of the
time I lay on a braeside betwixt sleep and waking, my body motionless,
my mind full of violent thoughts. Sometimes I slept indeed; but the
court-house of Inverary and the prisoner glancing on all sides to find
his missing witness, followed me in slumber; and I would wake again with
a start to darkness of spirit and distress of body. I thought Andie
seemed to observe me, but I paid him little heed. Verily, my bread was
bitter to me, and my days a burthen.

Early the next morning (Friday, 22nd) a boat came with provisions, and
Andie placed a packet in my hand. The cover was without address but
sealed with a Government seal. It enclosed two notes. "Mr. Balfour can
now see for himself it is too late to meddle. His conduct will be
observed and his discretion rewarded." So ran the first, which seemed to
be laboriously writ with the left hand. There was certainly nothing in
these expressions to compromise the writer, even if that person could be
found; the seal, which formidably served instead of signature, was
affixed to a separate sheet on which there was no scratch of writing;
and I had to confess that (so far) my adversaries knew what they were
doing, and to digest as well as I was able the threat that peeped under
the promise.

But the second enclosure was by far the more surprising. It was in a
lady's hand of writ. "_Maister Dauvit Balfour is informed a friend was
speiring for him, and her eyes were of the grey_," it ran--and seemed so
extraordinary a piece to come to my hands at such a moment and under
cover of a Government seal, that I stood stupid. Catriona's grey eyes
shone in my remembrance. I thought, with a bound of pleasure, she must
be the friend. But who should the writer be, to have her billet thus
enclosed with Prestongrange's? And of all wonders, why was it thought
needful to give me this pleasing but most inconsequential intelligence
upon the Bass? For the writer, I could hit upon none possible except
Miss Grant. Her family, I remembered, had remarked on Catriona's eyes
and even named her for their colour; and she herself had been much in
the habit to address me with a broad pronunciation, by way of a sniff, I
supposed, at my rusticity. No doubt, besides, but she lived in the same
house as this letter came from. So there remained but one step to be
accounted for; and that was how Prestongrange should have permitted her
at all in an affair so secret, or let her daft-like billet go in the
same cover with his own. But even here I had a glimmering. For, first of
all, there was something rather alarming about the young lady, and papa
might be more under her domination than I knew. And second, there was
the man's continual policy to be remembered, how his conduct had been
continually mingled with caresses, and he had scarce ever, in the midst
of so much contention, laid aside a mask of friendship. He must conceive
that my imprisonment had incensed me. Perhaps this little jesting,
friendly message was intended to disarm my rancour?

I will be honest--and I think it did. I felt a sudden warmth towards
that beautiful Miss Grant, that she should stoop to so much interest in
my affairs. The summoning up of Catriona moved me of itself to milder
and more cowardly counsels. If the Advocate knew of her and of our
acquaintance--if I should please him by some of that "discretion" at
which his letter pointed--to what might not this lead? _In vain is the
net spread in the sight of any fowl_, the scripture says. Well, fowls
must be wiser than folk! For I thought I perceived the policy, and yet
fell in with it.

I was in this frame, my heart beating, the grey eyes plain before me
like two stars, when Andie broke in upon my musing.

"I see ye hae gotten guid news," said he.

I found him looking curiously in my face; with that, there came before
me like a vision of James Stewart and the court of Inverary; and my mind
turned at once like a door upon its hinges. Trials, I reflected,
sometimes draw out longer than is looked for. Even if I came to Inverary
just too late, something might yet be attempted in the interests of
James--and in those of my own character, the best would be accomplished.
In a moment, it seemed without thought, I had a plan devised.

"Andie," said I, "is it still to be to-morrow?"

He told me nothing was changed.

"Was anything said about the hour?" I asked.

He told me it was to be two o'clock afternoon.

"And about the place?" I pursued.

"Whatten place?" says Andie.

"The place I'm to be landed at," said I.

He owned there was nothing as to that.

"Very well, then," I said, "this shall be mine to arrange. The wind is
in the east, my road lies westward; keep your boat, I hire it; let us
work up the Forth all day; and land me at two o'clock to-morrow at the
westmost we'll can have reached."

"Ye daft callant!" he cried, "ye would try for Inverary after a'!"

"Just that, Andie," says I.

"Weel, ye're ill to beat!" says he. "And I was kind o' sorry for ye a'
day yesterday," he added. "Ye see, I was never entirely sure till then,
which way of it ye really wantit."

Here was a spur to a lame horse!

"A word in your ear, Andie," said I. "This plan of mine has another
advantage yet. We can leave these Hielandmen behind us on the rock, and
one of your boats from the Castleton can bring them off to-morrow. Yon
Neil has a queer eye when he regards you; maybe, if I was once out of
the gate there might be knives again; these red-shanks are unco
grudgeful. And if there should come to be any question, here is your
excuse. Our lives were in danger by these savages; being answerable for
my safety, you chose the part to bring me from their neighbourhood and
detain me the rest of the time on board your boat; and do you know,
Andie?" says I, with a smile, "I think it was very wisely chosen."

"The truth is I have nae goo for Neil," says Andie, "nor he for me, I'm
thinking; and I would like ill to come to my hands wi' the man. Tam
Anster will make a better hand of it with the cattle onyway." (For this
man, Anster, came from Fife, where the Gaelic is still spoken.) "Ay,
ay!" says Andie, "Tam'll can deal with them the best. And troth! the
mair I think of it, the less I see what way we would be required. The
place--ay, feggs! they had forgot the place. Eh, Shaws, ye're a
lang-heided chield when ye like! Forby that I'm awing ye my life," he
added, with more solemnity, and offered me his hand upon the bargain.

Whereupon, with scarce more words, we stepped suddenly on board the
boat, cast off, and set the lug. The Gregara were then busy upon
breakfast, for the cookery was their usual part; but, one of them
stepping to the battlements, our flight was observed before we were
twenty fathoms from the rock; and the three of them ran about the ruins
and the landing-shelf, for all the world like ants about a broken nest,
hailing and crying on us to return. We were still in both the lee and
the shadow of the rock, which last lay broad upon the waters, but
presently came forth in almost the same moment into the wind and
sunshine; the sail filled, the boat heeled to the gunwale, and we swept
immediately beyond sound of the men's voices. To what terrors they
endured upon the rock, where they were now deserted without the
countenance of any civilised person or so much as the protection of a
Bible, no limit can be set; nor had they any brandy left to be their
consolation, for even in the haste and secrecy of our departure Andie
had managed to remove it.

It was our first care to set Anster ashore in a cove by the Glenteithy
Rocks, so that the deliverance of our maroons might be duly seen to the
next day. Thence we kept away up Firth. The breeze, which was then so
spirited, swiftly declined, but never wholly failed us. All day we kept
moving, though often not much more; and it was after dark ere we were up
with the Queensferry. To keep the letter of Andie's engagement (or what
was left of it) I must remain on board, but I thought no harm to
communicate with the shore in writing. On Prestongrange's cover, where
the Government seal must have a good deal surprised my correspondent, I
writ, by the boat's lantern, a few necessary words, and Andie carried
them to Rankeillor. In about an hour he came aboard again, with a purse
of money and the assurance that a good horse should be standing saddled
for me by two to-morrow at Clackmannan Pool. This done, and the boat
riding by her stone anchor, we lay down to sleep under the sail.

We were in the Pool the next day long ere two; and there was nothing
left for me but sit and wait. I felt little alacrity upon my errand. I
would have been glad of any passable excuse to lay it down; but none
being to be found, my uneasiness was no less great than if I had been
running to some desired pleasure. By shortly after one the horse was at
the waterside, and I could see a man walking it to and fro till I should
land, which vastly swelled my impatience. Andie ran the moment of my
liberation very fine, showing himself a man of his bare word, but scarce
serving his employers with a heaped measure; and by about fifty seconds
after two I was in the saddle and on the full stretch for Stirling. In a
little more than an hour I had passed that town, and was already
mounting Alan Water side, when the weather broke in a small tempest. The
rain blinded me, the wind had nearly beat me from the saddle, and the
first darkness of the night surprised me in a wilderness still some way
east of Balwhidder, not very sure of my direction and mounted on a horse
that began already to be weary.

In the press of my hurry, and to be spared the delay and annoyance of a
guide, I had followed (so far as it was possible for any horseman) the
line of my journey with Alan. This I did with open eyes, foreseeing a
great risk in it, which the tempest had now brought to a reality. The
last that I knew of where I was, I think it must have been about Uam
Var; the hour perhaps six at night. I must still think it great good
fortune that I got about eleven to my destination, the house of Duncan
Dhu. Where I had wandered in the interval perhaps the horse could tell.
I know we were twice down, and once over the saddle and for a moment
carried away in a roaring burn. Steed and rider were bemired up to the
eyes.

From Duncan I had news of the trial. It was followed in all these
Highland regions with religious interest; news of it spread from
Inverary as swift as men could travel; and I was rejoiced to learn that,
up to a late hour that Saturday, it was not yet concluded; and all men
began to suppose it must spread over to the Monday. Under the spur of
this intelligence I would not sit to eat; but, Duncan having agreed to
be my guide, took the road again on foot, with the piece in my hand and
munching as I went. Duncan brought with him a flask of usquebaugh and a
hand-lantern; which last enlightened us just so long as we could find
houses where to rekindle it, for the thing leaked outrageously and blew
out with every gust. The more part of the night we walked blindfold
among sheets of rain, and day found us aimless on the mountains. Hard by
we struck a hut on a burn-side, where we got a bite and a direction;
and, a little before the end of the sermon, came to the kirk doors of
Inverary.

The rain had somewhat washed the upper parts of me, but I was still
bogged as high as to the knees; I streamed water; I was so weary I could
hardly limp, and my face was like a ghost's. I stood certainly more in
need of a change of raiment and a bed to lie on, than of all the
benefits in Christianity. For all which (being persuaded the chief point
for me was to make myself immediately public) I set the door open,
entered that church with the dirty Duncan at my tails, and finding a
vacant place hard by, sat down.

"Thirteenthly, my brethren, and in parenthesis, the law itself must be
regarded as a means of grace," the minister was saying, in the voice of
one delighting to pursue an argument.

The sermon was in English on account of the assize. The judges were
present with their armed attendants, the halberts glittered in a corner
by the door, and the seats were thronged beyond custom with the array of
lawyers. The text was in Romans 5th and 13th--the minister a skilled
hand; and the whole of that able churchful--from Argyle, and my Lords
Elchies and Kilkerran, down to the halbertmen that came in their
attendance--was sunk with gathered brows in a profound critical
attention. The minister himself and a sprinkling of those about the door
observed our entrance at the moment and immediately forgot the same; the
rest either did not hear or would not heed; and I sat there amongst my
friends and enemies unremarked.

The first that I singled out was Prestongrange. He sat well forward,
like an eager horseman in the saddle, his lips moving with relish, his
eyes glued on the minister: the doctrine was clearly to his mind.
Charles Stewart, on the other hand, was half asleep, and looked harassed
and pale. As for Symon Fraser, he appeared like a blot, and almost a
scandal, in the midst of that attentive congregation, digging his hands
in his pockets, shifting his legs, clearing his throat, rolling up his
bald eyebrows and shooting out his eyes to right and left, now with a
yawn, now with a secret smile. At times too, he would take the Bible in
front of him, run it through, seem to read a bit, run it through again,
and stop and yawn prodigiously: the whole as if for exercise.

In the course of this restlessness his eye alighted on myself. He sat a
second stupefied, than tore a half leaf out of the Bible, scrawled upon
it with a pencil, and passed it with a whispered word to his next
neighbor. The note came to Prestongrange, who gave me but the one look;
thence it voyaged to the hands of Mr. Erskine; thence again to Argyle,
where he sat between the other two lords of session, and his Grace
turned and fixed me with an arrogant eye. The last of those interested
to observe my presence was Charlie Stewart, and he too began to pencil
and hand about despatches, none of which I was able to trace to their
destination in the crowd.

But the passage of these notes had aroused notice; all who were in the
secret (or supposed themselves to be so) were whispering
information--the rest questions; and the minister himself seemed quite
discountenanced by the flutter in the church and sudden stir and
whispering. His voice changed, he plainly faltered, nor did he again
recover the easy conviction and full tones of his delivery. It would be
a puzzle to him till his dying day, why a sermon that had gone with
triumph through four parts, should thus miscarry in the fifth.

As for me, I continued to sit there, very wet and weary, and a good deal
anxious as to what should happen next, but greatly exulting in my
success.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XVII

THE MEMORIAL


The last word of the blessing was scarce out of the minister's mouth
before Stewart had me by the arm. We were the first to be forth of the
church, and he made such extraordinary expedition that we were safe
within the four walls of a house before the street had begun to be
thronged with the home-going congregation.

"Am I yet in time?" I asked.

"Ay and no," said he. "The case is over; the jury is enclosed, and will
be so kind as let us ken their view of it to-morrow in the morning, the
same as I could have told it my own self three days ago before the play
began. The thing has been public from the start. The panel kent it, '_Ye
may do what ye will for me_,' whispers he two days ago. '_I ken my fate
by what the Duke of Argyle has just said to Mr. Macintosh_.' O, it's
been a scandal!

    The great Argyle he gaed before,
    He gart the cannons and guns to roar,

and the very macer cried 'Cruachan!' But now that I have got you again
I'll never despair. The oak shall go over the myrtle yet; we'll ding the
Campbells yet in their own town. Praise God that I should see the day!"

He was leaping with excitement, emptied out his mails upon the floor
that I might have a change of clothes, and incommoded me with his
assistance as I changed. What remained to be done, or how I was to do
it, was what he never told me nor, I believe, so much as thought of.
"We'll ding the Camphells yet!" that was still his overcome. And it was
forced home upon my mind how this, that had the externals of a sober
process of law, was in its essence a clan battle between savage clans. I
thought my friend the Writer none of the least savage. Who, that had
only seen him at a counsel's back before the Lord Ordinary or following
a golf ball and laying down his clubs on Bruntsfield links, could have
recognised for the same person this voluble and violent clansman?

James Stewart's counsel were four in number--Sheriffs Brown of Colstoun
and Miller, Mr. Robert Macintosh and Mr. Stewart younger of Stewart
Hall. These were covenanted to dine with the Writer after sermon, and I
was very obligingly included of the party. No sooner the cloth lifted,
and the first bowl very artfully compounded by Sheriff Miller, than we
fell to the subject in hand. I made a short narration of my seizure and
captivity, and was then examined and re-examined upon the circumstances
of the murder. It will be remembered this was the first time I had had
my say out, or the matter at all handled, among lawyers; and the
consequence was very dispiriting to the others and (I must own)
disappointing to myself.

"To sum up," said Colstoun, "you prove that Alan was on the spot; you
have heard him proffer menaces against Glenure; and though you assure us
he was not the man who fired, you leave a strong impression that he was
in league with him, and consenting, perhaps immediately assisting, in
the act. You show him besides, at the risk of his own liberty, actively
furthering the criminal's escape. And the rest of your testimony (so far
as the least material) depends on the bare word of Alan or of James, the
two accused. In short, you do not at all break, but only lengthen by one
personage, the chain that binds our client to the murderer; and I need
scarcely say that the introduction of a third accomplice rather
aggravates that appearance of a conspiracy which has been our stumbling
block from the beginning."

"I am of the same opinion," said Sheriff Miller. "I think we may all be
very much obliged to Prestongrange for taking a most uncomfortable
witness out of our way. And chiefly, I think, Mr. Balfour himself might
be obliged. For you talk of a third accomplice, but Mr. Balfour (in my
view) has very much the appearance of a fourth."

"Allow me, sirs!" interposed Stewart the Writer. "There is another view.
Here we have a witness--never fash whether material or not--a witness in
this cause, kidnapped by that old, lawless, bandit crew of the Glengyle
Macgregors, and sequestered for near upon a month in a bourock of old
cold ruins on the Bass. Move that and see what dirt you fling on the
proceedings! Sirs, this is a tale to make the world ring with! It would
be strange, with such a grip as this, if we couldnae squeeze out a
pardon for my client."

"And suppose we took up Mr. Balfour's cause to-morrow?" said Stewart
Hall. "I am much deceived or we should find so many impediments thrown
in our path, as that James should have been hanged before we had found a
court to hear us. This is a great scandal, but I suppose we have none of
us forgot a greater still, I mean the matter of the Lady Grange. The
woman was still in durance; my friend Mr. Hope of Rankeillor did what
was humanly possible; and how did he speed? He never got a warrant!
Well, it'll be the same now; the same weapons will be used. This is a
scene, gentlemen, of clan animosity. The hatred of the name which I have
the honor to bear, rages in high quarters. There is nothing here to be
viewed but naked Campbell spite and scurvy Campbell intrigue."

You may be sure this was to touch a welcome topic, and I sat for some
time in the midst of my learned counsel, almost deaved with their talk
but extremely little the wiser for its purport. The Writer was led into
some hot expressions; Colstoun must take him up and set him right; the
rest joined in on different sides, but all pretty noisy; the Duke of
Argyle was beaten like a blanket; King George came in for a few digs in
the by-going and a great deal of rather elaborate defence: and there was
only one person that seemed to be forgotten, and that was James of the
Glens.

Through all this Mr. Miller sat quiet. He was a slip of an oldish
gentleman, ruddy and twinkling; he spoke in a smooth rich voice, with an
infinite effect of pawkiness, dealing out each word the way an actor
does, to give the most expression possible; and even now, when he was
silent, and sat there with his wig laid aside, his glass in both hands,
his mouth funnily pursed, and his chin out, he seemed the mere picture
of a merry slyness. It was plain he had a word to say, and waited for
the fit occasion.

It came presently. Colstoun had wound up one of his speeches with some
expression of their duty to their client. His brother sheriff was
pleased, I suppose, with the transition. He took the table in his
confidence with a gesture and a look.

"That suggests to me a consideration which seems overlooked," said he.
"The interest of our client goes certainly before all, but the world
does not come to an end with James Stewart." Whereat he cocked his eye.
"I might condescend, _exempli gratia_, upon a Mr. George Brown, a Mr.
Thomas Miller, and a Mr. David Balfour. Mr. David Balfour has a very
good ground of complaint, and I think, gentlemen--if his story was
properly red out--I think there would be a number of wigs on the green."

The whole table turned to him with a common movement.

"Properly handled and carefully red out, his is a story that could
scarcely fail to have some consequence," he continued. "The whole
administration of justice, from its highest officer downward, would be
totally discredited; and it looks to me as if they would need to be
replaced." He seemed to shine with cunning as he said it. "And I need
not point out to ye that this of Mr. Balfour's would be a remarkable
bonny cause to appear in," he added.

Well, there they all were started on another hare; Mr. Balfour's cause,
and what kind of speeches could be there delivered, and what officials
could be thus turned out, and who would succeed to their positions. I
shall give but the two specimens. It was proposed to approach Symon
Fraser, whose testimony, if it could be obtained, could prove certainly
fatal to Argyle and Prestongrange. Miller highly approved of the
attempt. "We have here before us a dreeping roast," said he, "here is
cut-and-come-again for all." And methought all licked their lips. The
other was already near the end. Stewart the Writer was out of the body
with, delight, smelling vengeance on his chief enemy, the Duke.

"Gentlemen," cried he, charging his glass, "here is to Sheriff Miller.
His legal abilities are known to all. His culinary, this bowl in front
of us is here to speak for. But when it comes to the poleetical!"--cries
he, and drains the glass.

"Ay, but it will hardly prove politics in your meaning, my friend," said
the gratified Miller. "A revolution, if you like, and I think I can
promise you that historical writers shall date from Mr. Balfour's cause.
But properly guided, Mr. Stewart, tenderly guided, it shall prove a
peaceful revolution."

"And if the damned Campbells get their ears rubbed, what care I?" cries
Stewart, smiting down his fist.

It will be thought I was not very well pleased with all this, though I
could scarce forbear smiling at a kind of innocency in these old
intriguers. But it was not my view to have undergone so many sorrows for
the advancement of Sheriff Miller or to make a revolution in the
Parliament House: and I interposed accordingly with as much simplicity
of manner as I could assume.

"I have to thank you, gentlemen, for your advice," said I. "And now I
would like, by your leave, to set you two or three questions. There is
one thing that has fallen rather on one side, for instance: Will this
cause do any good to our friend James of the Glens?"

They seemed all a hair set back, and gave various answers, but
concurring practically in one point, that James had now no hope but in
the King's mercy.

"To proceed, then," said I, "will it do any good to Scotland? We have a
saying that it is an ill bird that fouls his own nest. I remember
hearing we had a riot in Edinburgh when I was an infant child, which
gave occasion to the late Queen to call this country barbarous; and I
always understood that we had rather lost than gained by that. Then came
the year 'Forty-five, which made Scotland to be talked of everywhere;
but I never heard it said we had anyway gained by the 'Forty-five. And
now we come to this cause of Mr. Balfour's, as you call it. Sheriff
Miller tells us historical writers are to date from it, and I would not
wonder. It is only my fear they would date from it as a period of
calamity and public reproach."

The nimble-witted Miller had already smelt where I was travelling to,
and made haste to get on the same road. "Forcibly put, Mr. Balfour,"
says he. "A weighty observe, sir."

"We have next to ask ourselves if it will be good for King George," I
pursued. "Sheriff Miller appears pretty easy upon this; but I doubt you
will scarce be able to pull down the house from under him, without his
Majesty coming by a knock or two, one of which might easily prove
fatal."

I gave them a chance to answer, but none volunteered.

"Of those for whom the case was to be profitable," I went on, "Sheriff
Miller gave us the names of several, among the which he was good enough
to mention mine. I hope he will pardon me if I think otherwise. I
believe I hung not the least back in this affair while there was life to
be saved; but I own I thought myself extremely hazarded, and I own I
think it would be a pity for a young man, with some idea of coming to
the bar, to ingrain upon himself the character of a turbulent, factious
fellow before he was yet twenty. As for James, it seems--at this date of
the proceedings, with the sentence as good as pronounced--he has no hope
but in the King's mercy. May not his Majesty, then, be more pointedly
addressed, the characters of these high officers sheltered from the
public, and myself kept out of a position which I think spells ruin for
me?"

They all sat and gazed into their glasses, and I could see they found my
attitude on the affair unpalatable. But Miller was ready at all events.

"If I may be allowed to put our young friend's notion in more formal
shape," says he, "I understand him to propose that we should embody the
fact of his sequestration, and perhaps some heads of the testimony he
was prepared to offer, in a memorial to the Crown. This plan has
elements of success. It is as likely as any other (and perhaps likelier)
to help our client. Perhaps his Majesty would have the goodness to feel
a certain gratitude to all concerned in such a memorial, which might be
construed into an expression of a very delicate loyalty; and I think, in
the drafting of the same, this view might be brought forward."

They all nodded to each other, not without sighs, for the former
alternative was doubtless more after their inclination.

"Paper then, Mr. Stewart, if you please," pursued Miller; "and I think
it might very fittingly be signed by the five of us here present, as
procurators for the 'condemned man.'"

"It can do none of us any harm at least," says Colstoun, heaving another
sigh, for he had seen himself Lord Advocate the last ten minutes.

Thereupon they set themselves, not very enthusiastically, to draft the
memorial--a process in the course of which they soon caught fire; and I
had no more ado but to sit looking on and answer an occasional question.
The paper was very well expressed; beginning with a recitation of the
facts about myself, the reward offered for my apprehension, my
surrender, the pressure brought to bear upon me; my sequestration; and
my arrival at Inverary in time to be too late; going on to explain the
reasons of loyalty and public interest for which it was agreed to waive
any right of action; and winding up with a forcible appeal to the King's
mercy on behalf of James.

Methought I was a good deal sacrificed, and rather represented in the
light of a firebrand of a fellow whom my cloud of lawyers had restrained
with difficulty from extremes. But I let it pass, and made but the one
suggestion, that I should be described as ready to deliver my own
evidence and adduce that of others before any commission of inquiry--and
the one demand, that I should be immediately furnished with a copy.

Colstoun hummed and hawed. "This is a very confidential document," said
he.

"And my position towards Prestongrange is highly peculiar," I replied.
"No question but I must have touched his heart at our first interview,
so that he has since stood my friend consistently. But for him,
gentlemen, I must now be lying dead or awaiting my sentence alongside
poor James. For which reason I choose to communicate to him the fact of
this memorial as soon as it is copied. You are to consider also that
this step will make for my protection. I have enemies here accustomed to
drive hard; his Grace is in his own country, Lovat by his side; and if
there should hang any ambiguity over our proceedings, I think I might
very well awake in gaol."

Not finding any very ready answer to these considerations, my company of
advisers were at the last persuaded to consent, and made only this
condition that I was to lay the paper before Prestongrange with the
express compliments of all concerned.

The Advocate was at the castle dining with his Grace. By the hand of one
of Colstoun's servants I sent him a billet asking for an interview, and
received a summons to meet him at once in a private house of the town.
Here I found him alone in a chamber; from his face there was nothing to
be gleaned; yet I was not so unobservant but what I spied some halberts
in the hall, and not so stupid but what I could gather he was prepared
to arrest me there and then, should it appear advisable.

"So, Mr. David, this is you?" said he.

"Where I fear I am not overly welcome, my lord," said I. "And I would
like before I go further to express my sense of your lordship's
continued good offices, even should they now cease."

"I have heard of your gratitude before," he replied drily, "and I think
this can scarce be the matter you called me from my wine to listen to. I
would remember also, if I were you, that you still stand on a very boggy
foundation."

"Not now, my lord, I think," said I; "and if your lordship will but
glance an eye along this, you will perhaps think as I do."

He read it sedulously through, frowning heavily; then turned back to one
part and another which he seemed to weigh and compare the effect of. His
face a little lightened.

"This is not so bad but what it might be worse," said he; "though I am
still likely to pay dear for my acquaintance with Mr. David Balfour."

"Rather for your indulgence to that unlucky young man, my lord," said I.

He still skimmed the paper, and all the while his spirits seemed to
mend.

"And to whom am I indebted for this?" he asked presently. "Other
counsels must have been discussed, I think. Who was it proposed this
private method? Was it Miller?"

"My lord, it was myself," said I. "These gentlemen have shown me no such
consideration, as that I should deny myself any credit I can fairly
claim, or spare them any responsibility they should properly bear. And
the mere truth is, that they were all in favour of a process which
should have remarkable consequences in the Parliament House, and prove
for them (in one of their own expressions) a dripping roast. Before I
intervened, I think they were on the point of sharing out the different
law appointments. Our friend Mr. Symon was to be taken in upon some
composition."

Prestongrange smiled. "These are our friends!" said he. "And what were
your reasons for dissenting, Mr. David?"

I told them without concealment, expressing, however, with more force
and volume those which regarded Prestongrange himself.

"You do me no more than justice," said he. "I have fought as hard in
your interest as you have fought against mine. And how came you here
to-day?" he asked. "As the case drew out, I began to grow uneasy that I
had clipped the period so fine, and I was even expecting you to-morrow.
But to-day--I never dreamed of it."

I was not, of course, going to betray Andie.

"I suspect there is some very weary cattle by the road," said I.

"If I had known you were such a mosstrooper you should have tasted
longer of the Bass," says he.

"Speaking of which, my lord, I return your letter." And I gave him the
enclosure in the counterfeit hand.

"There was the cover also with the seal," said he.

"I have it not," said I. "It bore naught but the address, and could not
compromise a cat. The second enclosure I have, and with your permission,
I desire to keep it."

I thought he winced a little, but he said nothing to the point.
"To-morrow," he resumed, "our business here is to be finished, and I
proceed by Glasgow. I would be very glad to have you of my party, Mr.
David."

"My lord...." I began.

"I do not deny it will be of service to me," he interrupted. "I desire
even that, when we shall come to Edinburgh you should alight at my
house. You have very warm friends in the Miss Grants, who will be
overjoyed to have you to themselves. If you think I have been of use to
you, you can thus easily repay me, and so far from losing, may reap some
advantage by the way. It is not every strange young man who is presented
in society by the King's Advocate."

Often enough already (in our brief relations) this gentleman had caused
my head to spin; no doubt but what for a moment he did so again now.
Here was the old fiction still maintained of my particular favour with
his daughters, one of whom had been so good as laugh at me, while the
other two had scarce deigned to remark the fact of my existence. And now
I was to ride with my lord to Glascow; I was to dwell with him in
Edinburgh; I was to be brought into society under his protection! That
he should have so much good-nature as to forgive me was surprising
enough; that he could wish to take me up and serve me seemed impossible;
and I began to seek for some ulterior meaning. One was plain. If I
became his guest, repentance was excluded; I could never think better of
my present design and bring any action. And besides, would not my
presence in his house draw out the whole pungency of the memorial? For
that complaint could not be very seriously regarded, if the person
chiefly injured was the guest of the official most incriminated. As I
thought upon this, I could not quite refrain from smiling.

"This is in the nature of a countercheck to the memorial?" said I.

"You are cunning, Mr. David," said he, "and you do not wholly guess
wrong; the fact will be of use to me in my defence. Perhaps, however,
you underrate my friendly sentiments, which are perfectly genuine. I
have a respect for you, Mr. David, mingled with awe," says he, smiling.

"I am more than willing, I am earnestly desirous to meet your wishes,"
said I. "It is my design to be called to the bar, where your lordship's
countenance would be invaluable; and I am besides sincerely grateful to
yourself and family for different marks of interest and of indulgence.
The difficulty is here. There is one point in which we pull two ways.
You are trying to hang James Stewart, I am trying to save him. In so far
as my riding with you would better your lordship's defence, I am at your
lordship's orders; but in so far as it would help to hang James Stewart,
you see me at a stick."

I thought he swore to himself. "You should certainly be called; the bar
is the true scene for your talents," says he, bitterly, and then fell a
while silent. "I will tell you," he presently resumed, "there is no
question of James Stewart, for or against. James is a dead man; his life
is given and taken--bought (if you like it better) and sold; no memorial
can help--no defalcation of a faithful Mr. David hurt him. Blow high,
blow low, there will be no pardon for James Stewart: and take that for
said! The question is now of myself: am I to stand or fall? and I do not
deny to you that I am in some danger. But will Mr. David Balfour
consider why? It is not because I have pushed the case unduly against
James; for that, I am sure of condonation. And it is not because I have
sequestered Mr. David on a rock, though it will pass under that colour;
but because I did not take the ready and plain path, to which I was
pressed repeatedly, and send Mr. David to his grave or to the gallows.
Hence the scandal--hence this damned memorial," striking the paper on
his leg. "My tenderness for you has brought me in this difficulty. I
wish to know if your tenderness to your own conscience is too great to
let you help me out of it?"

No doubt but there was much of the truth in what he said; if James was
past helping, whom was it more natural that I should turn to help than
just the man before me, who had helped myself so often, and was even now
setting me a pattern of patience? I was besides not only weary, but
beginning to be ashamed of my perpetual attitude of suspicion and
refusal.

"If you will name the time and place, I will be punctually ready to
attend your lordship," said I.

He shook hands with me. "And I think my misses have some news for you,"
says he, dismissing me.

I came away, vastly pleased to have my peace made, yet a little
concerned in conscience; nor could I help wondering, as I went back,
whether, perhaps, I had not been a scruple too good-natured. But there
was the fact, that this was a man that might have been my father, an
able man, a great dignitary, and one that, in the hour of my need, had
reached a hand to my assistance. I was in the better humour to enjoy the
remainder of that evening, which I passed with the advocates, in
excellent company no doubt, but perhaps with rather more than a
sufficiency of punch: for though I went early to bed I have no clear
mind of how I got there.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XVIII

THE TEE'D BALL


On the morrow, from the justices' private room, where none could see me,
I heard the verdict given in and judgment rendered upon James. The
Duke's words I am quite sure I have correctly; and since that famous
passage has been made a subject of dispute, I may as well commemorate my
version. Having referred to the year '45, the chief of the Campbells,
sitting as Justice-General upon the bench, thus addressed the
unfortunate Stewart before him: "If you had been successful in that
rebellion, you might have been giving the law where you have now
received the judgment of it; we, who are this day your judges, might
have been tried before one of your mock courts of judicature; and then
you might have been satiated with the blood of any name or clan to which
you had an aversion."

"This is to let the cat out of the bag, indeed," thought I. And that was
the general impression. It was extraordinary how the young advocate lads
took hold and made a mock of this speech, and how scarce a meal passed
but what some one would get in the words: "And then you might have been
satiated." Many songs were made in that time for the hour's diversion,
and are near all forgot. I remember one began:

    What do ye want the bluid of, bluid of?
      Is it a name, or is it a clan,
      Or is it an aefauld Hielandman,
    That ye want the bluid of, bluid of?

Another went to my old favourite air, _The House of Airlie_, and began
thus:

    It fell on a day when Argyle was on the bench,
      That they served him a Stewart for his denner.

And one of the verses ran:

    Then up and spak the Duke, and flyted on his cook,
      I regaird it as a sensible aspersion,
    That I would sup ava', an' satiate my maw,
      With the bluid of ony clan of my aversion.

James was as fairly murdered as though the Duke had got a fowling-piece
and stalked him. So much of course I knew: but others knew not so much,
and were more affected by the items of scandal that came to light in the
progress of the cause. One of the chief was certainly this sally of the
justice's. It was run hard by another of a juryman, who had struck into
the midst of Colstoun's speech for the defence with a "Pray, sir, cut it
short, we are quite weary," which seemed the very excess of impudence
and simplicity. But some of my new lawyer friends were still more
staggered with an innovation that had disgraced and even vitiated the
proceedings. One witness was never called. His name, indeed, was
printed, where it may still be seen on the fourth page of the list:
"James Drummond, _alias_ Macgregor, _alias_ James More, late tenant in
Inveronachile"; and his precognition had been taken, as the manner is,
in writing. He had remembered or invented (God help him) matter which
was lead in James Stewart's shoes, and I saw was like to prove wings to
his own. This testimony it was highly desirable to bring to the notice
of the jury, without exposing the man himself to the perils of
cross-examination; and the way it was brought about was a matter of
surprise to all. For the paper was handed round (like a curiosity) in
court; passed through the jury-box, where it did its work; and
disappeared again (as though by accident) before it reached the counsel
for the prisoner. This was counted a most insidious device; and that the
name of James More should be mingled up with it filled me with shame for
Catriona and concern for myself.

The following day, Prestongrange and I, with a considerable company, set
out for Glasgow, where (to my impatience) we continued to linger some
time in a mixture of pleasure and affairs. I lodged with my lord, with
whom I was encouraged to familiarity; had my place at entertainments;
was presented to the chief guests; and altogether made more of than I
thought accorded either with my parts or station; so that, on strangers
being present, I would often blush for Prestongrange. It must be owned
the view I had taken of the world in these last months was fit to cast a
gloom upon my character. I had met many men, some of them leaders in
Israel whether by their birth or talents; and who among them all had
shown clean hands? As for the Browns and Millers, I had seen their
self-seeking, I could never again respect them. Prestongrange was the
best yet; he had saved me, had spared me rather, when others had it in
their minds to murder me outright; but the blood of James lay at his
door; and I thought his present dissimulation with myself a thing below
pardon. That he should affect to find pleasure in my discourse almost
surprised me out of my patience. I would sit and watch him with a kind
of a slow fire of anger in my bowels. "Ah, friend, friend," I would
think to myself, "if you were but through with this affair of the
memorial, would you not kick me in the streets?" Here I did him, as
events have proved, the most foul injustice; and I think he was at once
far more sincere, and a far more artful performer than I supposed.

But I had some warrant for my incredulity in the behaviour of that court
of young advocates that hung about him in the hope of patronage. The
sudden favour of a lad not previously heard of troubled them at first
out of measure; but two days were not gone by before I found myself
surrounded with flattery and attention. I was the same young man, and
neither better nor bonnier, that they had rejected a month before; and
now there was no civility too fine for me! The same, do I say? It was
not so; and the byname by which I went behind my back confirmed it.
Seeing me so firm with the Advocate, and persuaded that I was to fly
high and far, they had taken a word from the golfing green, and called
me _the Tee'd Ball_.[14] I was told I was now "one of themselves"; I was
to taste of their soft lining, who had already made my own experience of
the roughness of the outer husk; and the one, to whom I had been
presented in Hope Park, was so assured as even to remind me of that
meeting. I told him I had not the pleasure of remembering it.

"Why," says he, "it was Miss Grant herself presented me! My name is
so-and-so."

"It may very well be, sir," said I, "but I have kept no mind of it."

At which he desisted; and in the midst of the disgust that commonly
overflowed my spirits I had a glisk of pleasure.

But I have not patience to dwell upon that time at length. When I was in
company with these young politics I was borne down with shame for myself
and my own plain ways, and scorn for them and their duplicity. Of the
two evils, I thought Prestongrange to be the least; and while I was
always as stiff as buckram to the young bloods, I made rather a
dissimulation of my hard feelings towards the Advocate, and was (in old
Mr. Campbell's word) "soople to the laird." Himself commented on the
difference, and bid me be more of my age, and make friends with my young
comrades.

I told him I was slow of making friends.

"I will take the word back," said he. "But there is such a thing as
_Fair gude e'en and fair gude day_, Mr. David. These are the same young
men with whom you are to pass your days and get through life: your
backwardness has a look of arrogance; and unless you can assume a little
more lightness of manner, I fear you will meet difficulties in the
path."

"It will be an ill job to make a silk purse of a sow's ear," said I.

On the morning of October 1st I was awakened by the clattering in of an
express; and getting to my window almost before he had dismounted, I saw
the messenger had ridden hard. Somewhile after I was called to
Prestongrange, where he was sitting in his bedgown and nightcap, with
his letters around him.

"Mr. David," said he, "I have a piece of news for you. It concerns some
friends of yours, of whom I sometimes think you are a little ashamed,
for you have never referred to their existence."

I suppose I blushed.

"I see you understand, since you make the answering signal," said he.
"And I must compliment you on your excellent taste in beauty. But do you
know, Mr. David, this seems to me a very enterprising lass? She crops up
from every side. The Government of Scotland appears unable to proceed
for Mistress Katrine Drummond, which was somewhat the case (no great
while back) with a certain Mr. David Balfour. Should not these make a
good match? Her first intromission in politics--but I must not tell you
that story, the authorities have decided you are to hear it otherwise
and from a livelier narrator. This new example is more serious, however;
and I am afraid I must alarm you with the intelligence that she is now
in prison."

I cried out.

"Yes," said he, "the little lady is in prison. But I would not have you
to despair. Unless you (with your friends and memorials) shall procure
my downfall, she is to suffer nothing."

"But what has she done? What is her offence?" I cried.

"It might be almost construed a high treason," he returned, "for she has
broke the King's Castle of Edinburgh."

"The lady is much my friend," I said. "I know you would not work me if
the thing were serious."

"And yet it is serious in a sense," said he; "for this rogue of a
Katrine--or Cateran, as we may call her--has set adrift again upon the
world that very doubtful character, her papa."

Here was one of my previsions justified: James More was once again at
liberty. He had lent his men to keep me a prisoner; he had volunteered
his testimony in the Appin case, and the same (no matter by what
subterfuge) had been employed to influence the jury. Now came his
reward, and he was free. It might please the authorities to give to it
the colour of an escape; but I knew better--I knew it was the fulfilment
of a bargain. The same course of thought relieved me of the least alarm
for Catriona. She might be thought to have broke prison for her father;
she might have believed so herself. But the chief hand in the whole
business was that of Prestongrange; and I was sure, so far from letting
her come to punishment, he would not suffer her to be even tried.
Whereupon thus came out of me the not very politic ejaculation:

"Ah! I was expecting that!"

"You have at times a great deal of discretion too!" says Prestongrange.

"And what is my lord pleased to mean by that?" I asked.

"I was just marvelling," he replied, "that being so clever as to draw
these inferences, you should not be clever enough to keep them to
yourself. But I think you would like to hear the details of the affair.
I have received two versions: and the least official is the more full
and far the more entertaining, being from the lively pen of my eldest
daughter. 'Here is all the town bizzing with a fine piece of work,' she
writes, 'and what would make the thing more noted (if it were only
known) the malefactor is a _protge_ of his lordship my papa. I am sure
your heart is too much in your duty (if it were nothing else) to have
forgotten Grey Eyes. What does she do, but get a broad hat with the
flaps open, a long hairy-like man's great-coat, and a big gravatt; kilt
her coats up to _Gude kens whaur_, clap two pair of boot-hose upon her
legs, take a pair of _clouted brogues_[15] in her hand, and off to the
Castle? Here she gives herself out to be a soutar[16] in the employ of
James More, and gets admitted to his cell, the lieutenant (who seems to
have been full of pleasantry) making sport among his soldiers of the
soutar's great-coat. Presently they hear disputation and the sound of
blows inside. Out flies the cobbler, his coat flying, the flaps of his
hat beat about his face, and the lieutenant and his soldiers mock at him
as he runs off. They laughed not so hearty the next time they had
occasion to visit the cell, and found nobody but a tall, pretty,
grey-eyed lass in the female habit! As for the cobbler, he was "over the
hills ayont Dumblane," and it's thought that poor Scotland will have to
console herself without him. I drank Catriona's health this night in
public. Indeed, the whole town admires her; and I think the beaux would
wear bits of her garters in their button-holes if they could only get
them. I would have gone to visit her in prison too, only I remembered in
time I was papa's daughter; so I wrote her a billet instead, which I
entrusted to the faithful Doig, and I hope you will admit I can be
political when I please. The same faithful gomeral is to despatch this
letter by the express along with those of the wiseacres, so that you may
hear Tom Fool in company with Solomon. Talking of _gomerals_, do tell
_Dauvit Balfour_. I would I could see the face of him at the thought of
a long-legged lass in such a predicament! to say nothing of the levities
of your affectionate daughter, and his respectful friend.' So my rascal
signs herself!" continued Prestongrange. "And you see, Mr. David, it is
quite true what I tell you, that my daughters regard you with the most
affectionate playfulness."


"The gomeral is much obliged," said I.

"And was not this prettily done?" he went on. "Is not this Highland maid
a piece of a heroine?"

"I was always sure she had a great heart," said I. "And I wager she
guessed nothing.... But I beg your pardon, this is to tread upon
forbidden subjects."

"I will go bail she did not," he returned, quite openly. "I will go bail
she thought she was flying straight into King George's face."

Remembrance of Catriona, and the thought of her lying in captivity,
moved me strangely. I could see that even Prestongrange admired, and
could not withhold his lips from smiling when he considered her
behaviour. As for Miss Grant, for all her ill habit of mockery, her
admiration shone out plain. A kind of a heat came on me.

"I am not your lordship's daughter..." I began.

"That I know of!" he put in smiling.

"I speak like a fool," said I, "or rather I began wrong. It would
doubtless be unwise in Mistress Grant to go to her in prison; but for
me, I think I would look like a half-hearted friend if I did not fly
there instantly."

"So-ho, Mr. David," says he, "I thought that you and I were in a
bargain?"

"My lord," I said, "when I made that bargain I was a good deal affected
by your goodness, but I'll never can deny that I was moved besides by my
own interest. There was self-seeking in my heart, and I think shame of
it now. It may be for your lordship's safety to say this fashious Davie
Balfour is your friend and housemate. Say it then; I'll never contradict
you. But as for your patronage, I give it all back. I ask but the one
thing--let me go, and give me a pass to see her in her prison."

He looked at me with a hard eye. "You put the cart before the horse, I
think," says he. "That which I had given was a portion of my liking,
which your thankless nature does not seem to have remarked. But for my
patronage, it is not given, nor (to be exact) is it yet offered." He
paused a bit. "And I warn you, you do not know yourself," he added.
"Youth is a hasty season; you will think better of all this before a
year."

"Well, and I would like to be that kind of youth!" I cried. "I have seen
too much of the other party, in these young advocates that fawn upon
your lordship and are even at the pains to fawn on me. And I have seen
it in the old ones also. They are all for by-ends, the whole clan of
them! It's this that makes me seem to misdoubt your lordship's liking.
Why would I think that you would like me? But ye told me yourself ye had
an interest!"

I stopped at this, confounded that I had run so far; he was observing me
with a unfathomable face.

"My lord, I ask your pardon," I resumed. "I have nothing in my chafts
but a rough country tongue. I think it would be only decent-like if I
would go to see my friend in her captivity; but I'm owing you my life,
I'll never forget that; and-if it's for your lordship's good, here I'll
stay. That's barely gratitude."

"This might have been reached in fewer words," says Prestongrange,
grimly. "It is easy, and it is at times gracious, to say a plain Scots
'ay'."

"Ah, but, my lord, I think ye take me not yet entirely!" cried I. "For
_your_ sake, for my life-safe, and the kindness that ye say ye bear to
me--for these, I'll consent; but not for any good that might be coming
to myself. If I stand aside when this young maid is in her trial, it's a
thing I will be noways advantaged by; I will lose by it, I will never
gain. I would rather make a shipwreck wholly than to build on that
foundation."

He was a minute serious, then smiled. "You mind me of the man with the
long nose," said he: "was you to look at the moon by a telescope, you
would see David Balfour there! But you shall have your way of it. I will
ask at you one service, and then set you free. My clerks are overdriven;
be so good as copy me these few pages," says he, visibly swithering
among some huge rolls of manuscripts, "and when that is done, I shall
bid you God speed! I would never charge myself with Mr. David's
conscience; and if you could cast some part of it (as you went by) in a
moss hag, you would find yourself to ride much easier without it."

"Perhaps not just entirely in the same direction though, my lord!" says
I.

"And you shall have the last word, too!" cries he gaily.

Indeed he had some cause for gaiety, having now found the means to gain
his purpose. To lessen the weight of the memorial, or to have a readier
answer at his hand, he desired I should appear publicly in the character
of his intimate. But if I were to appear with the same publicity as a
visitor to Catriona in her prison the world would scarce stint to draw
conclusions, and the true nature of James More's escape must become
evident to all. This was the little problem I had set him of a sudden,
and to which he had so briskly found an answer. I was to be tethered in
Glasgow by that job of copying, which in mere outward decency I could
not well refuse; and during these hours of my employment Catriona was
privately got rid of. I think shame to write of this man that loaded me
with so many goodnesses. He was kind to me as any father, yet I ever
thought him as false as a cracked bell.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XIX

I AM MUCH IN THE HANDS OF THE LADIES


The copying was a weary business, the more so as I perceived very early
there was no sort of urgency in the matters treated, and began very
early to consider my employment a pretext. I had no sooner finished,
than I got to horse, used what remained of daylight to the best purpose,
and being at last fairly benighted, slept in a house by Almond-Water
side. I was in the saddle again before the day, and the Edinburgh booths
were just opening when I clattered in by the West Bow and drew up a
smoking horse at my lord Advocate's door. I had a written word for Doig,
my lord's private hand that was thought to be in all his secrets, a
worthy, little plain man, all fat and snuff and self-sufficiency. Him I
found already at his desk and already bedabbled with maccabaw, in the
same anteroom where I rencountered with James More. He read the note
scrupulously through like a chapter in his Bible.

"H'm," says he, "ye come a wee thing ahint-hand, Mr. Balfour. The bird's
flaen, we hae letten her out."

"Miss Drummond is set free?" I cried.

"Achy!" said he. "What would we keep her for, ye ken? To hae made a
steer about the bairn would hae pleased naebody."

"And where'll she be now?" says I.

"Gude kens!" says Doig, with a shrug.

"She'll have gone home to Lady Allardyce, I'm thinking," said I.

"That'll be it," said he.

"Then I'll gang there straight," says I.

"But ye'll be for a bite or ye go?" said he.

"Neither bite nor sup," said I. "I had a good waucht of milk in by
Ratho."

"Aweel, aweel," says Doig. "But ye'll can leave your horse here and your
bags, for it seems we're to have your up-put."

"Na, na," said I. "Tamson's mear[17] would never be the thing for me,
this day of all days."

Doig speaking somewhat broad, I had been led by imitation into an accent
much more countrified than I was usually careful to affect, a good deal
broader indeed than I have written it down; and I was the more ashamed
when another voice joined in behind me with a scrap of a ballad:

    "Gae saddle me the bonny black,
      Gae saddle sune and mak' him ready,
    For I will down the Gatehope-slack,
      And a' to see my bonny leddy."

The young lady, when I turned to her, stood in a morning gown, and her
hands muffled in the same, as if to hold me at a distance. Yet I could
not but think there was kindness in the eye with which she saw me.

"My best respects to you, Mistress Grant," said I bowing.

"The like to yourself, Mr. David," she replied, with a deep courtesy,
"And I beg to remind you of an old musty saw, that meat and mass never
hindered man. The mass I cannot afford you, for we are all good
Protestants. But the meat I press on your attention. And I would not
wonder but I could find something for your private ear that would be
worth the stopping for."

"Mistress Grant," said I, "I believe I am already your debtor for some
merry words--and I think they were kind too--on a piece of unsigned
paper."

"Unsigned paper?" says she, and made a droll face, which was likewise
wondrous beautiful, as of one trying to remember.

"Or else I am the more deceived," I went on. "But to be sure, we shall
have the time to speak of these, since your father is so good as to make
me for a while your inmate; and the _gomeral_ begs you at this time only
for the favour of his liberty."

"You give yourself hard names," said she.

"Mr. Doig and I would be blythe to take harder at your clever pen," says
I.

"Once more I have to admire the discretion of all men-folk," she
replied. "But if you will not eat, off with you at once; you will be
back the sooner, for you go on a fool's errand. Off with you, Mr.
David," she continued, opening the door.

    "He has lowpen on his bonny grey,
      He rade the richt gate and the ready;
    I trow he would neither stint nor stay,
      Far he was seeking his bonny leddy."

I did not wait to be twice bidden, and did justice to Miss Grant's
citation on the way to Dean.

Old Lady Allardyce walked there alone in the garden, in her hat and
mutch, and having a silver-mounted staff of some black wood to lean
upon. As I alighted from my horse, and drew near to her with _congees_,
I could see the blood come in her face, and her head fling into the air
like what I had conceived of empresses.

"What brings you to my poor door?" she cried, speaking high through her
nose. "I cannot bar it. The males of my house are dead and buried; I
have neither son nor husband to stand in the gate for me; any beggar can
pluck me by the baird[18]--and a baird there is, and that's the worst of
it yet!" she added, partly to herself.

I was extremely put out at this reception, and the last remark, which
seemed like a daft wife's, left me near hand speechless.

"I see I have fallen under your displeasure, ma'am," said I. "Yet I will
still be so bold as ask after Mistress Drummond."

She considered me with a burning eye, her lips pressed close together
into twenty creases, her hand shaking on her staff. "This cows all!" she
cried. "Ye come to me to spier for her! Would God I knew!"

"She is not here?" I cried.

She threw up her chin and made a step and a cry at me, so that I fell
back incontinent.

"Out upon your leeing throat!" she cried. "What! ye come and spier at
me! She's in jyle, whaur ye took her to--that's all there is to it. And
of a' the beings ever I beheld in breeks, to think it should be you! Ye
timmer scoun'rel, if I had a male left to my name I would have your
jaicket dustit till ye raired."

I thought it not good to delay longer in that place because I remarked
her passion to be rising. As I turned to the horse-post she even
followed me; and I make no shame to confess that I rode away with the
one stirrup on and scrambling for the other.

As I knew no other quarter where I could push my inquiries, there was
nothing left me but to return to the Advocate's. I was well received by
the four ladies, who were now in company together, and must give the
news of Prestongrange and what word went in the west country, at the
most inordinate length and with great weariness to myself; while all the
time that young lady, with whom I so much desired to be alone again,
observed me quizzically and seemed to find pleasure in the sight of my
impatience. At last, after I had endured a meal with them, and was come
very near the point of appealing for an interview before her aunt, she
went and stood by the music case, and picking out a tune, sang to it on
a high key--"He that will not when he may, When he will he shall have
nay." But this was the end of her rigours, and presently, after making
some excuse of which I have no mind, she carried me away in private to
her father's library. I should not fail to say that she was dressed to
the nines, and appeared extraordinary handsome.

"Now, Mr. David, sit ye down here and let us have a two-handed crack,"
said she. "For I have much to tell you, and it appears besides that I
have been grossly unjust to your good taste."

"In what manner, Mistress Grant?" I asked. "I trust I have never seemed
to fail in due respect."

"I will be your surety, Mr. David," said she. "Your respect, whether to
yourself or your poor neighbours, has been always and most fortunately
beyond imitation. But that is by the question. You got a note from me?"
she asked.

"I was so bold as to suppose so upon inference," said I, "and it was
kindly thought upon."

"It must have prodigiously surprised you," said she. "But let us begin
with the beginning. You have not perhaps forgot a day when you were so
kind as to escort three very tedious misses to Hope Park? I have the
less cause to forget it myself, because you was so particular obliging
as to introduce me to some of the principles of the Latin grammar, a
thing which wrote itself profoundly on my gratitude."

"I fear I was sadly pedantical," said I, overcome with confusion at the
memory. "You are only to consider I am quite unused with the society of
ladies."

"I will say the less about the grammar then," she replied. "But how came
you to desert your charge? 'He has thrown her out, overboard, his ain
dear Annie!'" she hummed; "and his ain dear Annie and her two sisters
had to taigle home by theirselves like a string of green geese! It seems
you returned to my papa's, where you showed yourself excessively
martial, and then on to realms unknown, with an eye (it appears) to the
Bass Rock; solan geese being perhaps more to your mind than bonny
lasses."

Through all this raillery there was something indulgent in the lady's
eye which made me suppose there might be better coming.

"You take a pleasure to torment me," said I, "and I make a very feckless
plaything; but let me ask you to be more merciful. At this time there is
but the one thing that I care to hear of, and that will be news of
Catriona."

"Do you call her by that name to her face, Mr. Balfour?" she asked.

"In troth, and I am not very sure," I stammered.

"I would not do so in any case to strangers," said Miss Grant. "And why
are you so much immersed in the affairs of this young lady?"

"I heard she was in prison," said I.

"Well, and now you hear that she is out of it," she replied, "and what
more would you have? She has no need of any further champion."

"I may have the greater need of her, ma'am," said I.

"Come, this is better!" says Miss Grant. "But look me fairly in the
face; am I not bonnier than she?"

"I would be the last to be denying it," said I. "There is not your
marrow in all Scotland."

"Well, here you have the pick of the two at your hand, and must needs
speak of the other," said she. "This is never the way to please the
ladies, Mr. Balfour."

"But, mistress," said I, "there are surely other things besides mere
beauty."

"By which I am to understand that I am no better than I should be,
perhaps?" she asked.

"By which you will please understand that I am like the cock in the
midden in the fable book," said I. "I see the braw jewel--and I like
fine to see it too--but I have more need of the pickle corn."

"Bravissimo!" she cried. "There is a word well said at last, and I will
reward you for it with my story. That same night of your desertion I
came late from a friend's house--where I was excessively admired,
whatever you may think of it--and what should I hear but that a lass in
a tartan screen desired to speak with me? She had been there an hour or
better, said the servant-lass, and she grat in to herself as she sat
waiting. I went to her direct; she rose as I came in, and I knew her at
a look. '_Grey Eyes!_' says I to myself, but was more wise than to let
on. _You will be Miss Grant at last?_ she says, rising and looking at me
hard and pitiful. _Ay, it was true he said, you are bonny at all
events.--The way God made me, my dear_, I said, _but I would be gey and
obliged if ye could tell me what brought you here at such a time of the
night--Lady_, she said, _we are kinsfolk, we are both come of the blood
of the sons of Alpin.--My dear_, I replied, _I think no more of Alpin or
his sons than what I do of a kale-stock. You have a better argument in
these tears upon your bonny face_. And at that I was so weakminded as to
kiss her, which is what you would like to do dearly, and I wager will
never find the courage of. I say it was weakminded of me, for I knew no
more of her than the outside; but it was the wisest stroke I could have
hit upon. She is a very staunch, brave nature, but I think she has been
little used with tenderness; and at that caress (though to say the
truth, it was but lightly given) her heart went out to me. I will never
betray the secrets of my sex, Mr. Davie; I will never tell you the way
she turned me round her thumb, because it is the same she will use to
twist yourself. Ay, it is a fine lass! She is as clean as hill well
water."

"She is e'en't!" I cried.

"Well, then, she told me her concerns," pursued Miss Grant, "and in what
a swither she was in about her papa, and what a taking about yourself,
with very little cause, and in what a perplexity she had found herself
after you was gone away. _And then I minded at long last,_ says she,
_that we were kinswomen, and that Mr. David should have given you the
name of the bonniest of the bonny, and I was thinking to myself 'If she
is so bonny she will be good at all events; and I took up my foot soles
out of that_. That was when I forgave yourself, Mr. Davie. When you was
in my society, you seemed upon hot iron; by all marks, if ever I saw a
young man that wanted to be gone, it was yourself, and I and my two
sisters were the ladies you were so desirous to be gone from; and now it
appeared you had given me some notice in the bygoing, and was so kind as
to comment on my attractions! From that hour you may date our
friendship, and I began to think with tenderness upon the Latin
grammar."

"You will have many hours to rally me in," said I, "and I think besides
you do yourself injustice, I think it was Catriona turned your heart in
my direction, she is too simple to perceive as you do the stiffness of
her friend."

"I would not like to wager upon that, Mr. David," said she. "The lasses
have clear eyes. But at least she is your friend entirely, as I was to
see. I carried her in to his lordship my papa; and his Advocacy, being
in a favourable stage of claret, was so good as to receive the pair of
us. _Here is Grey Eyes that you have been deaved with these days past_,
said I, _she is come to prove that we spoke true, and I lay the
prettiest lass in the three Lothians at your feet_--making a papistical
reservation of myself. She suited her action to my words; down she went
upon her knees to him--I would not like to swear but he saw two of her,
which doubtless made her appeal the more irresistible, for you are all a
pack of Mahomedans--told him what had passed that night, and how she had
withheld her father's man from following of you, and what a case she was
in about her father, and what a flutter for yourself; and begged with
weeping for the lives of both of you (neither of which was in the
slightest danger) till I vow I was proud of my sex because it was done
so pretty, and ashamed for it because of the smallness of the occasion.
She had not gone far, I assure you, before the Advocate was wholly
sober, to see his inmost politics ravelled out by a young lass and
discovered to the most unruly of his daughters. But we took him in hand,
the pair of us, and brought that matter straight. Properly managed--and
that means managed by me--there is no one to compare with my papa."

"He has been a good man to me," said I.

"Well, he was a good man to Katrine, and I was there to see to it," said
she.

"And she pled for me!" said I.

"She did that, and very movingly," said Miss Grant. "I would not like to
tell you what she said, I find you vain enough already."

"God reward her for it!" cried I.

"With Mr. David Balfour, I suppose?" says she.

"You do me too much injustice at the last!" I cried. "I would tremble to
think of her in such hard hands. Do you think I would presume, because
she begged my life? She would do that for a new whelped puppy! I have
had more than that to set me up, if you but ken'd. She kissed that hand
of mine. Ay, but she did. And why? because she thought I was playing a
brave part and might be going to my death. It was not for my sake, but I
need not be telling that to you that cannot look at me without laughter.
It was for the love of what she thought was bravery. I believe there is
none but me and poor Prince Charlie had that honour done them. Was this
not to make a god of me? and do you not think my heart would quake when
I remember it?"

"I do laugh at you a good deal, and a good deal more than is quite
civil," said she; "but I will tell you one thing: if you speak to her
like that, you have some glimmerings of a chance."

"Me?" I cried, "I would never dare. I can speak to you, Miss Grant,
because it's a matter of indifference what ye think of me. But her? no
fear!" said I.

"I think you have the largest feet in all broad Scotland," says she.

"Troth, they are no very small," said I, looking down.

"Ah, poor Catriona!" cried Miss Grant.

And I could but stare upon her; for though I now see very well what she
was driving at (and perhaps some justification for the same), I was
never swift at the uptake in such flimsy talk.

"Ah well, Mr. David," she said, "it goes sore against my conscience, but
I see I shall have to be your speaking board. She shall know you came to
her straight upon the news of her imprisonment; she shall know you would
not pause to eat; and of your conversation she shall hear just so much
as I think convenient for a maid of her age and inexperience. Believe
me, you will be in that way much better served than you could serve
yourself, for I will keep the big feet out of the platter."

"You know where she is, then?" I exclaimed.

"That I do, Mr. David, and will never tell," said she.

"Why that?" I asked.

"Well," she said, "I am a good friend, as you will soon discover; and
the chief of those that I am a friend to is my papa. I assure you, you
will never heat nor melt me out of that, so you may spare me your
sheep's eyes; and adieu to your David-Balfourship for the now."

"But there is yet one thing more," I cried. "There is one thing that
must be stopped, being mere ruin to herself, and to me too."

"Well," she said, "be brief, I have spent half the day on you already."

"My Lady Allardyce believes," I began, "she supposes--she thinks that I
abducted her."

The colour came into Miss Grant's face, so that at first I was quite
abashed to find her ear so delicate, till I bethought me she was
struggling rather with mirth, a notion in which I was altogether
confirmed by the shaking of her voice as she replied--

"I will take up the defence of your reputation," said she. "You may
leave it in my hands."

And with that she withdrew out of the library.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XX

I CONTINUE TO MOVE IN GOOD SOCIETY


For about exactly two months I remained a guest in Prestongrange's
family, where I bettered my acquaintance with the bench, the bar, and
the flower of Edinburgh company. You are not to suppose my education was
neglected, on the contrary I was kept extremely busy. I studied the
French, so as to be more prepared to go to Leyden; I set myself to the
fencing, and wrought hard, sometimes three hours in the day, with
notable advancement; at the suggestion of my cousin, Pilrig, who was an
apt musician, I was put to a singing class, and by the orders of my Miss
Grant, to one for the dancing, at which. I must say I proved far from
ornamental. However, all were good enough to say it gave me an address a
little more genteel; and there is no question but I learned to manage my
coat skirts and sword with more dexterity, and to stand in a room as
though the same belonged to me. My clothes themselves were all earnestly
re-ordered; and the most trifling circumstance, such as where I should
tie my hair, or the colour of my ribbon, debated among the three misses
like a thing of weight. One way with another, no doubt I was a good deal
improved to look at, and acquired a bit of a modish air that would have
surprised the good folks at Essendean.

The two younger misses were very willing to discuss a point of my
habiliment, because that was in the line of their chief thoughts. I
cannot say that they appeared any other way conscious of my presence;
and though always more than civil, with a kind of heartless cordiality,
could not hide how much I wearied them. As for the aunt, she was a
wonderful still woman; and I think she gave me much the same attention
as she gave the rest of the family, which was little enough. The eldest
daughter and the Advocate himself were thus my principal friends, and
our familiarity was much increased by a pleasure that we took in common.
Before the court met we spent a day or two at the house of Grange,
living very nobly with an open table, and here it was that we three
began to ride out together in the fields, a practice afterwards
maintained in Edinburgh, so far as the Advocate's continual affairs
permitted. When we were put in a good frame by the briskness of the
exercise, the difficulties of the way, or the accidents of bad weather,
my shyness wore entirely off; we forgot that we were strangers, and
speech not being required, it flowed the more naturally on. Then it was
that they had my story from me, bit by bit, from the time that I left
Essendean, with my voyage and battle in the _Covenant_, wanderings in
the heather, etc.; and from the interest they found in my adventures
sprung the circumstance of a jaunt we made a little later on, a day when
the courts were not sitting, and of which I will tell a trifle more at
length.

We took horse early, and passed first by the house of Shaws, where it
stood smokeless in a great field of white frost, for it was yet early in
the day. Here Prestongrange alighted down, gave me his horse, and
proceeded alone to visit my uncle. My heart, I remember, swelled up
bitter within me at the sight of that bare house and the thought of the
old miser sitting chittering within in the cold kitchen.

"There is my home," said I. "And my family."

"Poor David Balfour!" said Miss Grant.

What passed during the visit I have never heard; but it would doubtless
not be very agreeable to Ebenezer; for when the Advocate came forth
again his face was dark.

"I think you will soon be the laird indeed, Mr. Davie," says he, turning
half about with the one foot in the stirrup.

"I will never pretend sorrow," said I; and, to say the truth, during his
absence Miss Grant and I had been embellishing the place in fancy with
plantations, parterres, and a terrace, much as I have since carried out
in fact.

Thence we pushed to the Queensferry, where Rankeillor gave us a good
welcome, being indeed out of the body to receive so great a visitor.
Here the Advocate was so unaffectedly good as to go quite fully over my
affairs, sitting perhaps two hours with the Writer in his study, and
expressing (I was told) a great esteem for myself and concern for my
fortunes. To while this time, Miss Grant and I and young Rankeillor took
boat and passed the Hope to Limekilns. Rankeillor made himself very
ridiculous (and, I thought offensive) with his admiration for the young
lady, and to my wonder (only it is so common a weakness of her sex) she
seemed, if anything, to be a little gratified. One use it had: for when
we were come to the other side, she laid her commands on him to mind the
boat, while she and I passed a little further to the ale-house. This was
her own thought, for she had been taken with my account of Alison
Hastie, and desired to see the lass herself. We found her once more
alone--indeed, I believe her father wrought all day in the fields--and
she curtsied dutifully to the gentry-folk and the beautiful young lady
in the riding coat.

"Is this all the welcome I am to get?" said I, holding out my hand. "And
have you no more memory of old friends?"

"Keep me! wha's this of it?" she cried, and then, "God's truth, it's the
tautit[19] laddie!"

"The very same," says I.

"Mony's the time I've thocht upon you and your freen, and blythe am I to
see in your braws,"[20] she cried. "Though I kent ye were come to your
ain folk by the grand present that ye sent me and that I thank ye for
with a' my heart."

"There," said Miss Grant to me, "run out by with ye, like a good bairn.
I didnae come here to stand and hand a candle; it's her and me that are
to crack."

I suppose she stayed ten minutes in the house, but when she came forth I
observed two things--that her eyes were reddened, and a silver brooch
was gone out of her bosom. This very much affected me.

"I never saw you so well adorned," said I.

"O Davie man, dinna be a pompous gowk!" said she, and was more than
usually sharp to me the remainder of the day.

About candlelight we came home from this excursion.

For a good while I heard nothing further of Catriona: my Miss Grant
remaining quite impenetrable, and stopping my mouth with pleasantries.
At last, one day that she returned from walking and found me alone in
the parlour over my French, I thought there was something unusual in her
looks; the colour heightened, the eyes sparkling high, and a bit of a
smile continually bitten in as she regarded me. She seemed indeed like
the very spirit of mischief, and walking briskly in the room, had soon
involved me in a kind of quarrel over nothing and (at the least) with
nothing intended on my side. I was like Christian in the slough; the
more I tried to clamber out upon the side, the deeper I became involved;
until at last I heard her declare, with a great deal of passion, that
she would take that answer at the hands of none, and I must down upon my
knees for pardon.

The causelessness of all this fuff stirred my own bile. "I have said
nothing you can properly object to," said I, "and as for my knees, that
is an attitude I keep for God."

"And as a goddess I am to be served!" she cried, shaking her brown locks
at me and with a bright colour. "Every man that comes within waft of my
petticoats shall use me so!"

"I will go so far as ask your pardon for the fashion's sake, although I
vow I know not why," I replied. "But for these play-acting postures, you
can go to others."

"O Davie!" she said. "Not if I was to beg you?"

I bethought me I was fighting with a woman, which is the same as to say
a child, and that upon a point entirely formal.

"I think it a bairnly thing," I said, "not worthy in you to ask, or me
to render. Yet I will not refuse you, neither," said I; "and the stain,
if there be any, rests with yourself." And at that I kneeled fairly
down.

"There!" she cried. "There is the proper station, there is where I have
been manoeuvring to bring you." And then, suddenly, "Kep,"[21] said she,
flung me a folded billet, and ran from the apartment laughing.

The billet had neither place nor date. "Dear Mr. David," it began, "I
get your news continually by my cousin, Miss Grant, and it is a pleisand
hearing. I am very well, in a good place, among good folk, but
necessitated to be quite private, though I am hoping that at long last
we may meet again. All your friendships have been told me by my loving
cousin, who loves us both. She bids me to send you this writing, and
oversees the same. I will be asking you to do all her commands, and rest
your affectionate friend, Catriona Macgregor-Drummond. P.S.--Will you
not see my cousin, Allardyce?"

I think it not the least brave of my campaigns (as the soldiers say)
that I should have done as I was here bidden and gone forthright to the
house by Dean. But the old lady was now entirely changed and supple as a
glove. By what means Miss Grant had brought this round I could never
guess; I am sure at least, she dared not to appear openly in the affair,
for her papa was compromised in it pretty deep. It was he, indeed, who
had persuaded Catriona to leave, or rather, not to return, to her
cousin's, placing her instead with a family of Gregorys, decent people,
quite at the Advocate's disposition, and in whom she might have the more
confidence because they were of her own clan and family. These kept her
private till all was ripe, heated and helped her to attempt her father's
rescue, and after she was discharged from prison received her again into
the same secrecy. Thus Prestongrange obtained and used his instrument;
nor did there leak out the smallest word of his acquaintance with the
daughter of James More. There was some whispering, of course, upon the
escape of that discredited person; but the Government replied by a show
of rigour, one of the cell porters was flogged, the lieutenant of the
guard (my poor friend, Duncansby) was broken of his rank, and as for
Catriona, all men were well enough pleased that her fault should be
passed by in silence.

I could never induce Miss Grant to carry back an answer. "No," she would
say, when I persisted, "I am going to keep the big feet out of the
platter." This was the more hard to bear, as I was aware she saw my
little friend many times in the week, and carried her my news whenever
(as she said) I "had behaved myself." At last she treated me to what she
called an indulgence, and I thought rather more of a banter. She was
certainly a strong, almost a violent friend, to all she liked; chief
among whom was a certain frail old gentlewoman, very blind, and very
witty, who dwelt in the top of a tall land on a strait close, with a
nest of linnets in a cage, and thronged all day with visitors. Miss
Grant was very fond to carry me there and put me to entertain her friend
with the narrative of my misfortunes; and Miss Tibbie Ramsay (that was
her name) was particular kind, and told me a great deal that was worth
knowledge of old folks and past affairs in Scotland. I should say that
from her chamber window, and not three feet away, such is the straitness
of that close, it was possible to look into a barred loophole lighting
the stairway of the opposite house.

Here, upon some pretext, Miss Grant left me one day alone with Miss
Ramsay. I mind I thought that lady inattentive and like one preoccupied.
I was besides yery uncomfortable, for the window, contrary to custom,
was left open and the day was cold. All at once the voice of Miss Grant
sounded in my ears as from a distance.

"Here, Shaws!" she cried, "keek out of the window and see what I have
broughten you."

I think it was the prettiest sight that ever I beheld; the well of the
close was all in clear shadow where a man could see distinctly, the
walls very black and dingy; and there from the barred loophole I saw two
faces smiling across at me--Miss Grant's and Catriona's.

"There!" says Miss Grant, "I wanted her to see you in your braws like
the lass of Limekilns. I wanted her to see what I could make of you,
when I buckled to the job in earnest!"

It came in my mind she had been more than common particular that day
upon my dress: and I think that some of the same care had been bestowed
upon Catriona. For so merry and sensible a lady, Miss Grant was
certainly wonderful taken up with duds.

"Catriona!" was all I could get out.

As for her, she said nothing in the world, but only waved her hand and
smiled to me, and was suddenly carried away again from before the
loophole.

The vision was no sooner lost than I ran to the house door, where I
found I was locked in; thence back to Miss Ramsay, crying for the key,
but might as well have cried upon the castle rock. She had passed her
word, she said, and I must be a good lad. It was impossible to burst the
door, even if it had been mannerly; it was impossible I should leap from
the window, being seven storeys above ground. All I could do was to
crane over the close and watch for their reappearance from the stair. It
was little to see, being no more than the tops of their two heads each
on a ridiculous bobbin of skirts, like to a pair of pincushions. Nor did
Catriona so much as look up for a farewell; being prevented (as I heard
afterwards) by Miss Grant, who told her folk were never seen to less
advantage than from above downward.

On the way home, as soon as I was set free, I upbraided Miss Grant with
her cruelty.

"I am sorry you was disappointed," says she demurely. "For my part I was
very pleased. You looked better than I dreaded; you looked--if it will
not make you vain--a mighty pretty young man when you appeared in the
window. You are to remember that she could not see your feet," says she,
with the manner of one reassuring me.

"O!" cried I, "leave my feet be, they are no bigger than my neighbor's."

"They are even smaller than some," said she, "but I speak in parables
like a Hebrew prophet."

"I marvel little they were sometimes stoned!" says I. "But you miserable
girl, how could you do it? Why should you care to tantalise me with a
moment?"

"Love is like folk," says she, "it needs some kind of vivers."[22]

"O, Barbara, let me see her properly!" I pleaded. "_You_ can, you see
her when you please; let me have half an hour."

"Who is it that is managing this love affair? You? Or me?" she asked,
and as I continued to press her with my instances, fell back upon a
deadly expedient: that of imitating the tones of my voice when I called
on Catriona by name; with which, indeed, she held me in subjection for
some days to follow.

There was never the least word heard of the memorial, or none by me.
Prestongrange and his grace the Lord President may have heard of it (for
what I know) on the deafest sides of their heads; they kept it to
themselves, at least; the public was none the wiser; and in course of
time, on November 8th, and in the midst of a prodigious storm of wind
and rain, poor James of the Glens was duly hanged at Lettermore by
Balachulish.

So there was the final upshot of my politics! Innocent men have perished
before James, and are like to keep on perishing (in spite of all our
wisdom) till the end of time. And till the end of time, young folk (who
are not yet used with the duplicity of life and men) will struggle as I
did, and make heroical resolves, and take long risks; and the course of
events will push them upon the one side and go on like a marching army.
James was hanged; and here was I dwelling in the house of Prestongrange,
and grateful to him for his fatherly attention. He was hanged; and
behold! When I met Mr. Symon in the causeway, I was fain to pull off my
beaver to him like a good little boy before his dominie. He had been
hanged by fraud and violence, and the world wagged along, and there was
not a pennyweight of difference; and the villains of that horrid plot
were decent, kind, respectable fathers of families, who went to kirk and
took the sacrament!

But I had had my view of that detestable business they call politics--I
had seen it from behind, when it is all bones and blackness; and I was
cured for life of any temptations to take part in it again. A plain,
quiet, private path was that which I was ambitious to walk in, when I
might keep my head out of the way of dangers and my conscience out of
the road of temptation. For, upon a retrospect, it appeared I had not
done so grandly, after all; but with the greatest possible amount of big
speech and preparation, had accomplished nothing.

The 25th of the same month, a ship was advertised to sail from Leith;
and I was suddenly recommended to make up my mails for Leyden. To
Prestongrange I could, of course, say nothing; for I had already been a
long while sorning on his house and table. But with his daughter I was
more open, bewailing my fate that I should be sent out of the country,
and assuring her, unless she should bring me to farewell with Catriona,
I would refuse at the last hour.

"Have I not given you my advice?" she asked.

"I know you have," said I, "and I know how much I am beholden to you
already, and that I am bidden to obey your orders. But you must confess
you are something too merry a lass at times to lippen[23] to entirely."

"I will tell you, then," said she. "Be you on board at nine o'clock
forenoon; the ship does not sail before one; keep your boat alongside;
and if you are not pleased with my farewells when I shall send them, you
can come ashore again and seek Katrine for yourself."

Since I could make no more of her, I was fain to be content with this.

The day came round at last when she and I were to separate. We had been
extremely intimate and familiar; I was much in her debt; and what way we
were to part was a thing that put me from my sleep, like the vails I was
to give to the domestic servants. I knew she considered me too backward,
and rather desired to rise in her opinion on that head. Besides which,
after so much affection shown and (I believe) felt upon both sides, it
would have looked cold-like to be anyways stiff. Accordingly, I got my
courage up and my words ready, and the last chance we were like to be
alone, asked pretty boldly to be allowed to salute her in farewell.

"You forget yourself strangely, Mr. Balfour," said she. "I cannot call
to mind that I had given you any right to presume on our acquaintancy."

I stood before her like a stopped clock, and knew not what to think, far
less to say, when of a sudden she cast her arms about my neck and kissed
me with the best will in the world.

"You inimitable bairn!" she cried. "Did you think that I would let us
part like strangers? Because I can never keep my gravity at you five
minutes on end, you must not dream I do not love you very well; I am all
love and laughter, every time I cast an eye on you! And now I will give
you an advice to conclude your education, which you will have need of
before its very long. Never _ask_ women-folk. They're bound to answer
'No'; God never made the lass that could resist the temptation. It's
supposed by divines to be the curse of Eve; because she did not say it
when the devil offered her the apple, her daughters can say nothing
else."

"Since I am so soon to lose my bonny professor," I began.

"This is gallant, indeed," says she curtseying.

"--I would put the one question," I went on; "May I ask a lass to marry
me?"

"You think you could not marry her without?" she asked. "Or else get her
to offer?"

"You see you cannot be serious," said I.

"I shall be very serious in one thing, David," said she. "I shall always
be your friend."

As I got to my horse the next morning, the four ladies were all at the
same window whence we had once looked down on Catriona, and all cried
farewell and waved their pocket napkins as I rode away; one out of the
four I knew was truly sorry; and at the thought of that, and how I had
come to the door three months ago for the first time, sorrow and
gratitude made a confusion in my mind.

       *       *       *       *       *




PART II

FATHER AND DAUGHTER

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXI

THE VOYAGE INTO HOLLAND


The ship lay at a single anchor, well outside the pier of Leith, so that
all we passengers must come to it by the means of skiffs. This was very
little troublesome, for the reason that the day was a flat calm, very
frosty and cloudy, and with a low shifting fog upon the water. The body
of the vessel was thus quite hid as I drew near, but the tall spars of
her stood high and bright in a sunshine like the flickering of a fire.
She proved to be a very roomy, commodious merchant, but somewhat blunt
in the bows, and loaden extraordinary deep with salt, salted salmon, and
fine white linen stockings for the Dutch. Upon my coming on board, the
captain welcomed me, one Sang (out of Lesmahago, I believe), a very
hearty, friendly tarpauling of a man, but at the moment in rather of a
bustle. There had no other of the passengers yet appeared, so that I was
left to walk about upon the deck, viewing the prospect and wondering a
good deal what these farewells should be which I was promised.

All Edinburgh and the Pentland Hills glinted above me in a kind of
smuisty brightness, now and again overcome with blots of cloud; of Leith
there was no more than the tops of chimneys visible, and on the face of
the water, where the haar[24] lay, nothing at all. Out of this I was
presently aware of a sound of oars pulling, and a little after (as if
out of the smoke of a fire) a boat issued. There sat a grave man in the
stern sheets, well muffled from the cold, and by his side a tall,
pretty, tender figure of a maid that brought my heart to a stand. I had
scarce the time to catch my breath in, and be ready to meet her, as she
stepped upon the deck, smiling, and making my best bow, which was now
vastly finer than some months before when I first made it to her
ladyship. No doubt we were both a good deal changed; she seemed to have
shot up taller, like a young, comely tree. She had now a kind of pretty
backwardness that became her well, as of one that regarded herself more
highly and was fairly woman; and for another thing, the hand of the same
magician had been at work upon the pair of us, and Miss Grant had made
us both _braw_, if she could make but the one _bonny_.

The same cry, in words not very different, came from both of us, that
the other was come in compliment to say farewell, and then we perceived
in a flash we were to ship together.

"O, why will not Baby have been telling me!" she cried; and then
remembered a letter she had been given, on the condition of not opening
it till she was well on board. Within was an enclosure for myself, and
ran thus:


     "DEAR DAVIE,--What do you think of my farewell? and what
     do you say to your fellow-passenger? Did you kiss, or did you
     ask? I was about to have signed here, but that would leave the
     purport of my question doubtful; and in my own case _I ken the
     answer_. So fill up here with good advice. Do not be too
     blate,[25]
     and for God's sake do not try to be too forward; nothing sets
     you
     worse. I am

     "Your affectionate friend and governess,

     "BARBARA GRANT."


I wrote a word of answer and compliment on a leaf out of my pocketbook,
put it in with another scratch from Catriona, sealed the whole with my
new signet of the Balfour arms, and despatched it by the hand of
Prestongrange's servant that still waited in my boat.

Then we had time to look upon each other more at leisure, which we had
not done for a piece of a minute before (upon a common impulse) we shook
hands again.

"Catriona!" said I; it seemed that was the first and last word of my
eloquence.

"You will be glad to see me again?" says she.

"And I think that is an idle word," said I. "We are too deep friends to
make speech upon such trifles."

"Is she not the girl of all the world?" she cried again. "I was never
knowing such a girl, so honest and so beautiful."

"And yet she cared no more for Alpin than what she did for a
kale-stock," said I.

"Ah, she will say so indeed!" cries Catriona. "Yet it was for the name
and the gentle kind blood that she took me up and was so good to me."

"Well, I will tell you why it was," said I. "There are all sorts of
people's faces in this world. There is Barbara's face, that everyone
must look at and admire, and think her a fine, brave, merry girl. And
then there is your face, which is quite different, I never knew how
different till to-day. You cannot see yourself, and that is why you do
not understand; but it was for the love of your face that she took you
up and was so good to you. And everybody in the world would do the
same."

"Everybody?" says she.

"Every living soul!" said I.

"Ah, then, that will be why the soldiers at the castle took me up!" she
cried.

"Barbara has been teaching you to catch me," said I.

"She will have taught me more than that at all events. She will have
taught me a great deal about Mr. David--all the ill of him, and a little
that was not so ill either now and then," she said, smiling. "She will
have told me all there was of Mr. David, only just that he would sail
upon this very same ship. And why is it you go?"

I told her.

"Ah, well," said she, "we will be some days in company and then (I
suppose) good-bye for altogether! I go to meet my father at a place of
the name of Helvoetsluys, and from there to France, to be exiles by the
side of our chieftain."

I could say no more than just "O!" the name of James More always drying
up my very voice.

She was quick to perceive it, and to guess some portion of my thought.

"There is one thing I must be saying first of all, Mr. David," said she.
"I think two of my kinsfolk have not behaved to you altogether very
well. And the one of them two is James More, my father, and the other is
the Laird of Prestongrange. Prestongrange will have spoken by himself,
or his daughter in the place of him. But for James More, my father, I
have this much to say: he lay shackled in a prison; he is a plain honest
soldier and a plain Highland gentleman; what they would be after, he
never would be guessing; but if he had understood it was to be some
prejudice to a young gentleman like yourself, he would have died first.
And for the sake of all your friendships, I will be asking you to pardon
my father and family for that same mistake."

"Catriona," said I, "what that mistake was I do not care to know. I know
but the one thing, that you went to Prestongrange and begged my life
upon your knees. O, I ken well it was for your father that you went, but
when you were there you pleaded for me also. It is a thing I cannot
speak of. There are two things I cannot think of in to myself; and the
one is your good words when you called yourself my little friend, and
the other that you pleaded for my life. Let us never speak more, we two,
of pardon or offence."

We stood after that silent, Catriona looking on the deck and I on her;
and before there was more speech, a little wind having sprung up, in the
nor'-west, they began to shake out the sails and heave in upon the
anchor.

There were six passengers besides our two selves, which made of it a
full cabin. Three were solid merchants out of Leith, Kirkaldy, and
Dundee, all engaged in the same adventure into High Germany; one was a
Hollander returning; the rest worthy merchants' wives, to the charge of
one of whom Catriona was recommended. Mrs. Grebbie (for that was her
name) was by great good fortune heavily incommoded by the sea, and lay
day and night on the broad of her back. We were besides the only
creatures at all young on board the _Rose_, except a white-faced boy
that did my old duty to attend upon the table; and it came about that
Catriona and I were left almost entirely to ourselves. We had the next
seats together at the table, where I waited on her with extraordinary
pleasure. On deck, I made her a soft place with my cloak; and the
weather being singularly fine for that season, with bright frosty days
and nights, a steady, gentle wind, and scarce a sheet started all the
way through the North Sea, we sat there (only now and again walking to
and fro for warmth) from the first blink of the sun till eight or nine
at night under the clear stars. The merchants or Captain Sang would
sometimes glance and smile upon us, or pass a merry word or two and give
us the go-by again; but the most part of the time they were deep in
herring and chintzes and linen, or in computations of the slowness of
the passage, and left us to our own concerns, which were very little
important to any but ourselves.

At the first, we had a great deal to say, and thought ourselves pretty
witty; and I was at a little pains to be the _beau_, and she (I believe)
to play the young lady of experience. But soon we grew plainer with each
other; I laid aside my high, clipped English (what little there was of
it) and forgot to make my Edinburgh bows and scrapes; she upon her side,
fell into a sort of kind familiarity; and we dwelt together like those
of the same household, only (upon my side) with a more deep emotion.
About the same time, the bottom seemed to fall out of our conversation,
and neither one of us the less pleased. Whiles she would tell me old
wives' tales, of which she had a wonderful variety, many of them from my
friend red-headed Niel. She told them very pretty, and they were pretty
enough childish tales; but the pleasure to myself was in the sound of
her voice, and the thought that she was telling and I listening. Whiles,
again, we would sit entirely silent, not communicating even with a look,
and tasting pleasure enough in the sweetness of that neighbourhood. I
speak here only for myself. Of what was in the maid's mind, I am not
very sure that ever I asked myself; and what was in my own, I was afraid
to consider. I need make no secret of it now, either to myself or to the
reader: I was fallen totally in love. She came between me and the sun.
She had grown suddenly taller, as I say, but with a wholesome growth;
she seemed all health, and lightness, and brave spirits; and I thought
she walked like a young deer, and stood like a birch upon the mountains.
It was enough for me to sit near by her on the deck; and I declare I
scarce spent two thoughts upon the future, and was so well content with
what I then enjoyed that I was never at the pains to imagine any further
step; unless perhaps that I would be sometimes tempted to take her hand
in mine and hold it there. But I was too like a miser of what joys I had
and would venture nothing on a hazard.

What we spoke was usually of ourselves or of each other, so that if
anyone had been at so much pains as overhear us, he must have supposed
us the most egotistical persons in the world. It befell one day when we
were at this practice, that we came on a discourse of friends and
friendship, and I think now that we were sailing near the wind. We said
what a fine thing friendship was, and how little we had guessed of it,
and how it made life a new thing, and a thousand covered things of the
same kind that will have been said, since the foundation of the world,
by young folk in the same predicament. Then we remarked upon the
strangeness of that circumstance, that friends came together in the
beginning as if they were there for the first time, and yet each had
been alive a good while, losing time with other people.

"It is not much that I have done," said she, "and I could be telling you
the five-fifths of it in two-three words. It is only a girl I am, and
what can befall a girl, at all events? But I went with the clan in the
year '45. The men marched with swords and firelocks, and some of them in
brigades in the same set of tartan; they were not backward at the
marching, I can tell you. And there were gentlemen from the Low Country,
with their tenants mounted and trumpets to sound, and there was a grand
skirling of war-pipes. I rode on a little Highland horse on the right
hand of my father, James More, and of Glengyle himself. And here is one
fine thing that I remember, that Glengyle kissed me in the face, because
(says he) 'my kinswoman, you are the only lady of the clan that has come
out,' and me a little maid of maybe twelve years old! I saw Prince
Charlie too, and the blue eyes of him; he was pretty indeed! I had his
hand to kiss in the front of the army. O, well, these were the good
days, but it is all like a dream that I have seen and then awakened. It
went what way you very well know; and these were the worst days of all,
when the red-coat soldiers were out, and my father and my uncles lay in
the hill, and I was to be carrying them their meat in the middle night,
or at the short side of day when the cocks crow. Yes, I have walked in
the night, many's the time, and my heart great in me for terror of the
darkness. It is a strange thing I will never have been meddled with a
bogle; but they say a maid goes safe. Next there was my uncle's
marriage, and that was a dreadful affair beyond all. Jean Kay was that
woman's name; and she had me in the room with her that night at
Inversnaid, the night we took her from her friends in the old, ancient
manner. She would and she wouldn't; she was for marrying Rob the one
minute, and the next she would be for none of him. I will never have
seen such a feckless creature of a woman; surely all there was of her
would tell her ay or no. Well, she was a widow, and I can never be
thinking a widow a good woman."

"Catriona!" says I, "how do you make out that?"

"I do not know," said she; "I am only telling you the seeming in my
heart. And then to marry a new man! Fy! But that was her; and she was
married again upon my Uncle Robin, and went with him awhile to kirk and
market; and then wearied, or else her friends got claught of her and
talked her round, or maybe she turned ashamed; at the least of it, she
ran away, and went back to her own folk, and said we had held her in the
lake, and I will never tell you all what. I have never thought much of
any females since that day. And so in the end my father, James More,
came to be cast in prison, and you know the rest of it as well as me."

"And through all you had no friends?" said I.

"No," said she; "I have been pretty chief with two-three lasses on the
braes, but not to call it friends."

"Well, mine is a plain tale," said I. "I never had a friend to my name
till I met in with you."

"And that brave Mr. Stewart?" she asked.

"O, yes, I was forgetting him," I said. "But he is a man, and that is
very different."

"I would think so," said she. "O, yes, it is quite different."

"And then there was one other," said I. "I once thought I had a friend,
but it proved a disappointment."

She asked me who she was?

"It was a he, then," said I. "We were the two best lads at my father's
school, and we thought we loved each other dearly. Well, the time came
when he went to Glasgow to a merchant's house, that was his second
cousin once removed; and wrote me two-three times by the carrier; and
then he found new friends, and I might write till I was tired, he took
no notice. Eh, Catriona, it took me a long while to forgive the world.
There is not anything more bitter than to lose a fancied friend."

Then she began to question me close upon his looks and character, for we
were each a great deal concerned in all that touched the other; till at
last, in a very evil hour, I minded of his letters and went and fetched
the bundle from the cabin.

"Here are his letters," said I, "and all the letters that ever I got.
That will be the last I'll can tell of myself; you know the lave[26] as
well as I do."

"Will you let me read them, then?" says she.

I told her, _if she would be at the pains_; and she bade me go away and
she would read them from the one end to the other. Now, in this bundle
that I gave her, there were packed together not only all the letters of
my false friend, but one or two of Mr. Campbell's when he was in town at
the Assembly, and to make a complete roll of all that ever was written
to me, Catriona's little word, and the two I had received from Miss
Grant, one when I was on the Bass and one on board that ship. But of
these last I had no particular mind at the moment.

I was in that state of subjection to the thought of my friend that it
mattered not what I did, nor scarce whether I was in her presence or out
of it; I had caught her like some kind of a noble fever that lived
continually in my bosom, by night and by day, and whether I was waking
or asleep. So it befell that after I was come into the fore-part of the
ship where the broad bows splashed into the billows, I was in no such
hurry to return as you might fancy; rather prolonged my absence like a
variety in pleasure. I do not think I am by nature much of an Epicurean;
and there had come till then so small a share of pleasure in my way that
I might be excused perhaps to dwell on it unduly.

When I returned to her again, I had a faint, painful impression as of a
buckle slipped, so coldly she returned the packet.

"You have read them?" said I; and I thought my voice sounded not wholly
natural, for I was turning in my mind for what could ail her.

"Did you mean me to read all?" she asked.

I told her "Yes," with a drooping voice.

"The last of them as well?" said she.

I knew where we were now; yet I would not lie to her either. "I gave
them all without after-thought," I said, "as I supposed that you would
read them. I see no harm in any."

"I will be differently made," said she. "I thank God I am differently
made. It was not a fit letter to be shown me. It was not fit to be
written."

"I think you are speaking of your own friend, Barbara Grant?" said I.

"There will not be anything as bitter as to lose a fancied friend," said
she, quoting my own expression.

"I think it is sometimes the friendship that was fancied!" I cried.
"What kind of justice do you call this, to blame me for some words that
a tomfool of a madcap lass has written down upon a piece of paper? You
know yourself with what respect I have behaved--and would do always."

"Yet you would show me that same letter!" says she. "I want no such
friends. I can be doing very well, Mr. Balfour, without her--or you."

"This is your fine gratitude!" says I.

"I am very much obliged to you," said she. "I will be asking you to take
away your--letters." She seemed to choke upon the word, so that it
sounded like an oath.

"You shall never ask twice," said I; picked up that bundle, walked a
little way forward and cast them as far as possible into the sea. For a
very little more, I could have cast myself after them.

The rest of the day I walked up and down raging. There were few names so
ill but what I gave her them in my own mind before the sun went down.
All that I had ever heard of Highland pride seemed quite outdone; that a
girl (scarce grown) should resent so trifling an allusion, and that from
her next friend, that she had near wearied me with praising of! I had
bitter, sharp, hard thoughts of her, like an angry boy's. If I had
kissed her indeed (I thought), perhaps she would have taken it pretty
well; and only because it had been written down, and with a spice of
jocularity, up she must fuff in this ridiculous passion. It seemed to me
there was a want of penetration in the female sex, to make angels weep
over the case of the poor men.

We were side by side again at supper, and what a change was there! She
was like curdled milk to me; her face was like a wooden doll's; I could
have indifferently smitten her or grovelled at her feet, but she gave me
not the least occasion to do either. No sooner the meal done than she
betook herself to attend on Mrs. Gebbie, which I think she had a little
neglected heretofore. But she was to make up for lost time, and in what
remained of the passage was extraordinary assiduous with the old lady,
and on deck began to make a great deal more than I thought wise of
Captain Sang. Not but what the captain seemed a worthy, fatherly man;
but I hated to behold her in the least familiarity with anyone except
myself.

Altogether, she was so quick to avoid me, and so constant to keep
herself surrounded with others, that I must watch a long while before I
could find my opportunity; and after it was found, I made not much of
it, as you are now to hear.

"I have no guess how I have offended," said I; "it should scarce be
beyond pardon, then. O, try if you can pardon me."

"I have no pardon to give," said she; and the words seemed to come out
of her throat like marbles. "I will be very much obliged for all your
friendships." And she made me an eight part of a curtsey.

But I had schooled myself beforehand to say more, and I was going to say
it too.

"There is one thing," said I. "If I have shocked your particularity by
the showing of that letter, it cannot touch Miss Grant. She wrote not to
you, but to a poor, common, ordinary lad, who might have had more sense
than show it. If you are to blame me--"

"I will advise you to say no more about that girl, at all events!" said
Catriona. "It is her I will never look the road of, not if she lay
dying." She turned away from me, and suddenly back. "Will you swear you
will have no more to deal with her?" she cried.

"Indeed, and I will never be so unjust then," said I; "nor yet so
ungrateful."

And now it was I that turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXII

HELVOETSLUYS


The weather in the end considerably worsened; the wind sang in the
shrouds, the sea swelled higher, and the ship began to labour and cry
out among the billows. The song of the leadsman in the chains was now
scarce ceasing, for we thrid all the way among shoals. About nine in the
morning, in a burst of wintry sun between two squalls of hail, I had my
first look of Holland--a line of windmills birling in the breeze. It was
besides my first knowledge of these daft-like contrivances, which gave
me a near sense of foreign travel and a new world and life. We came to
an anchor about half-past eleven, outside the harbour of Helvoetsluys,
in a place where the sea sometimes broke and the ship pitched
outrageously. You may be sure we were all on deck save Mrs. Gebbie, some
of us in cloaks, others mantled in the ship's tarpaulins, all clinging
on by ropes, and jesting the most like old sailor-folk that we could
imitate.

Presently a boat, that was backed like a partan-crab, came gingerly
alongside, and the skipper of it hailed our master in the Dutch. Thence
Captain Sang turned, very troubled like, to Catriona; and the rest of us
crowding about, the nature of the difficulty was made plain to all. The
_Rose_ was bound to the port of Rotterdam, whither the other passengers
were in a great impatience to arrive, in view of a conveyance due to
leave that very evening in the direction of the Upper Germany. This,
with the present half-gale of wind, the captain (if no time were lost)
declared himself still capable to save. Now James More had trysted in
Helvoet with his daughter, and the captain had engaged to call before
the port and place her (according to the custom) in a shore boat. There
was the boat, to be sure, and there was Catriona ready: but both our
master and the patroon of the boat scrupled at the risk, and the first
was in no humour to delay.

"Your father," said he, "would be gey an little pleased if we was to
break a leg to ye, Miss Drummond, let-a-be drowning of you. Take my way
of it," says he, "and come on-by with the rest of us here to Rotterdam.
Ye can get a passage down the Maes in a sailing scoot as far to the
Brill, and thence on again, by a place in a rattel-waggon, back to
Helvoet."

But Catriona would hear of no change. She looked white-like as she
beheld the bursting of the sprays, the green seas that sometimes poured
upon the forecastle, and the perpetual bounding and swooping of the boat
among the billows; but she stood firmly by her father's orders. "My
father, James More, will have arranged it so," was her first word and
her last. I thought it very idle and indeed wanton in the girl to be so
literal and stand opposite to so much kind advice; but the fact is she
had a very good reason, if she would have told us. Sailing scoots and
rattel-waggons are excellent things; only the use of them must first be
paid for, and all she was possessed of in the world was just two
shillings and a penny halfpenny sterling. So it fell out that captain
and passengers, not knowing of her destitution--and she being too proud
to tell them--spoke in vain.

"But you ken nae French and nae Dutch neither," said one.

"It is very true," says she, "but since the year '46 there are so many
of the honest Scots abroad that I will be doing very well, I thank you."

There was a pretty country simplicity in this that made some laugh,
others looked the more sorry, and Mr. Gebbie fall outright in a passion.
I believe he knew it was his duty (his wife having accepted charge of
the girl) to have gone ashore with her and seen her safe; nothing would
have induced him to have done so, since it must have involved the loss
of his conveyance; and I think he made it up to his conscience by the
loudness of his voice. At least he broke out upon Captain Sang, raging
and saying the thing was a disgrace; that it was mere death to try to
leave the ship, and at any event we could not cast down an innocent maid
in a boatful of nasty Holland fishers, and leave her to her fate. I was
thinking something of the same; took the mate upon one side, arranged
with him to send on my chests by track-scoot to an address I had in
Leyden, and stood up and signalled to the fishers.

"I will go ashore with the young lady, Captain Sang," said I. "It is all
one what way I go to Leyden;" and leaped at the same time into the boat,
which I managed not so elegantly but what I fell with two of the fishers
in the bilge.

From the boat the business appeared yet more precarious than from the
ship, she stood so high over us, swung down so swift, and menaced us so
perpetually with her plunging and passaging upon the anchor cable. I
began to think I had made a fool's bargain, that it was merely
impossible Catriona should be got on board to me, and that I stood to be
set ashore at Helvoet all by myself and with no hope of any reward but
the pleasure of embracing James More, if I should want to. But this was
to reckon without the lass's courage. She had seen me leap with very
little appearance (however much reality) of hesitation; to be sure, she
was not to be beat by her discarded friend. Up she stood on the bulwarks
and held by a stay, the wind blowing in her petticoats, which made the
enterprise more dangerous and gave us rather more of a view of her
stockings than would be thought genteel in cities. There was no minute
lost, and scarce time given for any to interfere if they had wished the
same. I stood up on the other side and spread my arms; the ship swung
down on us, the patroon humoured his boat nearer in than was perhaps
wholly safe, and Catriona leaped into the air. I was so happy as to
catch her, and the fishers readily supporting us, escaped a fall. She
held to me a moment very tight, breathing quick and deep; thence (she
still clinging to me with both hands) we were passed aft to our places
by the steersman; and Captain Sang and all the crew and passengers
cheering and crying farewell, the boat was put about for shore.

As soon as Catriona came a little to herself she unhanded me suddenly
but said no word. No more did I; and indeed the whistling of the wind
and the breaching of the sprays made it no time for speech; and our crew
not only toiled excessively but made extremely little way, so that the
_Rose_ had got her anchor and was off again before we had approached the
harbour mouth.

We were no sooner in smooth water than the patroon, according to their
beastly Hollands custom, stopped his boat and required of us our fares.
Two guilders was the man's demand, between three and four shillings
English money, for each passenger. But at this Catriona began to cry out
with a vast deal of agitation. She had asked of Captain Sang, she said,
and the fare was but an English shilling. "Do you think I will have come
on board and not ask first?" cries she. The patroon scolded back upon
her in a lingo where the oaths were English and the rest right Hollands;
till at last (seeing her near tears) I privately slipped in the rogue's
hand six shillings, whereupon he was obliging enough to receive from her
the other shilling without more complaint. No doubt I was a good deal
nettled and ashamed. I like to see folk thrifty but not with so much
passion; and I daresay it would be rather coldly that I asked her, as
the boat moved on again for shore, where it was that she was trysted
with her father.

"He is to be inquired of at the house of one Sprott, an honest Scotch
merchant," says she; and then with the same breath, "I am wishing to
thank you very much--you are a brave friend to me."

"It will be time enough when I get you to your father," said I, little
thinking that I spoke so true. "I can tell him a fine tale of a loyal
daughter."

"O, I do not think I will be a loyal girl, at all events," she cried,
with a great deal of painfulness in the expression. "I do not think my
heart is true."

"Yet there are very few that would have made that leap, and all to obey
a father's orders," I observed.

"I cannot have you to be thinking of me so," she cried again. "When you
had done that same, how would I stop behind? And at all events that was
not all the reasons." Whereupon, with a burning face, she told me the
plain truth upon her poverty.

"Good guide us!" cried I, "what kind of daft-like proceeding is this, to
let yourself be launched on the continent of Europe with an empty
purse--I count it hardly decent--scant decent!" I cried.

"You forget James More, my father, is a poor gentleman," said she. "He
is a hunted exile."

"But I think not all your friends are hunted exiles," I exclaimed. "And
was this fair to them that care for you? Was it fair to me? was it fair
to Miss Grant that counselled you to go, and would be driven fair
horn-mad if she could hear of it? Was it even fair to these Gregory folk
that you were living with, and used you lovingly? It's a blessing you
have fallen in my hands! Suppose your father hindered by an accident,
what would become of you here, and you your lee-alone in a strange
place? The thought of the thing frightens me," I said.

"I will have lied to all of them," she replied. "I will have told them
all that I had plenty. I told _her_ too. I could not be lowering James
More to them."

I found out later on that she must have lowered him in the very dust,
for the lie was originally the father's not the daughter's, and she thus
obliged to persevere in it for the man's reputation. But at the time I
was ignorant of this, and the mere thought of her destitution and the
perils in which she must have fallen, had ruffled me almost beyond
reason.

"Well, well, well," said I, "you will have to learn more sense."

I left her mails for the moment in an inn upon the shore, where I got a
direction for Sprott's house in my new French, and we walked there--it
was some little way--beholding the place with wonder as we went. Indeed,
there was much for Scots folk to admire; canals and trees being
intermingled with the houses; the houses, each within itself, of a brave
red brick, the colour of a rose, with steps and benches of blue marble
at the cheek of every door, and the whole town so clean you might have
dined upon the causeway. Sprott was within, upon his ledgers, in a low
parlour, very neat and clean, and set out with china and pictures and a
globe of the earth in a brass frame. He was a big-chafted, ruddy, lusty
man, with a crooked hard look to him; and he made us not that much
civility as offer us a seat.

"Is James More Macgregor now in Helvoet, sir?" says I.

"I ken nobody by such a name," says he, impatient-like.

"Since you are so particular," says I, "I will amend my question, and
ask you where we are to find in Helvoet one James Drummond, _alias_
Macgregor, _alias_ James More, late tenant in Iveronachile?"

"Sir," says he, "he may be in Hell for what I ken, and for my part I
wish he was."

"The young lady is that gentleman's daughter, sir," said I, "before
whom, I think you will agree with me, it is not very becoming to discuss
his character."

"I have nothing to make either with him, or her, or you!" cries he in
his gross voice.

"Under your favour, Mr. Sprott," said I, "this young lady is come from
Scotland seeking him, and by whatever mistake, was given the name of
your house for a direction. An error it seems to have been, but I think
this places both you and me--who am but her fellow-traveller by
accident--under a strong obligation to help our countrywoman."

"Will you ding me daft?" he cries. "I tell ye I ken naething and care
less either for him or his breed. I tell ye the man owes me money."

"That may very well be, sir," said I, who was now rather more angry than
himself. "At least I owe you nothing; the young lady is under my
protection; and I am neither at all used with these manners, nor in the
least content with them."

As I said this, and without particularly thinking what I did, I drew a
step or two nearer to his table; thus striking, by mere good fortune, on
the only argument that could at all affect the man. The blood left his
lusty countenance.

"For the Lord's sake dinna be hasty, sir!" he cried. "I am truly wishfu'
no to be offensive. But ye ken, sir, I'm like a wheen guid-natured,
honest, canty auld fallows--my bark is waur nor my bite. To hear me, ye
micht whiles fancy I was a wee thing dour; but na, na! its a kind auld
fellow at heart, Sandie Sprott! And ye could never imagine the fyke and
fash this man has been to me."

"Very good, sir," said I. "Then I will make that much freedom with your
kindness, as trouble you for your last news of Mr. Drummond."

"You're welcome, sir!" said he. "As for the young leddy (my respec's to
her!) he'll just have clean forgotten her. I ken the man, ye see; I have
lost siller by him ere now. He thinks of naebody but just himsel'; clan,
king, or dauchter, if he can get his wameful, he would give them a' the
go-by! ay, or his correspondent either. For there is a sense in whilk I
may be nearly almost said to be his correspondent. The fact is, we are
employed thegether in a business affair, and I think it's like to turn
out a dear affair for Sandie Sprott. The man's as guid's my pairtner,
and I give ye my mere word I ken naething by where he is. He micht be
coming here to Helvoet; he micht come here the morn, he michtnae come
for a twalmonth; I would wonder at naething--or just at the ae thing,
and that's if he was to pay me my siller. Ye see what way I stand with
it; and it's clear I'm no very likely to meddle up with the young leddy,
as ye ca' her. She cannae stop here, that's ae thing certain sure. Dod,
sir, I'm a lone man! If I was to tak her in, its highly possible the
hellicat would try and gar me marry her when he turned up."

"Enough of this talk," said I. "I will take the young lady among better
friends. Give me pen, ink, and paper, and I will leave here for James
More the address of my correspondent in Leyden. He can inquire from me
where he is to seek his daughter."

This word I wrote and sealed; which while I was doing, Sprott of his own
motion made a welcome offer, to charge himself with Miss Drummond's
mails, and even send a porter for them to the inn. I advanced him to
that effect a dollar or two to be a cover, and he gave me an
acknowledgment in writing of the sum.

Whereupon (I giving my arm to Catriona) we left the house of this
unpalatable rascal. She had said no word throughout, leaving me to judge
and speak in her place; I, upon my side, had been careful not to
embarrass her by a glance; and even now although my heart still glowed
inside of me with shame and anger, I made it my affair to seem quite
easy.

"Now," said I, "let us get back to yon same inn where they can speak the
French, have a piece of dinner, and inquire for conveyances to
Rotterdam. I will never be easy till I have you safe again in the hands
of Mrs. Gebbie."

"I suppose it will have to be," said Catriona, "though whoever will be
pleased, I do not think it will be her. And I will remind you this once
again that I have but one shilling, and three baubees."

"And just this once again," said I, "I will remind you it was a blessing
that I came alongst with you."

"What else would I be thinking all this time!" says she, and I thought
weighed a little on my arm. "It is you that are the good friend to me."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXIII

TRAVELS IN HOLLAND


The rattel-wagon, which is a kind of a long wagon set with benches,
carried us in four hours of travel to the great city of Rotterdam. It
was long past dark by then, but the streets pretty brightly lighted and
thronged with the wild-like, outlandish characters--bearded Hebrews,
black men, and the hordes of courtesans, most indecently adorned with
finery and stopping seamen by their very sleeves; the clash of talk
about us made our heads to whirl; and what was the most unexpected of
all, we appeared to be no more struck with all these foreigners than
they with us. I made the best face I could, for the lass's sake and my
own credit; but the truth is I felt like a lost sheep, and my heart beat
in my bosom with anxiety. Once or twice I inquired after the harbor or
the berth of the ship _Rose_; but either fell on some who spoke only
Hollands, or my own French failed me. Trying a street at a venture, I
came upon a lane of lighted houses, the doors and windows thronged with
wauf-like painted women; these jostled and mocked upon us as we passed,
and I was thankful we had nothing of their language. A little after we
issued forth upon an open place along the harbour.

"We shall be doing now," cries I, as soon as I spied masts. "Let us walk
here by the harbour. We are sure to meet some that has the English, and
at the best of it we may light upon that very ship."

We did the next best, as happened; for about nine of the evening, whom
should we walk into the arms of but Captain Sang? He told us they had
made their run in the most incredible brief time, the wind holding
strong until they reached port; by which means his passengers were all
gone already on their further travels. It was impossible to chase after
the Gebbies into High Germany, and we had no other acquaintance to fall
back upon but Captain Sang himself. It was the more gratifying to find
the man friendly and wishful to assist. He made it a small affair to
find some good plain family of merchants, where Catriona might harbour
till the _Rose_ was loaden; declared he would then blithely carry her
back to Leith for nothing and see her safe in the hands of Mr. Gregory;
and in the meanwhile carried us to a late ordinary for the meal we stood
in need of. He seemed extremely friendly, as I say, but what surprised
me a good deal, rather boisterous in the bargain; and the cause of this
was soon to appear. For at the ordinary, calling for Rhenish wine and
drinking of it deep, he soon became unutterably tipsy. In, this case, as
too common with all men, but especially with those of his rough trade,
what little sense or manners he possessed deserted him; and he behaved
himself so scandalous to the young lady, jesting most ill-favoredly at
the figure she had made on the ship's rail, that I had no resource but
carry her suddenly away.

She came out of that ordinary clinging to me close. "Take me away,
David," she said. "_You_ keep me. I am not afraid with you."

"And have no cause, my little friend!" cried I, and could have found it
in my heart to weep.

"Where will you be taking me?" she said again. "Don't leave me at all
events, never leave me."

"Where am I taking you indeed?" says I stopping, for I had been staving
on ahead in mere blindness. "I must stop and think. But I'll not leave
you, Catriona; the Lord do so to me, and more also, if I should fail or
fash you."

She crept closer in to me by way of a reply.

"Here," I said, "is the stillest place that we have hit on yet in this
busy byke of a city. Let us sit down here under yon tree and consider of
our course."

That tree (which I am little like to forget) stood hard by the harbour
side. It was a black night, but lights were in the houses, and nearer
hand in the quiet ships; there was a shining of the city on the one
hand, and a buzz hung over it of many thousands walking and talking; on
the other, it was dark and the water bubbled on the sides. I spread my
cloak upon a builder's stone, and made her sit there; she would have
kept her hold upon me, for she still shook with the late affronts; but I
wanted to think clear, disengaged myself, and paced to and fro before
her, in the manner of what we call a smuggler's walk, belabouring my
brains for any remedy. By the course of these scattering thoughts I was
brought suddenly face to face with a remembrance that, in the heat and
haste of our departure, I had left Captain Sang to pay the ordinary. At
this I began to laugh out loud, for I thought the man well served; and
at the same time, by an instinctive movement, carried my hand to the
pocket where my money was. I suppose it was in the lane where the women
jostled us; but there is only the one thing certain, that my purse was
gone.

"You will have thought of something good," said she, observing me to
pause.

At the pinch we were in, my mind became suddenly clear as a perspective
glass, and I saw there was no choice of methods. I had not one doit of
coin, but in my pocket-book I had still my letter on the Leyden
merchant; and there was now but the one way to get to Leyden, and that
was to walk on our two feet.

"Catriona," said I, "I know you're brave and I believe you're strong, do
you think you could walk thirty miles on a plain road?" We found it, I
believe, scarce the two-thirds of that, but such was my notion of the
distance.

"David," she said, "if you will just keep near, I will go anywhere and
do anything. The courage of my heart, it is all broken. Do not be
leaving me in this horrible country by myself, and I will do all else."

"Can you start now and march all night?" said I.

"I will do all that you can ask of me," she said, "and never ask you
why. I have been a bad ungrateful girl to you; and do what you please
with me now! And I think Miss Barbara Grant is the best lady in the
world," she added, "and I do not see what she would deny you for at all
events."

This was Greek and Hebrew to me; but I had other matters to consider,
and the first of these was to get clear of that city on the Leyden road.
It proved a cruel problem; and it may have been one or two at night ere
we had solved it. Once beyond the houses, there was neither moon or
stars to guide us; only the whiteness of the way in the midst and a
blackness of an alley on both hands. The walking was besides made most
extraordinary difficult by a plain black frost that fell suddenly in the
small hours and turned that highway into one long slide.

"Well, Catriona," said I, "here we are like the king's sons and the old
wives' daughters in your daft-like Highland tales. Soon we'll be going
over the '_seven Bens, the seven glens, and the seven mountain moors_.'"
Which was a common byword or overcome in these tales of hers that had
stuck in my memory.

"Ah," says she, "but here are no glens or mountains! Though I will never
be denying but what the trees and some of the plain places hereabouts
are very pretty. But our country is the best yet."

"I wish we could say as much for our own folk," says I, recalling Sprott
and Sang, and perhaps James More himself.

"I will never complain of the country of my friend," said she, and spoke
it out with an accent so particular that I seemed to see the look upon
her face.

I caught in my breath sharp and came near falling (for my pains) on the
black ice.

"I do not know what _you_ think, Catriona," said I, when I was a little
recovered, "but this has been the best day yet! I think shame to say it,
when you have met in with such misfortunes and disfavours; but for me,
it has been the best day yet."

"It was a good day when you showed me so much love," said she.

"And yet I think shame to be happy too," I went on, "and you here on the
road in the black night."

"Where in the great world would I be else?" she cried. "I am thinking I
am safest where I am with you."

"I am quite forgiven, then?" I asked.

"Will you not forgive me that time so much as not to take it in your
mouth again?" she cried. "There's is nothing in this heart to you but
thanks. But I will be honest too," she added, with a kind of suddenness,
"and I'll never can forgive that girl."

"Is this Miss Grant again?" said I. "You said yourself she was the best
lady in the world."

"So she will be, indeed!" says Catriona. "But I will never forgive her
for all that. I will never, never forgive her, and let me hear tell of
her no more."

"Well," said I, "this beats all that ever came to my knowledge; and I
wonder that you can indulge yourself in such bairnly whims. Here is a
young lady that was the best friend in the world to the both of us, that
learned us how to dress ourselves, and in a great manner how to behave,
as anyone can see that knew us both before and after."

But Catriona stopped square in the midst of the highway.

"It is this way of it," said she. "Either you will go on to speak of
her, and I will go back to yon town, and let come of it what God
pleases! Or else you will do me that politeness to talk of other
things."

I was the most nonplussed person in this world; but I bethought me that
she depended altogether on my help, that she was of the frail sex and
not so much beyond a child, and it was for me to be wise for the pair of
us.

"My dear girl," said I, "I can make neither head nor tails of this; but
God forbid that I should do anything to set you on the jee. As for
talking of Miss Grant I have no such a mind to it, and I believe it was
yourself began it. My only design (if I took you up at all) was for your
own improvement, for I hate the very look of injustice. Not that I do
not wish you to have a good pride and a nice female delicacy; they
become you well; but here you show them to excess."

"Well, then, have you done?" said she.

"I have done," said I.

"A very good thing," said she, and we went on again, but now in silence.

It was an eerie employment to walk in the gross night, beholding only
shadows and hearing nought but our own steps. At first, I believe our
hearts burned against each other with a deal of enmity; but the darkness
and the cold, and the silence, which only the cocks sometimes
interrupted, or sometimes the farmyard dogs, had pretty soon brought
down our pride to the dust; and for my own particular, I would have
jumped at any decent opening for speech.

Before the day peeped, came on a warmish rain, and the frost was all
wiped away from among our feet. I took my cloak to her and sought to hap
her in the same; she bade me, rather impatiently, to keep it.

"Indeed and I will do no such thing," said I. "Here am I, a great, ugly
lad that has seen all kinds of weather, and here are you a tender,
pretty maid! My dear, you would not put me to a shame?"

Without more words she let me cover her; which as I was doing in the
darkness, I let my hand rest a moment on her shoulder, almost like an
embrace.

"You must try to be more patient of your friend," said I.

I thought she seemed to lean the least thing in the world against my
bosom, or perhaps it was but fancy.

"There will be no end to your goodness," said she.

And we went on again in silence; but now all was changed; and the
happiness that was in my heart was like a fire in a great chimney.

The rain passed ere day; it was but a sloppy morning as we came into the
town of Delft. The red gabled houses made a handsome show on either hand
of a canal; the servant lassies were out slestering and scrubbing at the
very stones upon the public highway; smoke rose from a hundred kitchens;
and it came in upon me strongly it was time to break our fasts.

"Catriona," said I, "I believe you have yet a shilling and three
baubees?"

"Are you wanting it?" said she, and passed me her purse. "I am wishing
it was five pounds! What will you want it for?"

"And what have we been walking for all night, like a pair of waif
Egyptians?" says I. "Just because I was robbed of my purse and all I
possessed in that unchancy town of Rotterdam. I will tell you of it now,
because I think the worst is over, but we have still a good tramp before
us till we get to where my money is, and if you would not buy me a piece
of bread, I were like to go fasting."

She looked at me with open eyes. By the light of the new day she was all
black and pale for weariness, so that my heart smote me for her. But as
for her, she broke out laughing.

"My torture! are we beggars then?" she cried. "You too? O, I could have
wished for this same thing! And I am glad to buy your breakfast to you.
But it would be pleisand if I would have had to dance to get a meal to
you! For I believe they are not very well acquainted with our manner of
dancing over here, and might be paying for the curiosity of that sight."

I could have kissed her for that word, not with a lover's mind, but in a
heat of admiration. For it always warms a man to see a woman brave.

We got a drink of milk from a country wife but new come to the town, and
in a baker's, a piece of excellent, hot, sweet-smelling bread, which we
ate upon the road as we went on. That road from Delft to the Hague is
just five miles of a fine avenue shaded with trees, a canal on the one
hand, on the other excellent pastures of cattle. It was pleasant here
indeed.

"And now, Davie," said she, "what will you do with me at all events?"

"It is what we have to speak of," said I, "and the sooner yet the
better. I can come by money in Leyden; that will be all well. But the
trouble is how to dispose of you until your father come. I thought last
night you seemed a little sweir to part from me?"

"It will be more than seeming then," said she.

"You are a very young maid," said I, "and I am but a very young callant.
This is a great piece of difficulty. What way are we to manage? Unless,
indeed, you could pass to be my sister?"

"And what for no?" said she, "if you would let me!"

"I wish you were so, indeed!" I cried. "I would be a fine man if I had
such a sister. But the rub is that you are Catriona Drummond."

"And now I will be Catrine Balfour," she said. "And who is to ken? They
are all strange folk here."

"If you think that it would do," says I. "I own it troubles me. I would
like it very ill, if I advised you at all wrong."

"David, I have no friend here but you," she said.

"The mere truth is, I am too young to be your friend," said I. "I am too
young to advise you, or you to be advised. I see not what else we are to
do, and yet I ought to warn you."

"I will have no choice left," said she. "My father James More has not
used me very well, and it is not the first time. I am cast upon your
hands like a sack of barley meal, and have nothing else to think of but
your pleasure. If you will have me, good and well. If you will not"--she
turned and touched her hand upon my arm--"David, I am afraid," said she.

"No, but I ought to warn you," I began; and then bethought me that I was
the bearer of the purse, and it would never do to seem too churlish.
"Catriona," said I, "don't misunderstand me: I am just trying to do my
duty by you, girl! Here am I going alone to this strange city, to be a
solitary student there; and here is this chance arisen that you might
dwell with me a bit, and be like my sister: you can surely understand
this much, my dear, that I would just love to have you?"

"Well, and here I am," said she. "So that's soon settled."

I know I was in duty bounden to have spoke more plain. I know this was a
great blot on my character for which I was lucky that I did not pay more
dear. But I minded how easy her delicacy had been startled with a word
of kissing her in Barbara's letter; now that she depended on me, how was
I to be more bold? Besides, the truth is, I could see no other feasible
method to dispose of her. And I daresay inclination pulled me very
strong.

A little beyond the Hague she fell very lame and made the rest of the
distance heavily enough. Twice she must rest by the wayside, which she
did with pretty apologies, calling herself a shame to the Highlands and
the race she came of, and nothing but a hindrance to myself. It was her
excuse, she said, that she was not much used with walking shod. I would
have had her strip off her shoes and stockings and go barefoot. But she
pointed out to me that the women of that country, even in the landward
roads, appeared to be all shod.

"I must not be disgracing my brother," said she, and was very merry with
it all, although her face told tales of her.

There is a garden in that city we were bound to, sanded below with clean
sand, the trees meeting overhead, some of them trimmed, some pleached,
and the whole place beautified with alleys and arbours. Here I left
Catriona, and went forward by myself to find my correspondent. There I
drew on my credit, and asked to be recommended to some decent, retired
lodging. My baggage not being yet arrived, I told him I supposed I
should require his caution with the people of the house; and explained
that, my sister being come for a while to keep house with me, I should
be wanting two chambers. This was all very well; but the trouble was
that Mr. Balfour in his letter of recommendation had condescended on a
great deal of particulars, and never a word of any sister in the case. I
could see my Dutchman was extremely suspicious; and viewing me over the
rims of a great pair of spectacles--he was a poor, frail body, and
reminded me of an infirm rabbit--he began to question me close.

Here I fell in a panic. Suppose he accept my tale (thinks I), suppose he
invite my sister to his house, and that I bring her. I shall have a fine
ravelled pirn to unwind, and may end by disgracing both the lassie and
myself. Thereupon I began hastily to expound to him my sister's
character. She was of a bashful disposition, it appeared, and so
extremely fearful of meeting strangers that I had left her at that
moment sitting in a public place alone. And then, being launched upon
the stream of falsehood, I must do like all the rest of the world in the
same circumstance, and plunge in deeper than was any service; adding
some altogether needless particulars of Miss Balfour's ill-health and
retirement during childhood. In the midst of which I awoke to a sense of
my behaviour, and was turned to one blush.

The old gentleman was not so much deceived but what he discovered a
willingness to be quit of me. But he was first of all a man of business;
and knowing that my money was good enough, however it might be with my
conduct, he was so far obliging as to send his son to be my guide and
caution in the matter of a lodging. This implied my presenting of the
young man to Catriona. The poor, pretty child was much recovered with
resting, looked and behaved to perfection, and took my arm and gave me
the name of brother more easily than I could answer her. But there was
one misfortune: thinking to help, she was rather towardly than otherwise
to my Dutchman. And I could not but reflect that Miss Balfour had rather
suddenly outgrown her bashfulness. And there was another thing, the
difference of our speech. I had the Low Country tongue and dwelled upon
my words; she had a hill voice, spoke with something of an English
accent, only far more delightful, and was scarce quite fit to be called
a deacon in the craft of talking English grammar; so that, for a brother
and sister, we made a most uneven pair. But the young Hollander was a
heavy dog, without so much spirit in his belly as to remark her
prettiness, for which I scorned him. And as soon as he had found a cover
to our heads, he left us alone, which was the greater service of the
two.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXIV

FULL STORY OF A COPY OF HEINECCIUS


The place found was in the upper part of a house backed on a canal. We
had two rooms, the second entering from the first; each had a chimney
built out into the floor in the Dutch manner; and being alongside, each
had the same prospect from the window of the top of a tree below us in a
little court, of a piece of the canal, and of houses in the Hollands
architecture and a church spire upon the further side. A full set of
bells hung in that spire and made delightful music; and when there was
any sun at all, it shone direct in our two chambers. From a tavern hard
by we had good meals sent in.

The first night we were both pretty weary, and she extremely so. There
was little talk between us, and I packed her off to her bed as soon as
she had eaten. The first thing in the morning I wrote word to Sprott to
have her mails sent on, together with a line to Alan at his chief's; and
had the same dispatched, and her breakfast ready, ere I waked her. I was
a little abashed when she came forth in her one habit, and the mud of
the way upon her stockings. By what inquiries I had made, it seemed a
good few days must pass before her mails could come to hand in Leyden,
and it was plainly needful she must have a shift of things. She was
unwilling at first that I should go to that expense; but I reminded her
she was now a rich man's sister and must appear suitably in the part,
and we had not got to the second merchant's before she was entirely
charmed into the spirit of the thing, and her eyes shining. It pleased
me to see her so innocent and thorough in this pleasure. What was more
extraordinary was the passion into which I fell on it myself; being
never satisfied that I had bought her enough or fine enough, and never
weary of beholding her in different attires. Indeed, I began to
understand some little of Miss Grant's immersion in that interest of
clothes; for the truth is, when you have the ground of a beautiful
person to adorn, the whole business becomes beautiful. The Dutch
chintzes I should say were extraordinary cheap and fine; but I would be
ashamed to set down what I paid for stockings to her. Altogether I spent
so great a sum upon this pleasuring (as I may call it) that I was
ashamed for a great while to spend more; and by way of a set off, I left
our chambers pretty bare. If we had beds, if Catriona was a little braw,
and I had light to see her by, we were richly enough lodged for me.

By the end of this merchandising I was glad to leave her at the door
with all our purchases, and go for a long walk alone in which to read
myself a lecture. Here had I taken under my roof, and as good as to my
bosom, a young lass extremely beautiful, and whose innocence was her
peril. My talk with the old Dutchman, and the lies to which I was
constrained, had already given me a sense of how my conduct must appear
to others; and now, after the strong admiration I had just experienced
and the immoderacy with which I had continued my vain purchases, I began
to think of it myself as very hasarded. I bethought me, if I had a
sister indeed, whether I would so expose her; then, judging the case too
problematical, I varied my question into this, whether I would so trust
Catriona in the hands of any other Christian being: the answer to which
made my face to burn. The more cause, since I had been entrapped and had
entrapped the girl into an undue situation, that I should behave in it
with scrupulous nicety. She depended on me wholly for her bread and
shelter; in case I should alarm her delicacy, she had no retreat.
Besides, I was her host and her protector; and the more irregularly I
had fallen in these positions, the less excuse for me if I should profit
by the same to forward even the most honest suit; for with the
opportunities that I enjoyed, and which no wise parent would have
suffered for a moment, even the most honest suit would be unfair. I saw
I must be extremely hold-off in my relations; and yet not too much so
neither; for if I had no right to appear at all in the character of a
suitor, I must yet appear continually, and if possible agreeably, in
that of host. It was plain I should require a great deal of tact and
conduct, perhaps more than my years afforded. But I had rushed in where
angels might have feared to tread, and there was no way out of that
position, save by behaving right while I was in it. I made a set of
rules for my guidance; prayed for strength to be enabled to observe
them, and as a more human aid to the same end purchased a study book in
law. This being all that I could think of, I relaxed from these grave
considerations; whereupon my mind bubbled at once into an effervescency
of pleasing spirits, and it was like one treading on air that I turned
homeward. As I thought that name of home, and recalled the image of that
figure awaiting me between four walls, my heart beat upon my bosom.

My troubles began with my return. She ran to greet me with an obvious
and affecting pleasure. She was clad, besides, entirely in the new
clothes that I had bought for her; looked in them beyond expression
well; and must walk about and drop me curtseys to display them and to be
admired. I am sure I did it with an ill grace, for I thought to have
choked upon the words.

"Well," she said, "if you will not be caring for my pretty clothes, see
what I have done with our two chambers." And she showed me the place all
very finely swept and the fires glowing in the two chimneys.

I was glad of a chance to seem a little more severe than I quite felt.
"Catriona," said I, "I am very much displeased with you, and you must
never again lay a hand upon my room. One of us two must have the rule
while we are here together; it is most fit it should be I who am both
the man and the elder; and I give you that for my command."

She dropped me one of her curtseys which were extraordinary taking. "If
you will be cross," said she, "I must be making pretty manners at you,
Davie. I will be very obedient, as I should be when every stitch upon
all there is of me belongs to you. But you will not be very cross
either, because now I have not anyone else."

This struck me hard, and I made haste, in a kind of penitence, to blot
out all the good effect of my last speech. In this direction, progress
was more easy, being down hill; she led me forward, smiling; at the
sight of her, in the brightness of the fire and with her pretty becks
and looks, my heart was altogether melted. We made our meal with
infinite mirth and tenderness; and the two seemed to be commingled into
one, so that our very laughter sounded like a kindness.

In the midst of which I awoke to better recollections, made a lame word
of excuse, and set myself boorishly to my studies. It was a substantial,
instructive book that I had bought, by the late Dr. Heineccius, in which
I was to do a great deal of reading these next days, and often very glad
that I had no one to question me of what I read. Methought she bit her
lip at me a little, and that cut me. Indeed it left her wholly solitary,
the more as she was very little of a reader, and had never a book. But
what was I to do?

So the rest of the evening flowed by almost without speech.

I could have beat myself. I could not lie in my bed that night for rage
and repentance, but walked to and fro on my bare feet till I was nearly
perished, for the chimney was gone out and the frost keen. The thought
of her in the next room, the thought that she might even hear me as I
walked, the remembrance of my churlishness and that I must continue to
practise the same ungrateful course or be dishonoured, put me beside my
reason. I stood like a man between Scylla and Charybdis: _What must she
think of me_? was my one thought that softened me continually into
weakness. _What is to become of us_? the other which steeled me again to
resolution. This was my first night of wakefulness and divided counsels,
of which I was now to pass many, pacing like a madman, sometimes weeping
like a childish boy, sometimes praying (I would fain hope) like a
Christian.

But prayer is not very difficult, and the hitch comes in practice. In
her presence, and above all if I allowed any beginning of familiarity, I
found I had very little command of what should follow. But to sit all
day in the same room with her, and feign to be engaged upon Heineccius,
surpassed my strength. So that I fell instead upon the expedient of
absenting myself so much as I was able; taking out classes and sitting
there regularly, often with small attention, the test of which I found
the other day in a note-book of that period, where I had left off to
follow an edifying lecture and actually scribbled in my book some very
ill verses, though the Latinity is rather better than I thought I could
ever have compassed. The evil of this course was unhappily near as great
as its advantage. I had the less time of trial, but I believe, while
that time lasted, I was tried the more extremely. For she being so much
left to solitude, she came to greet my return with an increasing fervour
that came nigh to overmaster me. These friendly offers I must
barbarously cast back; and my rejection sometimes wounded her so cruelly
that I must unbend and seek to make it up to her in kindness. So that
our time passed in ups and downs, tiffs and disappointments, upon the
which I could almost say (if it may be said with reverence) that I was
crucified.

The base of my trouble was Catriona's extraordinary innocence, at which
I was not so much surprised as filled with pity and admiration. She
seemed to have no thought of our position, no sense of my struggles;
welcomed any mark of my weakness with responsive joy; and when I was
drove again to my retrenchments, did not always dissemble her chagrin.
There were times when I have thought to myself, 'If she were over head
in love, and set her cap to catch me, she would scarce behave much
otherwise;' and then I would fall again into wonder at the simplicity of
woman, from whom I felt (in these moments) that I was not worthy to be
descended.

There was one point in particular on which our warfare turned, and of
all things, this was the question of her clothes. My baggage had soon
followed me from Rotterdam, and hers from Helvoet. She had now, as it
were, two wardrobes; and it grew to be understood between us (I could
never tell how) that when she was friendly she would wear my clothes,
and when otherwise her own. It was meant for a buffet, and (as it were)
the renunciation of her gratitude; and I felt it so in my bosom, but was
generally more wise than to appear to have observed the circumstance.

Once, indeed, I was betrayed into a childishness greater than her own;
it fell in this way. On my return from classes, thinking upon her
devoutly with a great deal of love and a good deal of annoyance in the
bargain, the annoyance began to fade away out of my mind; and spying in
a window one of those forced flowers, of which the Hollanders are so
skilled in the artifice, I gave way to an impulse and bought it for
Catriona. I do not know the name of that flower, but it was of the pink
colour, and I thought she would admire the same, and carried it home to
her with a wonderful soft heart. I had left her in my clothes, and when
I returned to find her all changed and a face to match, I cast but the
one look at her from head to foot, ground my teeth together, flung the
window open, and my flower into the court, and then (between rage and
prudence) myself out of that room again, of which I slammed the door as
I went out.

On the steep stair I came near falling, and this brought me to myself,
so that I began at once to see the folly of my conduct. I went, not into
the street as I had purposed, but to the house court, which was always a
solitary place, and where I saw my flower (that had cost me vastly more
than it was worth) hanging in the leafless tree. I stood by the side of
the canal, and looked upon the ice. Country people went by on their
skates, and I envied them. I could see no way out of the pickle I was
in: no way so much as to return to the room I had just left. No doubt
was in my mind but I had now betrayed the secret of my feelings; and to
make things worse, I had shown at the same time (and that with wretched
boyishness) incivility to my helpless guest.

I suppose she must have seen me from the open window. It did not seem to
me that I had stood there very long before I heard the crunching of
footsteps on the frozen snow, and turning somewhat angrily (for I was in
no spirit to be interrupted) saw Catriona drawing near. She was all
changed again, to the clocked stockings.

"Are we not to have our walk to-day?" said she.

I was looking at her in a maze. "Where is your brooch?" says I.

She carried her hand to her bosom and coloured high. "I will have
forgotten it," said she. "I will run upstairs for it quick, and then
surely we'll can have our walk?"

There was a note of pleading in that last that staggered me; I had
neither words nor voice to utter them; I could do no more than nod by
way of answer; and the moment she had left me, climbed into the tree and
recovered my flower, which on her return I offered her.

"I bought it for you, Catriona," said I.

She fixed it in the midst of her bosom with the brooch, I could have
thought tenderly.

"It is none the better of my handling," said I again, and blushed.

"I will be liking it none the worse, you may be sure of that," said she.

We did not speak so much that day, she seemed a thought on the reserve
though not unkindly. As for me, all the time of our walking, and after
we came home, and I had seen her put my flower into a pot of water, I
was thinking to myself what puzzles women were. I was thinking, the one
moment, it was the most stupid thing on earth she should not have
perceived my love; and the next, that she had certainly perceived it
long ago, and (being a wise girl with the fine female instinct of
propriety) concealed her knowledge.

We had our walk daily. Out in the streets I felt more safe; I relaxed a
little in my guardedness; and for one thing, there was no Heineccius.
This made these periods not only a relief to myself, but a particular
pleasure to my poor child. When I came back about the hour appointed, I
would generally find her ready dressed and glowing with anticipation.
She would prolong their duration to the extreme, seeming to dread (as I
did myself) the hour of the return; and there is scarce a field or
waterside near Leyden, scarce a street or lane there, where we have not
lingered. Outside of these, I bade her confine herself entirely to our
lodgings; this in the fear of her encountering any acquaintance, which
would have rendered our position very difficult. From the same
apprehension I would never suffer her to attend church, nor even go
myself; but made some kind of shift to hold worship privately in our own
chamber--I hope with an honest, but I am quite sure with a very much
divided mind. Indeed, there was scarce anything that more affected me,
than thus to kneel down alone with her before God like man and wife.

One day it was snowing downright hard. I had thought it not possible
that we should venture forth, and was surprised to find her waiting for
me ready dressed.

"I will not be doing without my walk," she cried. "You are never a good
boy, Davie, in the house; I will never be caring for you only in the
open air. I think we two will better turn Egyptian and dwell by the
roadside."

That was the best walk yet of all of them; she clung near to me in the
falling snow; it beat about and melted on us, and the drops stood upon
her bright cheeks like tears and ran into her smiling mouth. Strength
seemed to come upon me with the sight like a giant's; I thought I could
have caught her up and run with her into the uttermost places in the
earth; and we spoke together all that time beyond belief for freedom and
sweetness.

It was the dark night when we came to the house door. She pressed my arm
upon her bosom. "Thank you kindly for these same good hours," said she,
on a deep note of her voice.

The concern in which I fell instantly on this address, put me with the
same swiftness on my guard; and we were no sooner in the chamber, and
the light made, than she beheld the old, dour, stubborn countenance of
the student of Heineccius. Doubtless she was more than usually hurt; and
I know for myself, I found it more than usually difficult to maintain my
strangeness. Even at the meal, I durst scarce unbuckle and scarce lift
my eyes to her; and it was no sooner over than I fell again to my
civilian, with more seeming abstraction and less understanding than
before. Methought, as I-read, I could hear my heart strike like an
eight-day clock. Hard as I feigned to study, there was still some of my
eyesight that spilled beyond the book upon Catriona. She sat on the
floor by the side of my great mail, and the chimney lighted her up, and
shone and blinked upon her, and made her glow and darken through a
wonder of fine hues. Now she would be gazing in the fire, and then again
at me; and at that I would be plunged in a terror of myself, and turn
the pages of Heineccius like a man looking for the text in church.

Suddenly she called out aloud, "O, why does not my father come?" she
cried, and fell at once into a storm of tears.

I leaped up, flung Heineccius fairly into the fire, ran to her side, and
cast an arm around her sobbing body.

She put me from her sharply. "You do not love your friend," says she. "I
could be so happy too, if you would let me!" And then, "O, what will I
have done that you should hate me so?"

"Hate you!" cries I, and held her firm. "You blind lass, can you not see
a little in my wretched heart? Do you think when I set there, reading in
that fool-book that I have just burned and be damned to it, I take ever
the least thought of any stricken thing but just yourself? Night after
night I could have grat to see you sitting there your lone. And what was
I to do? You are here under my honour; would you punish me for that? Is
it for that that you would spurn a loving servant?"

At the word, with a small, sudden motion, she clung near to me. I raised
her face to mine, I kissed it, and she bowed her brow upon my bosom,
clasping me tight. I sat in a mere whirl like a man drunken. Then I
heard her voice sound very small and muffled in my clothes.

"Did you kiss her truly?" she asked.

There went through me so great a heave of surprise that I was all shook
with it.

"Miss Grant!" I cried, all in a disorder. "Yes, I asked her to kiss me
good-bye, the which she did."

"Ah, well!" said she, "you have kissed me too, at all events."

At the strangeness and sweetness of that word, I saw where we had
fallen; rose, and set her on her feet.

"This will never do," said I. "This will never, never do. O Catrine,
Catrine!" Then there came a pause in which I was debarred from any
speaking. And then, "Go away to your bed," said I. "Go away to your bed
and leave me."

She turned to obey me like a little child, and the next I knew of it,
had stopped in the very doorway.

"Good night, Davie!" said she.

"And O, good night, my love!" I cried, with a great outbreak of my soul,
and caught her to me again, so that it seemed I must have broken her.
The next moment I had thrust her from the room, shut to the door even
with violence, and stood alone.

The milk was spilt now, the word was out and the truth told. I had crept
like an untrusty man into the poor maid's affections; she was in my hand
like any frail, innocent thing to make or mar; and what weapon of
defence was left me? It seemed like a symbol that Heinoccius, my old
protection, was now burned. I repented, yet could not find it in my
heart to blame myself for that great failure. It seemed not possible to
have resisted the boldness of her innocence or that last temptation of
her weeping. And all that I had to excuse me did but make my sin appear
the greater--it was upon a nature so defenceless, and with such
advantages of the position, that I seemed to have practised.

What was to become of us now? It seemed we could no longer dwell in the
one place. But where was I to go? or where she? Without either choice or
fault of ours, life had conspired to wall us together in that narrow
place. I had a wild thought of marrying out of hand; and the next moment
put it from me with revolt. She was a child, she could not tell her own
heart; I had surprised her weakness, I must never go on to build on that
surprisal; I must keep her not only clear of reproach, but free as she
had come to me.

Down I sat before the fire, and reflected, and repented, and beat my
brains in vain for any means of escape. About two of the morning, there
were three red embers left and the house and all the city was asleep,
when I was aware of a small sound of weeping in the next room. She
thought that I slept, the poor soul; she regretted her weakness--and
what perhaps (God help her!) she called her forwardness--and in the dead
of the night solaced herself with tears. Tender and bitter feelings,
love and penitence and pity struggled in my soul; it seemed I was under
bond to heal that weeping.

"O, try to forgive me!" I cried out, "try, try to forgive me. Let us
forget it all, let us try if we'll no can forget it!"

There came no answer, but the sobbing ceased. I stood a long while with
my hands still clasped as I had spoken; then the cold of the night laid
hold upon me with a shudder, and I think my reason reawakened.

"You can make no hand of this, Davie," thinks I. "To bed with you like a
wise lad, and try if you can sleep. To-morrow you may see your way."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXV

THE RETURN OF JAMES MORE


I was called on the morrow out of a late and troubled slumber by a
knocking on my door, ran to open it, and had almost swooned with the
contrariety of my feelings, mostly painful; for on the threshold, in a
rough wrapraseal and an extraordinary big laced hat, there stood James
More.

I ought to have been glad perhaps without admixture, for there was a
sense in which the man came like an answer to prayer. I had been saying
till my head was weary that Catriona and I must separate, and looking
till my head ached for any possible means of separation. Here were the
means come to me upon two legs, and joy was the hindmost of my thoughts.
It is to be considered, however, that even if the weight of the future
were lifted off me by the man's arrival, the present heaved up the more
black and menacing; so that, as I first stood before him in my shirt and
breeches, I believe I took a leaping step backward like a person shot.

"Ah," said he, "I have found you, Mr. Balfour." And offered me his
large, fine hand, the which (recovering at the same time my post in the
doorway, as if with some thought of resistance) I took him by
doubtfully. "It is a remarkable circumstance how our affairs appear to
intermingle," he continued. "I am owing you an apology for an
unfortunate intrusion upon yours, which I suffered myself to be
entrapped into by my confidence in that false-face, Prestongrange; I
think shame to own to you that I was ever trusting to a lawyer." He
shrugged his shoulders with a very French air. "But indeed the man is
very plausible," says he. "And now it seems that you have busied
yourself handsomely in the matter of my daughter, for whose direction I
was remitted to yourself."

"I think, sir," said I, with a very painful air, "that it will be
necessary we two should have an explanation."

"There is nothing amiss?" he asked. "My agent, Mr. Sprott--"

"For God's sake moderate your voice!" I cried. "She must not hear till
we have had an explanation."

"She is in this place?" cries he.

"That is her chamber door," said I.

"You are here with her alone?" he asked.

"And who else would I have got to stay with us?" cries I.

I will do him the justice to admit that he turned pale.

"This is very unusual," said he. "This is a very unusual circumstance.
You are right, we must hold an explanation."

So saying, he passed me by, and I must own the tall old rogue appeared
at that moment extraordinary dignified. He had now, for the first time,
the view of my chamber, which I scanned (I may say) with his eyes. A bit
of morning sun glinted in by the window pane, and showed it off; my bed,
my mails, and washing dish, with some disorder of my clothes, and the
unlighted chimney, made the only plenishing; no mistake but it looked
bare and cold, and the most unsuitable, beggarly place conceivable to
harbour a young lady. At the same time came in on my mind the
recollection of the clothes that I had bought for her; and I thought
this contrast of poverty and prodigality bore an ill appearance.

He looked all about the chamber for a seat, and finding nothing else to
his purpose except my bed, took a place upon the side of it; where,
after I had closed the door, I could not very well avoid joining him.
For however this extraordinary interview might end, it must pass if
possible without waking Catriona; and the one thing needful was that we
should sit close and talk low. But I can scarce picture what a pair we
made; he in his great coat which the coldness of my chamber made
extremely suitable; I shivering in my shirt and breeks; he with very
much the air of a judge; and I (whatever I looked) with very much the
feelings of a man who has heard the last trumpet.

"Well?" says he.

And "Well" I began, but found myself unable to go further.

"You tell me she is here?" said he again, but now with a spice of
impatiency that seemed to brace me up.

"She is in this house," said I, "and I knew the circumstance would be
called unusual. But you are to consider how very unusual the whole
business was from the beginning. Here is a young lady landed on the
coast of Europe with two shillings and a penny halfpenny. She is
directed to yon man Sprott in Helvoet. I hear you call him your agent.
All I can say is he could do nothing but damn and swear at the mere
mention of your name, and I must fee him out of my own pocket even to
receive the custody of her effects, You speak of unusual circumstances,
Mr. Drummond, if that be the name you prefer. Here was a circumstance,
if you like, to which it was barbarity to have exposed her."

"But this is what I cannot understand the least," said James. "My
daughter was placed into the charge of some responsible persons, whose
names I have forgot."

"Gebbie was the name," said I; "and there is no doubt that Mr. Gebbie
should have gone ashore with her at Helvoet. But he did not, Mr.
Drummond; and I think you might praise God that I was there to offer in
his place."

"I shall have a word to say to Mr. Gebbie before done," said he. "As for
yourself, I think it might have occurred that you were somewhat young
for such a post."

"But the choice was not between me and somebody else, it was between me
and nobody," I cried. "Nobody offered in my place, and I must say I
think you show a very small degree of gratitude to me that did."

"I shall wait until I understand my obligation a little more in the
particular," says he.

"Indeed, and I think it stares you in the face, then," said I. "Your
child was deserted, she was clean flung away in the midst of Europe,
with scarce two shillings, and not two words of any language spoken
there: I must say, a bonny business! I brought her to this place. I gave
her the name and the tenderness due to a sister. All this has not gone
without expense, but that I scarce need to hint at. They were services
due to the young lady's character which I respect; and I think it would
be a bonny business too, if I was to be singing her praises to her
father."

"You are a young man," he began.

"So I hear you tell me," said I, with a good deal of heat.

"You are a very young man," he repeated, "or you would have understood
the significancy of the step."

"I think you speak very much at your ease," cried I. "What else was I to
do? It is a fact I might have hired some decent, poor woman to be a
third to us, and I declare I never thought of it until this moment! But
where was I to find her, that am a foreigner myself? And let me point
out to your observation, Mr. Drummond, that it would have cost me money
out of my pocket. For here is just what it comes to, that I had to pay
through the nose for your neglect; and there is only the one story to
it, just that you were so unloving and so careless as to have lost your
daughter."

"He that lives in a glass house should not be casting stones," says he;
"and we will finish inquiring into the behaviour of Miss Drummond,
before we go on to sit in judgment on her father."

"But I will be entrapped into no such attitude," said I. "The character
of Miss Drummond is far above inquiry, as her father ought to know. So
is mine, and I am telling you that. There are but the two ways of it
open. The one is to express your thanks to me as one gentleman to
another, and to say no more. The other (if you are so difficult as to be
still dissatisfied) is to pay me that which I have expended and be
done."

He seemed to soothe me with a hand in the air.

"There, there," said he. "You go too fast, you go too fast, Mr. Balfour.
It is a good thing that I have learned to be more patient. And I believe
you forget that I have yet to see my daughter."

I began to be a little relieved upon this speech and a change in the
man's manner that I spied in him as soon as the name of money fell
between us.

"I was thinking it would be more fit--if you will excuse the plainness
of my dressing in your presence--that I should go forth and leave you to
encounter her alone?" said I.

"What I would have looked for at your hands!" says he; and there was no
mistake but what he said it civilly.

I thought this better and better still, and as I began to pull on my
hose, recalling the man's impudent mendicancy at Prestongrange's, I
determined to pursue what seemed to be my victory.

"If you have any mind to stay some while in Leyden," said I, "this room
is very much at your disposal, and I can easy find another for myself:
in which way we shall have the least amount of flitting possible, there
being only one to change."

"Why, sir," said he, making his bosom big, "I think no shame of a
poverty I have come by in the service of my king; I make no secret that
my affairs are quite involved; and for the moment, it would be even
impossible for me to undertake a journey."

"Until you have occasion to communicate with your friends," said I,
"perhaps it might be convenient for you (as of course it would be
honourable to myself) if you were to regard yourself in the light of my
guest?"

"Sir," said he, "when an offer is frankly made, I think I honour myself
most to imitate that frankness. Your hand, Mr. David; you have the
character that I respect the most; you are one of those from whom a
gentleman can take a favour and no more words about it. I am an old
soldier," he went on, looking rather disgusted-like around my chamber,
"and you need not fear I shall prove burthensome. I have ate too often
at a dyke-side, drank of the ditch, and had no roof but the rain."

"I should be telling you," said I, "that our breakfasts are sent
customarily in about this time of morning. I propose I should go now to
the tavern, and bid them add a cover for yourself and delay the meal the
matter of an hour, which will give you an interval to meet your daughter
in."

Methought his nostrils wagged at this. "O, an hour," says he. "That is
perhaps superfluous. Half an hour, Mr. David, or say twenty minutes; I
shall do very well in that. And by the way," he adds, detaining me by
the coat, "what is it you drink in the morning, whether ale or wine?"

"To be frank with you, sir," says I, "I drink nothing else but spare,
cold water?"

"Tut-tut," says he, "that is fair destruction to the stomach, take an
old campaigner's word for it. Our country spirit at home is perhaps the
most entirely wholesome; but as that is not come-at-able, Rhenish or a
white wine of Burgundy will be next best."

"I shall make it my business to see you are supplied," said I.

"Why, very good," said he, "and we shall make a man of you yet, Mr.
David."

By this time, I can hardly say that I was minding him at all, beyond an
odd thought of the kind of father-in-law that he was like to prove; and
all my cares centred about the lass his daughter, to whom I determined
to convey some warning of her visitor. I stepped to the door
accordingly, and cried through the panels, knocking thereon at the same
time: "Miss Drummond, here is your father come at last."

With that I went forth upon my errand, having (by two words)
extraordinarily damaged my affairs.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXVI

THE THREESOME


Whether or not I was to be so much blamed, or rather perhaps pitied, I
must leave others to judge of. My shrewdness (of which I have a good
deal, too) seems not so great with the ladies. No doubt, at the moment
when I awaked her, I was thinking a good deal of the effect upon James
More; and similarly when I returned and we were all sat down to
breakfast, I continued to behave to the young lady with deference and
distance; as I still think to have been most wise. Her father had cast
doubts upon the innocence of my friendship; and these, it was my first
business to allay. But there is a kind of an excuse for Catriona also.
We had shared in a scene of some tenderness and passion, and given and
received caresses; I had thrust her from me with violence; I had called
aloud upon her in the night from the one room to the other; she had
passed hours of wakefulness and weeping; and it is not to be supposed I
had been absent from her pillow thoughts. Upon the back of this, to be
awaked, with unaccustomed formality, under the name of Miss Drummond,
and to be thenceforth used with a great deal of distance and respect,
led her entirely in error on my private sentiments; and she was indeed
so incredibly abused as to imagine me repentant and trying to draw off!

The trouble betwixt us seems to have been this: that whereas I (since I
had first set eyes on his great hat) thought singly of James More, his
return and suspicions, she made so little of these that I may say she
scarce remarked them, and all her troubles and doings regarded what had
passed between us in the night before. This is partly to be explained by
the innocence and boldness of her character; and partly because James
More, having sped so ill in his interview with me, or had his mouth
closed by my invitation, said no word to her upon the subject. At the
breakfast, accordingly, it soon appeared we were at cross purposes. I
had looked to find her in clothes of her own: I found her (as if her
father were forgotten) wearing some of the best that I had bought for
her and which she knew (or thought) that I admired her in. I had looked
to find her imitate my affectation of distance, and be most precise and
formal; instead I found her flushed and wild-like, with eyes
extraordinary bright, and a painful and varying expression, calling me
by name with a sort of appeal of tenderness, and referring and deferring
to my thoughts and wishes like an anxious or a suspected wife.

But this was not for long. As I beheld her so regardless of her own
interests, which I had jeopardised and was now endeavoring to recover, I
redoubled my own boldness in the manner of a lesson to the girl. The
more she came forward, the further I drew back; the more she betrayed
the closeness of our intimacy, the more pointedly civil I became, until
even her father (if he had not been so engrossed with eating) might have
observed the opposition. In the midst of which, of a sudden, she became
wholly changed, and I told myself, with a good deal of relief, that she
had took the hint at last.

All day I was at my classes or in quest of my new lodging; and though
the hour of our customary walk hung miserably on my hands, I cannot say
but I was happy on the whole to find my way cleared, the girl again in
proper keeping, the father satisfied or at least acquiescent, and myself
free to prosecute my love with honour. At supper, as at all our meals,
it was James More that did the talking. No doubt but he talked well, if
anyone could have believed him. But I will speak of him presently more
at large. The meal at an end, he rose, got his great coat, and looking
(as I thought) at me, observed he had affairs abroad. I took this for a
hint that I was to be going also, and got up; whereupon the girl, who
had scarce given me greeting at my entrance, turned her eyes on me wide
open, with a look that bade me stay. I stood between them like a fish
out of water, turning from one to the other; neither seemed to observe
me, she gazing on the floor, he buttoning his coat: which vastly swelled
my embarrassment. This appearance of indifferency argued, upon her side,
a good deal of anger very near to burst out. Upon his, I thought it
horribly alarming; I made sure there was a tempest brewing there; and
considering that to be the chief peril, turned towards him and put
myself (so to speak) in the man's hands.

"Can I do anything for _you_, Mr. Drummond?" says I.

He stifled a yawn, which again I thought to be duplicity. "Why, Mr.
David," said he, "since you are so obliging as to propose it, you might
show me the way to a certain tavern" (of which he gave the name) "where
I hope to fall in with some old companions in arms."

There was no more to say, and I got my hat and cloak to bear him
company.

"And as for you," he says to his daughter, "you had best go to your bed.
I shall be late home, and _Early to bed and early to rise, gars bonny
lasses have bright eyes."_

Whereupon he kissed her with a good deal of tenderness, and ushered me
before him from the door. This was so done (I thought on purpose) that
it was scarce possible there should be any parting salutation; but I
observed she did not look at me, and set it down to terror of James
More.

It was some distance to that tavern. He talked all the way of matters
which did not interest me the smallest, and at the door dismissed me
with empty manners. Thence I walked to my new lodging, where I had not
so much as a chimney to hold me warm, and no society but my own
thoughts. These were still bright enough; I did not so much as dream
that Catriona was turned against me; I thought we were like folk
pledged; I thought we had been too near and spoke too warmly to be
severed, least of all by what were only steps in a most needful policy.
And the chief of my concern was only the kind of father-in-law that I
was getting, which was not at all the kind I would have chosen: and the
matter of how soon I ought to speak to him, which was a delicate point
on several sides. In the first place, when I thought how young I was, I
blushed all over, and could almost have found it in my heart to have
desisted; only that if once I let them go from Leyden without
explanation, I might lose her altogether. And in the second place, there
was our very irregular situation to be kept in view, and the rather
scant measure of satisfaction I had given James More that morning. I
concluded, on the whole, that delay would not hurt anything, yet I would
not delay too long neither; and got to my cold bed with a full heart.

The next day, as James More seemed a little on the complaining hand in
the matter of my chamber, I offered to have in more furniture; and
coming in the afternoon, with porters bringing chairs and tables, found
the girl once more left to herself. She greeted me on my admission
civilly, but withdrew at once to her own room, of which she shut the
door. I made my disposition, and paid and dismissed the men so that she
might hear them go, when I supposed she would at once come forth again
to speak to me. I waited yet awhile, then knocked upon her door.

"Catriona!" said I.

The door was opened so quickly, even before I had the word out, that I
thought she must have stood behind it listening. She remained there in
the interval quite still; but she had a look that I cannot put a name
on, as of one in a bitter trouble.

"Are we not to have our walk to-day either?" so I faltered.

"I am thanking you," said she. "I will not be caring much to walk, now
that my father is come home."

"But I think he has gone out himself and left you here alone," said I.

"And do you think that was very kindly said?" she asked.

"It was not unkindly meant," I replied. "What ails you, Catriona? What
have I done to you that you should turn from me like this?"

"I do not turn from you at all," she said, speaking very carefully. "I
will ever be grateful to my friend that was good to me; I will ever be
his friend in all that I am able. But now that my father James More is
come again, there is a difference to be made, and I think there are some
things said and done that would be better to be forgotten. But I will
ever be your friend in all that I am able, and if that is not all that
. . . if it is not so much. . . . Not that you will be caring! But I would
not have you think of me too hard. It was true what you said to me, that
I was too young to be advised, and I am hoping you will remember I was
just a child. I would not like to lose your friendship, at all events."

She began this very pale; but before she was done, the blood was in her
face like scarlet, so that not her words only, but her face and the
trembling of her very hands, besought me to be gentle. I saw for the
first time, how very wrong I had done to place the child in that
position, where she had been entrapped into a moment's weakness, and now
stood before me like a person shamed.

"Miss Drummond," I said, and stuck, and made the same beginning once
again, "I wish you could see into my heart," I cried. "You would read
there that my respect is undiminished. If that were possible, I should
say it was increased. This is but the result of the mistake we made; and
had to come; and the less said of it now the better. Of all of our life
here, I promise you it shall never pass my lips; I would like to promise
you too that I would never think of it, but it's a memory that will be
always dear to me. And as for a friend, you have one here that would die
for you."

"I am thanking you," said she.

We stood awhile silent, and my sorrow for myself began to get the upper
hand; for here were all my dreams come to a sad tumble, and my love
lost, and myself alone again in the world as at the beginning.

"Well," said I, "we shall be friends always, that's a certain thing. But
this is a kind of a farewell too: it's a kind of a farewell after all; I
shall always ken Miss Drummond, but this is a farewell to my Catriona."

I looked at her; I could hardly say I saw her, but she seemed to grow
great and brighten in my eyes; and with that I suppose I must have lost
my head, for I called out her name again and made a step at her with my
hands reached forth.

She shrank back like a person struck, her face flamed; but the blood
sprang no faster up into her cheeks, than what it flowed back upon my
own heart, at sight of it, with penitence and concern. I found no words
to excuse myself, but bowed before her very deep, and went my ways out
of the house with death in my bosom.

I think it was about five days that followed without any change. I saw
her scarce ever but at meals, and then of course in the company of James
More. If we were alone even for a moment, I made it my devoir to behave
the more distantly and to multiply respectful attentions, having always
in my mind's eye that picture of the girl shrinking and flaming in a
blush, and in my heart more pity for her than I could depict in words. I
was sorry enough for myself, I need not dwell on that, having fallen all
my length and more than all my height in a few seconds; but, indeed, I
was near as sorry for the girl, and sorry enough to be scarce angry with
her save by fits and starts. Her plea was good: she was but a child; she
had been placed in an unfair position; if she had deceived herself and
me, it was no more than was to have been looked for.

And for another thing she was now very much alone. Her father, when he
was by, was rather a caressing parent; but he was very easy led away by
his affairs and pleasures, neglected her without compunction or remark,
spent his nights in taverns when he had the money, which was more often
than I could at all account for; and even in the course of these few
days, failed once to come to a meal, which Catriona and I were at last
compelled to partake of without him. It was the evening meal, and I left
immediately that I had eaten, observing I supposed she would prefer to
be alone; to which she agreed and (strange as it may seem) I quite
believed her. Indeed, I thought myself but an eyesore to the girl, and a
reminder of a moment's weakness that she now abhorred to think of. So
she must sit alone in that room where she and I had been so merry, and
in the blink of that chimney whose light had shone upon our many
difficult and tender moments. There she must sit alone, and think of
herself as of a maid who had most unmaidenly proffered her affections
and had the same rejected. And in the meanwhile I would be alone some
other place, and reading myself (whenever I was tempted to be angry)
lessons upon human frailty and female delicacy. And altogether I suppose
there were never two poor fools made themselves more unhappy in a
greater misconception.

As for James, he paid not so much heed to us, or to anything in nature
but his pocket, and his belly, and his own prating talk. Before twelve
hours were gone he had raised a small loan of me; before thirty, he had
asked for a second and been refused. Money and refusal he took with the
same kind of high good-nature. Indeed, he had an outside air of
magnanimity that was very well fitted to impose upon a daughter; and the
light in which he was constantly presented in his talk, and the man's
fine presence and great ways went together pretty harmoniously. So that
a man that had no business with him, and either very little penetration
or a furious deal of prejudice, might almost have been taken in. To me,
after my first two interviews, he was as plain as print; I saw him to be
perfectly selfish, with a perfect innocency in the same; and I would
harken to his swaggering talk (of arms, and "an old soldier," and "a
poor Highland gentleman," and "the strength of my country and my
friends") as I might to the babbling of a parrot.

The odd thing was that I fancy he believed some part of it himself, or
did at times; I think he was so false all through that he scarce knew
when he was lying; and for one thing, his moments of dejection must have
been wholly genuine. There were times when he would be the most silent,
affectionate, clinging creature possible, holding Catriona's hand like a
big baby, and begging of me not to leave if I had any love to him; of
which, indeed, I had none, but all the more to his daughter. He would
press and indeed beseech us to entertain him with our talk, a thing very
difficult in the state of our relations; and again break forth in
pitiable regrets for his own land and friends, or into Gaelic singing.

"This is one of the melancholy airs of my native land," he would say.
"You may think it strange to see a soldier weep, and indeed it is to
make a near friend of you," says he. "But the notes of this singing are
in my blood, and the words come out of my heart. And when I mind upon my
red mountains and the wild birds calling there, and the brave streams of
water running down, I would scarce think shame to weep before my
enemies." Then he would sing again, and translate to me pieces of the
song, with a great deal of boggling and much expressed contempt against
the English language. "It says here," he would say, "that the sun is
gone down, and the battle is at an end, and the brave chiefs are
defeated. And it tells here how the stars see them fleeing into strange
countries or lying dead on the red mountain; and they will never more
shout the call of battle or wash their feet in the streams of the
valley. But if you had only some of this language, you would weep also
because the words of it are beyond all expression, and it is mere
mockery to tell you it in English."

Well, I thought there was a good deal of mockery in the business, one
way and another; and yet, there was some feeling too, for which I hated
him, I think, the worst of all. And it used to cut me to the quick to
see Catriona so much concerned for the old rogue, and weeping herself to
see him weep, when I was sure one-half of his distress flowed from his
last night's drinking in some tavern. There were times when I was
tempted to lend him a round sum, and see the last of him for good; but
this would have been to see the last of Catriona as well, for which I
was scarcely so prepared; and besides, it went against my conscience to
squander my good money on one who was so little of a husband.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXVII

A TWOSOME


I believe it was about the fifth day, and I know at least that James was
in one of his fits of gloom, when I received three letters. The first
was from Alan, offering to visit me in Leyden; the other two were out of
Scotland and prompted by the same affair, which was the death of my
uncle and my own complete accession to my rights. Rankeillor's was, of
course, wholly in the business view; Miss Grant's was like herself, a
little more witty than wise, full of blame to me for not having written
(though how was I to write with such intelligence?) and of rallying talk
about Catriona, which it cut me to the quick to read in her very
presence.

For it was of course in my own rooms that I found them, when I came to
dinner, so that I was surprised out of my news in the very first moment
of reading it. This made a welcome diversion for all three of us, nor
could any have foreseen the ill consequences that ensued. It was
accident that brought the three letters the same day, and that gave them
into my hand in the same room with James More; and of all the events
that flowed from that accident, and which I might have prevented if I
had held my tongue, the truth is that they were preordained before
Agricola came into Scotland or Abraham set out upon his travels.

The first that I opened was naturally Alan's; and what more natural than
that I should comment on his design to visit me? but I observed James to
sit up with an air of immediate attention.

"Is that not Alan Breck that was suspected of the Appin accident?" he
inquired.

I told him, "Ay," it was the same; and he withheld me some time from my
other letters, asking of our acquaintance, of Alan's manner of life in
France, of which I knew very little, and further of his visit as now
proposed.

"All we forfeited folk hang a little together," he explained, "and
besides I know the gentleman: and though his descent is not the thing,
and indeed he has no true right to use the name of Stewart, he was very
much admired in the day of Drummossie. He did there like a soldier; if
some that need not be named had done as well, the upshot need not have
been so melancholy to remember. There were two that did their best that
day, and it makes a bond between the pair of us," says he.

I could scarce refrain from shooting out my tongue at him, and could
almost have wished that Alan had been there to have inquired a little
further into that mention of his birth. Though, they tell me, the same
was indeed not wholly regular.

Meanwhile, I had opened Miss Grant's, and could not withhold an
exclamation.

"Catriona," I cried, forgetting, the first time since her father was
arrived, to address her by a handle, "I am come into my kingdom fairly,
I am the laird of Shaws indeed--my uncle is dead at last."

She clapped her hands together leaping from her seat. The next moment it
must have come over both of us at once what little cause of joy was left
to either, and we stood opposite, staring on each other sadly.

But James showed himself a ready hypocrite. "My daughter," says he, "is
this how my cousin learned you to behave? Mr. David has lost a near
friend, and we should first condole with him on his bereavement."

"Troth, sir," said I, turning to him in a kind of anger, "I can make no
such faces. His death is as blythe news as ever I got."

"It's a good soldier's philosophy," says James. "'Tis the way of flesh,
we must all go, all go. And if the gentleman was so far from your
favour, why, very well! But we may at least congratulate you on your
accession to your estates."

"Nor can I say that either," I replied, with the same heat. "It is a
good estate; what matters that to a lone man that has enough already? I
had a good revenue before in my frugality; and but for the man's
death--which gratifies me, shame to me that must confess it!--I see not
how anyone is to be bettered by this change."

"Come, come," said he, "you are more affected than you let on, or you
would never make yourself out so lonely. Here are three letters; that
means three that wish you well; and I could name two more, here in this
very chamber. I have known you not so very long, but Catriona, when we
are alone, is never done with the singing of your praises."

She looked up at him, a little wild at that; and he slid off at once
into another matter, the extent of my estate, which (during the most of
the dinner time) he continued to dwell upon with interest. But it was to
no purpose he dissembled; he had touched the matter with too gross a
hand: and I knew what to expect. Dinner was scarce ate when he plainly
discovered his designs. He reminded Catriona of an errand, and bid her
attend to it. "I do not see you should be gone beyond the hour," he
added, "and friend David will be good enough to bear me company till you
return." She made haste to obey him without words. I do not know if she
understood, I believe not; but I was completely satisfied, and sat
strengthening my mind for what should follow.

The door had scarce closed behind her departure, when the man leaned
back in his chair and addressed me with a good affectation of easiness.
Only the one thing betrayed him and that was his face; which suddenly
shone all over with fine points of sweat.

"I am rather glad to have a word alone with you," says he, "because in
our first interview there were some expressions you misapprehended and I
have long meant to set you right upon. My daughter stands beyond doubt.
So do you, and I would make that good with my sword against all
gainsayers. But, my dear David, this world is a censorious place--as who
should know it better than myself, who have lived ever since the days of
my late departed father, God sain him! in a perfect spate of calumnies?
We have to face to that; you and me have to consider of that; we have to
consider of that." And he wagged his head like a minister in a pulpit.

"To what effect, Mr. Drummond?" said I. "I would be obliged to you if
you would approach your point."

"Ay, ay," says he, laughing, "like your character indeed! and what I
most admire in it. But the point, my worthy fellow, is sometimes in a
kittle bit." He filled a glass of wine. "Though between you and me, that
are such fast friends, it need not bother us long. The point, I need
scarcely tell you, is my daughter. And the first thing is that I have no
thought in my mind of blaming you. In the unfortunate circumstances,
what could you do else? 'Deed, and I cannot tell."

"I thank you for that," said I, pretty close upon my guard.

"I have besides studied your character," he went on; "your talents are
fair; you seem to have a moderate competence; which does no harm; and
one thing with another, I am very happy to have to announce to you that
I have decided on the latter of the two ways open."

"I am afraid I am dull," said I. "What ways are these?"

He bent his brows upon me formidably and uncrossed his legs. "Why, sir,"
says he, "I think I need scarce describe them to a gentleman of your
condition; either that I should cut your throat or that you should marry
my daughter."

"You are pleased to be quite plain at last," said I.

"And I believe I have been plain from the beginning!" cries he
robustiously. "I am a careful parent, Mr. Balfour; but I thank God, a
patient and deleeberate man. There is many a father, sir, that would
have hirsled you at once either to the altar or the field. My esteem for
your character--"

"Mr. Drummond," I interrupted, "if you have any esteem for me at all, I
will beg of you to moderate your voice. It is quite needless to rowt at
a gentleman in the same chamber with yourself and lending you his best
attention."

"Why, very true," says he, with an immediate change. "And you must
excuse the agitations of a parent."

"I understand you then," I continued--"for I will take no note of your
other alternative, which perhaps it was a pity you let fall--I
understand you rather to offer me encouragement in case I should desire
to apply for your daughter's hand?"

"It is not possible to express my meaning better," said he, "and I see
we shall do well together."

"That remains to be yet seen," said I. "But so much I need make no
secret of, that I bear the lady you refer to the most tender affection,
and I could not fancy, even in a dream, a better fortune than to get
her."

"I was sure of it, I felt certain of you, David," he cried, and reached
out his hand to me.

I put it by. "You go too fast, Mr. Drummond," said I. "There are
conditions to be made; and there is a difficulty in the path, which I
see not entirely how we shall come over. I have told you that, upon my
side, there is no objection to the marriage, but I have good reason to
believe there will be much on the young lady's."

"This is all beside the mark," says he. "I will engage for her
acceptance."

"I think you forget, Mr. Drummond," said I, "that, even in dealing with
myself you have been betrayed into two-three unpalatable expressions. I
will have none such employed to the young lady. I am here to speak and
think for the two of us; and I give you to understand that I would no
more let a wife be forced upon myself, than what I would let a husband
be forced on the young lady."

He sat and glowered at me like one in doubt and a good deal of temper.

"So that this is to be the way of it," I concluded. "I will marry Miss
Drummond, and that blythely, if she is entirely willing. But if there be
the least unwillingness, as I have reason to fear--marry her will I
never."

"Well, well," said he, "this is a small affair. As soon as she returns I
will sound her a bit, and hope to reassure you----"

But I cut in again. "Not a finger of you, Mr. Drummond, or I cry off,
and you can seek a husband to your daughter somewhere else," said I. "It
is I that am to be the only dealer and the only judge. I shall satisfy
myself exactly; and none else shall anyways meddle--you the least of
all."

"Upon my word, sir!" he exclaimed, "and who are you to be the judge?"

"The bridegroom, I believe," said I.

"This is to quibble," he cried. "You turn your back upon the facts. The
girl, my daughter, has no choice left to exercise. Her character is
gone."

"And I ask your pardon," said I, "but while this matter lies between her
and you and me, that is not so."

"What security have I!" he cried. "Am I to let my daughter's reputation
depend upon a chance?"

"You should have thought of all this long ago," said I, "before you were
so misguided as to lose her; and not afterwards, when it is quite too
late. I refuse to regard myself as any way accountable for your neglect,
and I will be browbeat by no man living. My mind is quite made up, and
come what may, I will not depart from it a hair's breadth. You and me
are to sit here in company till her return; upon which, without either
word or look from you, she and I are to go forth again to hold our talk.
If she can satisfy me that she is willing to this step, I will then make
it; and if she cannot, I will not."

He leaped out of his seat like a man stung. "I can spy your manoeuvre,"
he cried; "you would work upon her to refuse!"

"Maybe ay, and maybe no," said I. "That is the way it is to be,
whatever."

"And if I refuse?" cries he.

"Then, Mr. Drummond, it will have to come to the throat-cutting," said
I.

What with the size of the man, his great length of arm in which he came
near rivalling his father, and his reputed skill at weapons, I did not
use this word without some trepidation, to say nothing at all of the
circumstance that he was Catriona's father. But I might have spared
myself alarms. From the poorness of my lodging--he does not seem to have
remarked his daughter's dresses, which were indeed all equally new to
him--and from the fact that I had shown myself averse to lend, he had
embraced a strong idea of my poverty. The sudden news of my estate
convinced him of his error, and he had made but the one bound of it on
this fresh venture, to which he was now so wedded, that I believe he
would have suffered anything rather than fall to the alternative of
fighting.

A little while longer he continued to dispute with me until I hit upon a
word that silenced him.

"If I find you so averse to let me see the lady by herself," said I, "I
must suppose you have very good grounds to think me in the right about
her unwillingness."

He gabbled some kind of an excuse.

"But all this is very exhausting to both of our tempers," I added, "and
I think we would do better to preserve a judicious silence."

The which we did until the girl returned, and I must suppose would have
cut a very ridiculous figure, had there been any there to view us.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXVIII

IN WHICH I AM LEFT ALONE


I opened the door to Catriona and stopped her on the threshold.

"Your father wishes us to take our walk," said I.

She looked to James More, who nodded, and at that, like a trained
soldier, she turned to go with me.

We took one of our old ways, where we had gone often together, and been
more happy than I can tell of in the past. I came a half a step behind,
so that I could watch her unobserved. The knocking of her little shoes
upon the way sounded extraordinary pretty and sad; and I thought it a
strange moment that I should be so near both ends of it at once, and
walk in the midst between two destinies, and could not tell whether I
was hearing these steps for the last time, or whether the sound of them
was to go in and out with me till death should part us.

She avoided even to look at me, only walked before her, like one who had
a guess of what was coming. I saw I must speak soon before my courage
was run out, but where to begin I knew not. In this painful situation,
when the girl was as good as forced into my arms and had already
besought my forbearance, any excess of pressure must have seemed
indecent; yet to avoid it wholly would have a very cold-like appearance.
Between these extremes I stood helpless, and could have bit my fingers;
so that, when at last I managed to speak at all, it may be said I spoke
at random.

"Catriona," said I, "I am in a very painful situation; or rather, so we
are both; and I would be a good deal obliged to you if you would promise
to let me speak through first of all, and not to interrupt till I have
done."

She promised me that simply.

"Well," said I, "this that I have got to say is very difficult, and I
know very well I have no right to be saying it. After what passed
between the two of us last Friday, I have no manner of right. We have
got so ravelled up (and all by my fault) that I know very well the least
I could do is just to hold my tongue, which was what I intended fully,
and there was nothing further from my thoughts than to have troubled you
again. But, my dear, it has become merely necessary, and no way by it.
You see, this estate of mine has fallen in, which makes me rather a
better match; and the--the business would not have quite the same
ridiculous-like appearance that it would before. Besides which, it's
supposed that our affairs have got so much ravelled up (as I was saying)
that it would be better to let them be the way they are. In my view,
this part of the thing is vastly exaggerate, and if I were you I would
not wear two thoughts on it. Only it's right I should mention the same,
because there's no doubt it has some influence on James More. Then I
think we were none so unhappy when we dwelt together in this town
before. I think we did pretty well together. If you would look back, my
dear--"

"I will look neither back nor forward," she interrupted. "Tell me the
one thing: this is my father's doing?"

"He approves of it," said I. "He approved that I should ask your hand in
marriage," and was going on again with somewhat more of an appeal upon
her feelings; but she marked me not, and struck into the midst.

"He told you to!" she cried. "It is no sense denying it, you said
yourself that there was nothing farther from your thoughts. He told you
to."

"He spoke of it the first, if that is what you mean," I began.

She was walking ever the faster, and looking fair in front of her; but
at this she made a little noise in her head, and I thought she would
have run.

"Without which," I went on, "after what you said last Friday, I would
never have been so troublesome as make the offer. But when he as good as
asked me, what was I to do?"

She stopped and turned round upon me.

"Well, it is refused at all events," she cried, "and there will be an
end of that."

And she began to walk forward.

"I suppose I could expect no better," said I, "but I think you might try
to be a little kind to me for the last end of it. I see not why you
should be harsh. I have loved you very well, Catriona--no harm that I
should call you so for the last time. I have done the best that I could
manage, I am trying the same still, and only vexed that I can do no
better. It is a strange thing to me that you can take any pleasure to be
hard to me."

"I am not thinking of you," she said, "I am thinking of that man, my
father."

"Well, and that way, too!" said I. "I can be of use to you that way,
too; I will have to be. It is very needful, my dear, that we should
consult about your father; for the way this talk has gone, an angry man
will be James More."

She stopped again. "It is because I am disgraced?" she asked.

"That is what he is thinking," I replied, "but I have told you already
to make nought of it."

"It will be all one to me," she cried. "I prefer to be disgraced!"

I did not know very well what to answer, and stood silent.

There seemed to be something working in her bosom after that last cry;
presently she broke out, "And what is the meaning of all this? Why is
all this shame loundered on my head? How could you dare it, David
Balfour?"

"My dear," said I, "what else was I to do?"

"I am not your dear," she said, "and I defy you to be calling me these
words."

"I am not thinking of my words," said I. "My heart bleeds for you, Miss
Drummond. Whatever I may say, be sure you have my pity in your difficult
position. But there is just the one thing that I wish you would bear in
view, if it was only long enough to discuss it quietly; for there is
going to be a collieshangie when we two get home. Take my word for it,
it will need the two of us to make this matter end in peace."

"Ay," said she. There sprang a patch of red in either of her cheeks.
"Was he for fighting you?" said she.

"Well, he was that," said I.

She gave a dreadful kind of laugh. "At all events, it is complete!" she
cried. And then turning on me: "My father and I are a fine pair," she
said, "but I am thanking the good God there will be somebody worse than
what we are. I am thanking the good God that he has let me see you so.
There will never be the girl made that would not scorn you."

I had borne a good deal pretty patiently, but this was over the mark.

"You have no right to speak to me like that," said I. "What have I done
but to be good to you, or try to? And here is my repayment! O, it is too
much."

She kept looking at me with a hateful smile. "Coward!" said she.

"The word in your throat and in your father's!" I cried. "I have dared
him this day already in your interest. I will dare him again, the nasty
pole-cat; little I care which of us should fall! Come," said I, "back to
the house with us; let us be done with it, let me be done with the whole
Hieland crew of you! You will see what you think when I am dead."

She shook her head at me with that same smile I could have struck her
for.

"O, smile away!" I cried. "I have seen your bonny father smile on the
wrong side this day. Not that I mean he was afraid, of course," I added
hastily, "but he preferred the other way of it."

"What is this?" she asked.

"When I offered to draw with him," said I.

"You offered to draw upon James More?" she cried.

"And I did so," said I, "and found him backward enough, or how would we
be here?"

"There is a meaning upon this," said she. "What is it you are meaning?"

"He was to make you take me," I replied, "and I would not have it. I
said you should be free, and I must speak with you alone; little I
supposed it would be such a speaking! '_And what if I refuse_?' says
he.--'_Then it must come to the throat cutting_,' says I, '_for I will
no more have a husband forced on that young lady than what I would have
a wife forced upon myself_.' These were my words, they were a friend's
words; bonnily have I been paid for them! Now you have refused me of
your own clear free will, and there lives no father in the Highlands, or
out of them, that can force on this marriage. I will see that your
wishes are respected; I will make the same my business, as I have all
through. But I think you might have that decency as to affect some
gratitude. 'Deed, and I thought you knew me better! I have not behaved
quite well to you, but that was weakness. And to think me a coward and
such a coward as that--O, my lass, there was a stab for the last of it!"

"Davie, how would I guess?" she cried. "O, this is a dreadful business!
Me and mine,"--she gave a kind of wretched cry at the word--"me and mine
are not fit to speak to you. O, I could be kneeling down to you in the
street, I could be kissing your hands for your forgiveness!"

"I will keep the kisses I have got from you already," cried I. "I will
keep the ones I wanted and that were something worth; I will not be
kissed in penitence."

"What can you be thinking of this miserable girl?" says she.

"What I am trying to tell you all this while!" said I, "that you had
best leave me alone, whom you can make no more unhappy if you tried, and
turn your attention to James More, your father, with whom you are like
to have a queer pirn to wind."

"O, that I must be going out into the world alone with such a man!" she
cried, and seemed to catch herself in with a great effort. "But trouble
yourself no more for that," said she. "He does not know what kind of
nature is in my heart. He will pay me dear for this day of it; dear,
dear, will he pay."

She turned, and began to go home and I to accompany her. At which she
stopped.

"I will be going alone," she said. "It is alone I must be seeing him."

Some little while I raged about the streets, and told myself I was the
worst used lad in Christendom. Anger choked me; it was all very well for
me to breathe deep; it seemed there was not air enough about Leyden to
supply me, and I thought I would have burst like a man at the bottom of
the sea. I stopped and laughed at myself at a street corner a minute
together, laughing out loud, so that a passenger looked at me, which
brought me to myself.

"Well," I thought, "I have been a gull and a ninny and a soft Tommy long
enough. Time it was done. Here is a good lesson to have nothing to do
with that accursed sex, that was the ruin of the man in the beginning
and will be so to the end. God knows I was happy enough before ever I
saw her; God knows I can be happy enough again when I have seen the last
of her."

That seemed to me the chief affair: to see them go. I dwelled upon the
idea fiercely; and presently slipped on, in a kind of malevolence, to
consider how very poorly they were like to fare when Davie Balfour was
no longer by to be their milk-cow; at which, to my own very great
surprise, the disposition of my mind turned bottom up. I was still
angry; I still hated her; and yet I thought I owed it to myself that she
should suffer nothing.

This carried me home again at once, where I found the mails drawn out
and ready fastened by the door, and the father and daughter with every
mark upon them of a recent disagreement. Catriona was like a wooden
doll; James More breathed hard, his face was dotted with white spots,
and his nose upon one side. As soon as I came in, the girl looked at him
with a steady, clear, dark look that might very well have been followed
by a blow. It was a hint that was more contemptuous than a command, and
I was surprised to see James More accept it. It was plain he had had a
master talking-to; and I could see there must be more of the devil in
the girl than I had guessed, and more good-humor about the man than I
had given him the credit of.

He began, at least, calling me Mr. Balfour, and plainly speaking from a
lesson; but he got not very far, for at the first pompous swell of his
voice, Catriona cut in.

"I will tell you what James More is meaning," said she. "He means we
have come to you, beggar-folk, and have not behaved to you very well,
and we are ashamed of our ingratitude and ill-behaviour. Now we are
wanting to go away and be forgotten; and my father will have guided his
gear so ill, that we cannot even do that unless you will give us some
more alms. For that is what we are, at all events, beggar-folk and
sorners."

"By your leave, Miss Drummond," said I, "I must speak to your father by
myself."

She went into her own room and shut the door, without a word or a look.

"You must excuse her, Mr. Balfour," says James More. "She has no
delicacy."

"I am not here to discuss that with you," said I, "but to be quit of
you. And to that end I must talk of your position. Now, Mr. Drummond, I
have kept the run of your affairs more closely than you bargained for. I
know you had money of your own when you were borrowing mine. I know you
have had more since you were here in Leyden, though you concealed it
even from your daughter."

"I bid you beware. I will stand no more baiting," he broke out. "I am
sick of her and you. What kind of a damned trade is this to be a parent!
I have had expressions used to me----" There he broke off. "Sir, this is
the heart of a soldier and a parent," he went on again, laying his hand
on his bosom, "outraged in both characters--and I bid you beware."

"If you would have let me finish," says I, "you would have found I spoke
for your advantage."

"My dear friend," he cried, "I know I might have relied upon the
generosity of your character."

"Man! will you let me speak?" said I. "The fact is that I cannot win to
find out if you are rich or poor. But it is my idea that your means, as
they are mysterious in their source, so they are something insufficient
in amount; and I do not choose your daughter to be lacking. If I durst
speak to herself, you may be certain I would never dream of trusting it
to you; because I know you like the back of my hand, and all your
blustering talk is that much wind to me. However, I believe in your way
you do still care something for your daughter after all; and I must just
be doing with that ground of confidence, such as it is."

Whereupon, I arranged with him that he was to communicate with me, as to
his whereabouts and Catriona's welfare, in consideration of which I was
to serve him a small stipend.

He heard the business out with a great deal of eagerness; and when it
was done, "My dear fellow, my dear son," he cried out, "this is more
like yourself than any of it yet! I will serve you with a soldier's
faithfulness----"

"Let me hear no more of it!" says I. "You have got me to that pitch that
the bare name of soldier rises on my stomach. Our traffic is settled; I
am now going forth and will return in one half-hour, when I expect to
find my chambers purged of you."

I gave them good measure of time; it was my one fear that I might see
Catriona again, because tears and weakness were ready in my heart, and I
cherished my anger like a piece of dignity. Perhaps an hour went by; the
sun had gone down, a little wisp of a new moon was following it across a
scarlet sunset; already there were stars in the east, and in my
chambers, when at last I entered them, the night lay blue. I lit a taper
and reviewed the rooms; in the first there remained nothing so much as
to awake a memory of those who were gone; but in the second, in a corner
of the floor, I spied a little heap that brought my heart into my mouth.
She had left behind at her departure all that ever she had of me. It was
the blow that I felt sorest, perhaps because it was the last; and I fell
upon that pile of clothing and behaved myself more foolish than I care
to tell of.

Late in the night, in a strict frost, and my teeth chattering, I came
again by some portion of my manhood and considered with myself. The
sight of these poor frocks and ribbons, and her shifts, and the clocked
stockings, was not to be endured; and if I were to recover any constancy
of mind, I saw I must be rid of them ere the morning. It was my first
thought to have made a fire and burned them; but my disposition has
always been opposed to wastery, for one thing; and for another, to have
burned these things that she had worn so close upon her body, seemed in
the nature of a cruelty. There was a corner cupboard in that chamber;
there I determined to bestow them. The which I did and made it a long
business, folding them with very little skill indeed but the more care;
and sometimes dropping them with my tears. All the heart was gone out of
me, I was weary as though I had run miles, and sore like one beaten;
when, as I was folding a kerchief that she wore often at her neck, I
observed there was a corner neatly cut from it. It was a kerchief of a
very pretty hue, on which I had frequently remarked; and once that she
had it on, I remembered telling her (by way of a banter) that she wore
my colours. There came a glow of hope and like a tide of sweetness in my
bosom; and the next moment I was plunged back in a fresh despair. For
there was the corner crumpled in a knot and cast down by itself in
another part of the floor.

But when I argued with myself, I grew more hopeful. She had cut that
corner off in some childish freak that was manifestly tender; that she
had cast it away again was little to be wondered at; and I was inclined
to dwell more upon the first than upon the second, and to be more
pleased that she had ever conceived the idea of that keepsake, than
concerned because she had flung it from her in an hour of natural
resentment.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXIX

WE MEET IN DUNKIRK


Altogether, then, I was scarce so miserable the next days but what I had
many hopeful and happy snatches; threw myself with a good deal of
constancy upon my studies; and made out to endure the time till Alan
should arrive, or I might hear word of Catriona by the means of James
More. I had altogether three letters in the time of our separation. One
was to announce their arrival in the town of Dunkirk in France, from
which place James shortly after started alone upon a private mission.
This was to England and to see Lord Holderness; and it has always been a
bitter thought that my good money helped to pay the charges of the same.
But he has need of a long spoon who sups with the deil, or James More
either. During this absence, the time was to fall due for another
letter; and as the letter was the condition of his stipend, he had been
so careful as prepare it beforehand and leave it with Catriona to be
despatched. The fact of our correspondence aroused her suspicions, and
he was no sooner gone than she had burst the seal. What I received began
accordingly in the writing of James More:

"My dear Sir,--Your esteemed favour came to hand duly, and I have to
acknowledge the inclosure according to agreement. It shall be all
faithfully expended on my daughter, who is well, and desires to be
remembered to her dear friend. I find her in rather a melancholy
disposition, but trusts in the mercy of Grod to see her re-established.
Our manner of life is very much alone, but we solace ourselves with the
melancholy tunes of our native mountains, and by walking upon the margin
of the sea that lies next to Scotland. It was better days with me when I
lay with five wounds upon my body on the field of Gladsmuir. I have found
employment here in the _haras_ of a French nobleman, where my experience
is valued. But, my dear Sir, the wages are so exceedingly unsuitable that
I would be ashamed to mention them, which makes your remittances the more
necessary to my daughter's comfort, though I daresay the sight of old
friends would be still better.

"My dear Sir, "Your affectionate obedient servant,

"JAMES MACGREGOR DRUMMOND."

Below it began again in the hand of Catriona:--

    "Do not be believing him, it is all lies together.
    "C.M.D."

Not only did she add this postcript, but I think she must have come near
suppressing the letter; for it came long after date, and was closely
followed by the third. In the time betwixt them, Alan had arrived, and
made another life to me with his merry conversation; I had been
presented to his cousin of the Scots-Dutch, a man that drank more than I
could have thought possible and was not otherwise of interest; I had
been entertained to many jovial dinners and given some myself, all with
no great change upon my sorrow; and we two (by which I mean Alan and
myself, and not at all the cousin) had discussed a good deal the nature
of my relations with James More and his daughter. I was naturally
diffident to give particulars; and this disposition was not anyway
lessened by the nature of Alan's commentary upon those I gave.

"I cannae make head nor tail of it," he would say, "but it sticks in my
mind ye've made a gowk of yourself. There's few people that has had more
experience than Alan Breck; and I can never call to mind to have heard
tell of a lassie like this one of yours. The way that you tell it, the
thing's fair impossible. Ye must have made a terrible hash of the
business, David."

"There are whiles that I am of the same mind," said I.

"The strange thing is that ye seem to have a kind of a fancy for her
too!" said Alan.

"The biggest kind, Alan," said I, "and I think I'll take it to my grave
with me."

"Well, ye beat me, whatever!" he would conclude.

I showed him the letter with Catriona's postcript. "And here again!" he
cried. "Impossible to deny a kind of decency to this Catriona, and sense
forby! As for James More, the man's as boss as a drum; he's just a wame
and a wheen words; though I'll can never deny that he fought reasonably
well at Gladsmuir, and it's true what he says here about the five
wounds. But the loss of him is that the man's boss."

"Ye see, Alan," said I, "it goes against the grain with me to leave the
maid in such poor hands."

"Ye couldnae weel find poorer," he admitted. "But what are ye to do with
it? It's this way about a man and a woman, ye see, Davie: The weemenfolk
have got no kind of reason to them. Either they like the man, and then
a' goes fine; or else they just detest him, and ye may spare your
breath--ye can do naething. There's just the two sets of them--them that
would sell their coats for ye, and them that never look the road ye're
on. That's a' that there is to women; and you seem to be such a gomeral
that ye cannae tell the tane frae the tither."

"Well, and I'm afraid that's true for me," said I.

"And yet there's naething easier!" cried Alan. "I could easy learn ye
the science of the thing; but ye seem to me to be born blind, and
there's where the diffeeculty comes in!"

"And can _you_ no help me?" I asked, "you that's so clever at the
trade?"

"Ye see, David, I wasnae here," said he. "I'm like a field officer that
has naebody but blind men for scouts and _claireurs_; and what would he
ken? But it sticks in my mind that ye'll have made some kind of bauchle;
and if I was you, I would have a try at her again."

"Would ye so, man Alan?" said I.

"I would e'en't," says he.

The third letter came to my hand while we were deep in some such talk;
and it will be seen how pat it fell to the occasion. James professed to
be in some concern upon his daughter's health, which I believe was never
better; abounded in kind expressions to myself; and finally proposed
that I should visit them at Dunkirk.

"You will now be enjoying the society of my old comrade, Mr. Stewart,"
he wrote. "Why not accompany him so far in his return to France? I have
something very particular for Mr. Stewart's ear; and, at any rate, I
would be pleased to meet in with an old fellow-soldier and one so mettle
as himself. As for you, my dear sir, my daughter and I would be proud to
receive our benefactor, whom we regard as a brother and a son. The
French nobleman has proved a person of the most filthy avarice of
character, and I have been necessitate to leave the _haras_. You will
find us, in consequence, a little poorly lodged in the _auberge_ of a
man Bazin on the dunes; but the situation is caller, and I make no doubt
but we might spend some very pleasant days, when Mr. Stewart and I could
recall our services, and you and my daughter divert yourselves in a
manner more befitting your age. I beg at least that Mr. Stewart would
come here; my business with him opens a very wide door."

"What does the man want with me?" cried Alan, when he had read. "What he
wants with you is clear enough--it's siller. But what can he want with
Alan Breck?"

"O, it'll be just an excuse," said I. "He is still after this marriage,
which I wish from my heart that we could bring about. And he asks you
because he thinks I would be less likely to come wanting you."

"Well, I wish that I kent," says Alan. "Him and me were never onyways
pack; we used to girn at ither like a pair of pipers. 'Something for my
ear,' quo' he! I'll maybe have something for his hinder end, before
we're through with it. Dod, I'm thinking it would be a kind of a
divertisement to gang and see what he'll be after! Forby that I could
see your lassie then. What say ye, Davie? Will ye ride with Alan?"

You may be sure I was not backward, and Alan's furlough running towards
an end, we set forth presently upon this joint adventure.

It was near dark of a January day when we rode at last into the town of
Dunkirk. We left our horses at the post, and found a guide to Bazin's
Inn, which lay beyond the walls. Night was quite fallen, so that we were
the last to leave that fortress, and heard the doors of it close behind
us as we passed the bridge. On the other side there lay a lighted
suburb, which we thridded for a while, then turned into a dark lane, and
presently found ourselves wading in the night among deep sand where we
could hear a bullering of the sea. We travelled in this fashion for some
while, following our conductor mostly by the sound of his voice; and I
had begun to think he was perhaps misleading us, when we came to the top
of a small brae, and there appeared out of the darkness a dim light in a
window.

"_Voil l'auberge , Bazin_," says the guide.

Alan smacked his lips. "An unco lonely bit," said he, and I thought by
his tone he was not wholly pleased.

A little after, and we stood in the lower storey of the house, which was
all in the one apartment, with a stair leading to the chambers at the
side, benches and tables by the wall, the cooking fire at the one end of
it, and shelves of bottles and the cellar-trap at the other. Here Bazin,
who was an ill-looking, big man, told us the Scottish gentleman was gone
abroad he knew not where, but the young lady was above, and he would
call her down to us.

I took from my breast the kerchief wanting the corner, and knotted it
about my throat. I could hear my heart go; and Alan patting me on the
shoulder with some of his laughable expressions, I could scarce refrain
from a sharp word. But the time was not long to wait. I heard her step
pass overhead, and saw her on the stair. This she descended very
quietly, and greeted me with a pale face and certain seeming of
earnestness, or uneasiness, in her manner that extremely dashed me.

"My father, James More, will be here soon. He will be very pleased to
see you," she said. And then of a sudden her face flamed, her eyes
lightened, the speech stopped upon her lips; and I made sure she had
observed the kerchief. It was only for a breath that she was
discomposed; but methought it was with a new animation that she turned
to welcome Alan. "And you will be his friend Alan Breck?" she cried.
"Many is the dozen times I will have heard him tell of you; and I love
you already for all your bravery and goodness."

"Well, well," says Alan, holding her hand in his and viewing her, "and
so this is the young lady at the last of it! David, you're an awful poor
hand of a description."

I do not know that ever I heard him speak so straight to people's
hearts; the sound of his voice was like song.

"What? will he have been describing me?" she cried.

"Little else of it since I ever came out of France!" says he, "forby a
bit of speciment one night in Scotland in a shaw of wood by Silvermills.
But cheer up, my dear! ye're bonnier than what he said. And now there's
one thing sure: you and me are to be a pair of friends. I'm a kind of a
henchman to Davie here; I'm like a tyke at his heels; and whatever he
cares for, I've got to care for too--and by the holy airn! they've got
to care for me! So now you can see what way you stand with Alan Breck,
and ye'll find ye'll hardly lose on the transaction. He's no very
bonnie, my dear, but he's leal to them he loves."

"I thank you with my heart for your good words," said she. "I have that
honour for a brave, honest man that I cannot find any to be answering
with."

Using travellers' freedom, we spared to wait for James More, and sat
down to meat, we threesome. Alan had Catriona sit by him and wait upon
his wants: he made her drink first out of his glass, he surrounded her
with continual kind gallantries, and yet never gave me the most small
occasion to be jealous; and he kept the talk so much in his own hand,
and that in so merry a note, that neither she nor I remembered to be
embarrassed. If any one had seen us there, it must have been supposed
that Alan was the old friend and I the stranger. Indeed, I had often
cause to love and to admire the man, but I never loved or admired him
better than that night; and I could not help remarking to myself (what I
was sometimes rather in danger of forgetting) that he had not only much
experience of life, but in his own way a great deal of natural ability
besides. As for Catriona she seemed quite carried away; her laugh was
like a peal of bells, her face gay as a May morning; and I own, although
I was very well pleased, yet I was a little sad also, and thought myself
a dull, stockish character in comparison of my friend, and very unfit to
come into a young maid's life, and perhaps ding down her gaiety.

But if that was like to be my part, I found at least that I was not
alone in it; for, James More returning suddenly, the girl was changed
into a piece of stone. Through the rest of that evening, until she made
an excuse and slipped to bed, I kept an eye upon her without cease: and
I can bear testimony that she never smiled, scarce spoke, and looked
mostly on the board in front of her. So that I really marvelled to see
so much devotion (as it used to be) changed into the very sickness of
hate.

Of James More it is unnecessary to say much; you know the man already,
what there was to know of him; and I am weary of writing out his lies.
Enough that he drank a great deal, and told us very little that was to
any possible purpose. As for the business with Alan, that was to be
reserved for the morrow and his private hearing.

It was the more easy to be put off, because Alan and I were pretty weary
with our day's ride, and sat not very late after Catriona.

We were soon alone in a chamber where we were to make shift with a
single bed. Alan looked on me with a queer smile.

"Ye muckle ass!" said he.

"What do ye mean by that?" I cried.

"Mean? What do I mean? It's extraordinar, David man," says he, "that you
should be so mortal stupit."

Again I begged him to speak out.

"Well, it's this of it," said he. "I told ye there were the two kinds of
women--them that would sell their shifts for ye, and the others. Just
you try for yoursel', my bonny man I But what's that neepkin at your
craig?"

I told him.

"I thocht it was something there about," said he.

Nor would he say another word though I besieged him long with
importunities.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXX

THE LETTER FROM THE SHIP


Daylight showed us how solitary the inn stood. It was plainly hard upon
the sea, yet out of all view of it, and beset on every side with scabbit
hills of sand. There was, indeed, only one thing in the nature of a
prospect, where there stood out over a brae the two sails of a windmill,
like an ass's ears, but with the ass quite hidden. It was strange (after
the wind rose, for at first it was dead calm) to see the turning and
following of each other of these great sails behind the hillock. Scarce
any road came by there; but a number of footways travelled among the
bents in all directions up to Mr. Bazin's door. The truth is, he was a
man of many trades, not any one of them honest, and the position of his
inn was the best of his livelihood. Smugglers frequented it; political
agents and forfeited persons bound across the water came there to await
their passages; and I daresay there was worse behind, for a whole family
might have been butchered in that house and nobody the wiser.

I slept little and ill. Long ere it was day, I had slipped from beside
my bedfellow, and was warming myself at the fire or walking to and fro
before the door. Dawn broke mighty sullen; but a little after, sprang up
a wind out of the west, which burst the clouds, let through the sun, and
set the mill to the turning. There was something of spring in the
sunshine, or else it was in my heart; and the appearing of the great
sails one after another from behind the hill, diverted me extremely. At
times I could hear a creak of the machinery; and by half-past eight of
the day, Catriona began to sing in the house. At this I would have cast
my hat in the air; and I thought this dreary, desert place was like a
paradise.

For all which, as the day drew on and nobody came near, I began to be
aware of an uneasiness that I could scarce explain. It seemed there was
trouble afoot; the sails of the windmill, as they came up and went down
over the hill, were like persons spying; and outside of all fancy, it
was surely a strange neighbourhood and house for a young lady to be
brought to dwell in.

At breakfast, which we took late, it was manifest that James More was in
some danger or perplexity; manifest that Alan was alive to the same, and
watched him close; and this appearance of duplicity upon the one side
and vigilance upon the other, held me on live coals. The meal was no
sooner over than James seemed to come to a resolve, and began to make
apologies. He had an appointment of a private nature in the town (it was
with the French nobleman, he told me) and we would please excuse him
till about noon. Meanwhile, he carried his daughter aside to the far end
of the room, where he seemed to speak rather earnestly and she to listen
without much inclination.

"I am caring less and less about this man James," said Alan. "There's
something no right with the man James, and I wouldnae wonder but what
Alan Breck would give an eye to him this day. I would like fine to see
yon French nobleman, Davie; and I daresay you could find an employ to
yoursel, and that would be to speer at the lassie for some news of your
affair. Just tell it to her plainly--tell her ye're a muckle ass at the
off-set; and then, if I were you, and ye could do it naitural, I would
just mint to her I was in some kind of a danger; a' weemenfolk likes
that."

"I cannae lee, Alan, I cannae do it naitural," says I, mocking him.

"The more fool you!" says he. "Then ye'll can tell her that I
recommended it; that'll set her to the laughing; and I wouldnae wonder
but what that was the next best. But see to the pair of them! If I
didnae feel just sure of the lassie, and that she was awful pleased and
chief with Alan, I would think there was some kind of hocus-pocus about
yon."

"And is she so pleased with ye, then, Alan?" I asked.

"She thinks a heap of me," says he. "And I'm no like you: I'm one that
can tell. That she does--she thinks a heap of Alan. And troth! I'm
thinking a good deal of him mysel; and with your permission, Shaws, I'll
be getting a wee yont amang the bents, so that I can see what way James
goes."

One after another went, till I was left alone beside the breakfast
table; James to Dunkirk, Alan dogging him, Catriona up the stairs to her
own chamber. I could very well understand how she should avoid to be
alone with me; yet was none the better pleased with it for that, and
bent my mind to entrap her to an interview before the men returned. Upon
the whole, the best appeared to me to do like Alan. If I was out of view
among the sand hills, the fine morning would decoy her out; and once I
had her in the open, I could please myself.

No sooner said than done; nor was I long under the bield of a hillock
before she appeared at the inn door, looked here and there, and (seeing
nobody) set out by a path that led directly seaward, and by which I
followed her. I was in no haste to make my presence known; the further
she went I made sure of the longer hearing to my suit; and the ground
being all sandy, it was easy to follow her unheard. The path rose and
came at last to the head of a knowe. Thence I had a picture for the
first time of what a desolate wilderness that inn stood hidden in; where
was no man to be seen, nor any house of man, except just Bazin's and the
windmill. Only a little further on, the sea appeared and two or three
ships upon it, pretty as a drawing. One of these was extremely close in
to be so great a vessel; and I was aware of a shock of new suspicion,
when I recognized the trim of the _Seahorse_. What should an English
ship be doing so near in France? Why was Alan brought into her
neighbourhood, and that in a place so far from any hope of rescue? and
was it by accident, or by design, that the daughter of James More should
walk that day to the seaside?

Presently I came forth behind her in the front of the sand hills and
above the beach. It was here long and solitary; with a man-o'-war's boat
drawn up about the middle of the prospect, and an officer in charge and
pacing the sands like one who waited. I sat immediately down where the
rough grass a good deal covered me, and looked for what should follow.
Catriona went straight to the boat; the officer met her with civilities;
they had ten words together; I saw a letter changing hands; and there
was Catriona returning. At the same time, as if this was all her
business on the Continent, the boat shoved off and was headed for the
_Seahorse_. But I observed the officer to remain behind and disappear
among the bents.

I liked the business little; and the more I considered of it, liked it
less. Was it Alan the officer was seeking? or Catriona? She drew near
with her head down, looking constantly on the sand, and made so tender a
picture that I could not bear to doubt her innocency. The next, she
raised her face and recognised me; seemed to hesitate, and then came on
again, but more slowly, and I thought with a changed colour. And at that
thought, all else that was upon my bosom--fears, suspicions, the care of
my friend's life--was clean swallowed up; and I rose to my feet and
stood waiting her in a drunkenness of hope.

I gave her "good-morning" as she came up, which she returned with a good
deal of composure.

"Will you forgive my having followed you?" said I.

"I know you are always meaning kindly," she replied; and then, with a
little outburst, "But why will you be sending money to that man? It must
not be."

"I never sent it for him," said I, "but for you, as you know well."

"And you have no right to be sending it to either one of us," said she.
"David, it is not right."

"It is not, it is all wrong," said I; "and I pray God he will help this
dull fellow (if it be at all possible), to make it better. Catriona,
this is no kind of life for you to lead, and I ask your pardon for the
word, but yon man is no fit father to take care of you."

"Do not be speaking of him, even!" was her cry.

"And I need speak of him no more, it is not of him that I am thinking,
O, be sure of that!" says I. "I think of the one thing. I have been
alone now this long time in Leyden; and when I was by way of at my
studies, still I was thinking of that. Next Alan came, and I went among
soldier-men to their big dinners; and still I had the same thought. And
it was the same before, when I had her there beside me. Catriona, do you
see this napkin at my throat? You cut a corner from it once and then
cast it from you. They're _your_ colours now; I wear them in my heart.
My dear, I cannot want you. O, try to put up with me!"

I stepped before her so as to intercept her walking on.

"Try to put up with me," I was saying, "try and bear me with a little."

Still she had never the word, and a fear began to rise in me like a fear
of death.

"Catriona," I cried, gazing on her hard, "is it a mistake again? Am I
quite lost?"

She raised her face to me, breathless.

"Do you want me, Davie, truly?" said she, and I scarce could hear her
say it.

"I do that," said I. "O, sure you know it--I do that."

"I have nothing left to give or to keep back," said she. "I was all
yours from the first day, if you would have had a gift of me!" she said.

This was on the summit of a brae; the place was windy and conspicuous,
we were to be seen there even from the English ship; but I kneeled down
before her in the sand, and embraced her knees, and burst into that
storm of weeping that I thought it must have broken me. All thought was
wholly beaten from my mind by the vehemency of my discomposure. I knew
not where I was, I had forgot why I was happy; only I knew she stooped,
and I felt her cherish me to her face and bosom, and heard her words out
of a whirl.

"Davie," she was saying, "O, Davie, is this what you think of me? Is it
so that you were caring for poor me? O, Davie, Davie!"

With that she wept also, and our tears were commingled in a perfect
gladness.

It might have been ten in the day before I came to a clear sense of what
a mercy had befallen me; and sitting over against her, with her hands in
mine, gazed in her face, and laughed out loud for pleasure like a child,
and called her foolish and kind names. I have never seen the place look
so pretty as these bents by Dunkirk; and the windmill sails, as they
bobbed over the knowe, were like a tune of music.

I know not how much longer we might have continued to forget all else
besides ourselves, had I not chanced upon a reference to her father,
which brought us to reality.

"My little friend," I was calling her again and again, rejoicing to
summon up the past by the sound of it, and to gaze across on her, and to
be a little distant--"My little friend, now you are mine altogether;
mine for good, my little friend; and that man's no longer at all."

There came a sudden whiteness in her face, she plucked her hands from
mine.

"Davie, take me away from him!" she cried. "There's something wrong;
he's not true. There will be something wrong; I have a dreadful terror
here at my heart. What will he be wanting at all events with that King's
ship? What will this word be saying?" And she held the letter forth. "My
mind misgives me, it will be some ill to Alan. Open it, Davie--open it
and see."

I took it, and looked at it, and shook my head.

"No," said I, "it goes against me, I cannot open a man's letter."

"Not to save your friend?" she cried.

"I cannae tell," said I. "I think not. If I was only sure!"

"And you have but to break the seal!" said she.

"I know it," said I, "but the thing goes against me."

"Give it here," said she, "and I will open it myself."

"Nor you neither," said I. "You least of all. It concerns your father,
and his honour, dear, which we are both misdoubting. No question but the
place is dangerous-like, and the English ship being here, and your
father having word of it, and yon officer that stayed ashore! He would
not be alone either; there must be more along with him; I daresay we are
spied upon this minute. Ay, no doubt, the letter should be opened; but
somehow, not by you nor me."

I was about this far with it, and my spirit very much overcome with a
sense of danger and hidden enemies, when I spied Alan, come back again
from following James and walking by himself among the sand hills. He was
in his soldier's coat, of course, and mighty fine; but I could not avoid
to shudder when I thought how little that jacket would avail him, if he
were once caught and flung in a skiff, and carried on board of the
_Seahorse_, a deserter, a rebel, and now a condemned murderer.

"There," said I, "there is the man that has the best right to open it:
or not, as he thinks fit."

With which I called upon his name, and we both stood up to be a mark for
him.

"If it is so--if it be more disgrace--will you can bear it?" she asked,
looking upon me with a burning eye.

"I was asked something of the same question when I had seen you but the
once," said I. "What do you think I answered? That if I liked you as I
thought I did--and O, but I like you better!--I would marry you at his
gallows' foot."

The blood rose in her face; she came close up and pressed upon me,
holding my hand: and it was so that we awaited Alan.

He came with one of his queer smiles. "What was I telling ye, David?"
says he.

"There is a time for all things, Alan," said I, "and this time is
serious. How have you sped? You can speak out plain before this friend
of ours."

"I have been upon a fool's errand," said he.

"I doubt we have done better than you, then," said I; "and, at least,
here is a great deal of matter that you must judge of. Do you see that?"
I went on, pointing to the ship. "That is the _Seahorse_, Captain
Palliser."

"I should ken her, too," says Alan. "I had fyke enough with her when she
was stationed in the Forth. But what ails the man to come so close?"

"I will tell you why he came there first," said I. "It was to bring this
letter to James More. Why he stops here now that it's delivered, what
it's likely to be about, why there's an officer hiding in the bents, and
whether or not it's probable that he's alone--I would rather you
considered for yourself."

"A letter to James More?" said he.

"The same," said I.

"Well, and I can tell ye more than that," said Alan. "For last night
when you were fast asleep, I heard the man colloquing with some one in
the French, and then the door of that inn to be opened and shut."

"Alan!" cried I, "you slept all night, and I am here to prove it."

"Ay, but I would never trust Alan whether he was asleep or waking!" says
he. "But the business looks bad. Let's see the letter."

I gave it him.

"Catriona," said he, "ye'll have to excuse me, my dear; but there's
nothing less than my fine bones upon the cast of it, and I'll have to
break this seal."

"It is my wish," said Catriona.

He opened it, glanced it through, and flung his hand in the air.

"The stinking brock!" says he, and crammed the paper in his pocket.
"Here, let's get our things thegether. This place is fair death to me."
And he began to walk towards the inn.

It was Catriona who spoke the first. "He has sold you?" she asked.

"Sold me, my dear," said Alan. "But thanks to you and Davie, I'll can
jink him yet. Just let me win upon my horse!" he added.

"Catriona must come with us," said I. "She can have no more traffic with
that man. She and I are to be married." At which she pressed my hand to
her side.

"Are ye there with it?" says Alan, looking back. "The best day's work
that ever either of ye did yet I And I'm bound to say, my dawtie, ye
make a real, bonny couple."

The way that he was following brought us close in by the windmill, where
I was aware of a man in seaman's trousers, who seemed to be spying from
behind it. Only, of course, we took him in the rear.

"See, Alan!" said I.

"Wheesht!" said he, "this is my affairs."

The man was, no doubt, a little deafened by the clattering of the mill,
and we got up close before he noticed. Then he turned, and we saw he was
a big fellow with a mahogany face.

"I think, sir," says Alan, "that you speak the English?"

"_Non, monsieur_," says he, with an incredible bad accent.

"_Non, monsieur_," cries Alan, mocking him. "Is that how they learn you
French on the _Seahorse?_ Ye muckle, gutsey hash, here's a Scots boot to
your English hurdies!"

And bounding on him before he could escape, he dealt the man a kick that
laid him on his nose. Then he stood, with a savage smile, and watched
him scramble to his feet and scamper off into the sand hills.

"But it's high time I was clear of these empty bents!" said Alan; and
continued his way at top speed and we still following, to the back door
of Bazin's inn.

It chanced that as we entered by the one door we came face to face with
James More entering by the other.

"Here!" said I to Catriona, "quick! upstairs with you and make your
packets; this is no fit scene for you."

In the meanwhile James and Alan had met in the midst of the long room.
She passed them close by to reach the stairs; and after she was some way
up I saw her turn and glance at them again, though without pausing.
Indeed, they were worth looking at. Alan wore as they met one of his
best appearances of courtesy and friendliness, yet with something
eminently warlike, so that James smelled danger off the man, as folk
smell fire in a house, and stood prepared for accidents.

Time pressed. Alan's situation in that solitary place, and his enemies
about him, might have daunted Csar. It made no change in him; and it
was in his old spirit of mockery and daffing that he began the
interview.

"A braw good day to ye again, Mr. Drummond," said he. "What'll yon
business of yours be just about?"

"Why, the thing being private, and rather of a long story," says James,
"I think it will keep very well till we have eaten."

"I'm none so sure of that," said Alan. "It sticks in my mind it's either
now or never; for the fact is me and Mr. Balfour here have gotten a
line, and we're thinking of the road."

I saw a little surprise in James's eye; but he held himself stoutly.

"I have but the one word to say to cure you of that," said he, "and that
is the name of my business."

"Say it then," says Alan. "Hout! wha minds for Davie?"

"It is a matter that would make us both rich men," said James.

"Do ye tell me that?" cries Alan.

"I do, sir," said James. "The plain fact is that it is Cluny's
Treasure."

"No!" cried Alan. "Have ye got word of it?"

"I ken the place, Mr. Stewart, and can take you there," said James.

"This crowns all!" says Alan. "Well, and I'm glad I came to Dunkirk. And
so this was your business, was it? Halvers, I'm thinking?"

"That is the business, sir," says James.

"Well, well," says Alan; and then in the same tone of childlike
interest, "It has naething to do with the _Seahorse_, then?" he asked.

"With what?" says James.

"Or the lad that I have just kicked the bottom of behind yon windmill?"
pursued Alan. "Hut, man! have done with your lees! I have Palliser's
letter here in my pouch. You're by with it, James More. You can never
show your face again with dacent folk."

James was taken all aback with it. He stood a second, motionless and
white, then swelled with the living anger.

"Do you talk to me, you bastard?" he roared out.

"Ye glee'd swine!" cried Alan, and hit him a sounding buffet on the
mouth, and the next wink of time their blades clashed together.

At the first sound of the bare steel I instinctively leaped back from
the collision. The next I saw, James parried a thrust so nearly that I
thought him killed; and it lowed up in my mind that this was the girl's
father, and in a manner almost my own, and I drew and ran in to sever
them.

"Keep back, Davie! Are ye daft? Damn ye, keep back!" roared Alan. "Your
blood be on your ain heid then!"

I beat their blades down twice. I was knocked reeling against the wall;
I was back again betwixt them. They took no heed of me, thrusting at
each other like two furies. I can never think how I avoided being
stabbed myself or stabbing one of these two Rodomonts, and the whole
business turned about me like a piece of a dream; in the midst of which
I heard a great cry from the stair, and Catriona sprang before her
father. In the same moment the point of my sword encountered something
yielding. It came back to me reddened. I saw the blood flow on the
girl's kerchief, and stood sick.

"Will you be killing him before my eyes, and me his daughter after all?"
she cried.

"My dear, I have done with him," said Alan, and went and sat on a table,
with his arms crossed and the sword naked in his hand.

Awhile she stood before the man, panting, with big eyes, then swung
suddenly about and faced him.

"Begone!" was her word, "take your shame out of my sight; leave me with
clean folk. I am a daughter of Alpin! Shame of the sons of Alpin,
begone!"

It was said with so much passion as awoke me from the horror of my own
bloodied sword. The two stood facing, she with the red stain on her
kerchief, he white as a rag. I knew him well enough--I knew it must have
pierced him in the quick place of his soul; but he betook himself to a
bravado air.

"Why," says he, sheathing his sword, though still with a bright eye on
Alan, "if this brawl is over I will but get my portmanteau---"

"There goes no pockmantie out of this place except with me," says Alan.

"Sir!" cries James.

"James More," says Alan, "this lady daughter of yours is to marry my
friend Davie, upon the which account I let you pack with a hale carcase.
But take you my advice of it and get that carcase out of harm's way or
ower late. Little as you suppose it, there are leemits to my temper."

"Be damned, sir, but my money's there!" said James.

"I'm vexed about that, too," says Alan, with his funny face, "but now,
ye see, it's mines." And then with more gravity, "Be you advised, James
More, you leave this house."

James seemed to cast about for a moment in his mind; but it's to be
thought he had enough of Alan's swordsmanship, for he suddenly put off
his hat to us and (with a face like one of the damned) bade us farewell
in a series. With which he was gone.

At the same time a spell was lifted from me.

"Catriona," I cried, "it was me--it was my sword. O, are ye much hurt?"

"I know it, Davie, I am loving you for the pain of it; it was done
defending that bad man, my father. See!" she said, and showed me a
bleeding scratch, "see, you have made a man of me now. I will carry a
wound like an old soldier."

Joy that she should be so little hurt, and the love of her brave nature,
transported me. I embraced her, I kissed the wound.

"And am I to be out of the kissing, me that never lost a chance?" says
Alan; and putting me aside and taking Catriona by either shoulder, "My
dear," he said, "you're a true daughter of Alpin. By all accounts, he
was a very fine man, and he may weel be proud of you. If ever I was to
get married, it's the marrow of you I would be seeking for a mother to
my sons. And I bear a king's name and speak the truth."

He said it with a serious heat of admiration that was honey to the girl,
and through her, to me. It seemed to wipe us clean of all James More's
disgraces. And the next moment he was just himself again.

"And now by your leave, my dawties," said he, "this is a' very bonny;
but Alan Breck'll be a wee thing nearer to the gallows than he's caring
for; and Dod! I think this is a grand place to be leaving."

The word recalled us to some wisdom. Alan ran upstairs and returned with
our saddle-bags and James More's portmanteau; I picked up Catriona's
bundle where she had dropped it on the stair; and we were setting forth
out of that dangerous house, when Bazin stopped the way with cries and
gesticulations. He had whipped under a table when the swords were drawn,
but now he was as bold as a lion. There was his bill to be settled,
there was a chair broken, Alan had sat among his dinner things, James
More had fled.

"Here," I cried, "pay yourself," and flung him down some Lewie d'ors;
for I thought it was no time to be accounting.

He sprang upon that money, and we passed him by, and ran forth into the
open. Upon three sides of the house were seamen hasting and closing in;
a little nearer to us James More waved his hat as if to hurry them; and
right behind him, like some foolish person holding up its hands, were
the sails of the windmill turning.

Alan gave but the one glance, and laid himself down to run. He carried a
great weight in James More's portmanteau; but I think he would as soon
have lost his life as cast away that booty which was his revenge; and he
ran so that I was distressed to follow him, and marvelled and exulted to
see the girl bounding at my side.

As soon as we appeared, they cast off all disguise upon the other side;
and the seamen pursued us with shouts and view-hullohs. We had a start
of some two hundred yards, and they were but bandy-legged tarpaulins
after all, that could not hope to better us at such an exercise. I
suppose they were armed, but did not care to use their pistols on French
ground. And as soon as I perceived that we not only held our advantage
but drew a little away, I began to feel quite easy of the issue. For all
which, it was a hot, brisk bit of work, so long as it lasted; Dunkirk
was still far off; and when we popped over a knowe, and found a company
of the garrison marching on the other side on some manoeuvre, I could
very well understand the word that Alan had.

He stopped running at once; and mopping at his brow, "They're a real
bonny folk, the French nation," says he.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONCLUSION


No sooner were we safe within the walls of Dunkirk than we held a very
necessary council-of-war on our position. We had taken a daughter from
her father at the sword's point; any judge would give her back to him at
once, and by all likelihood clap me and Alan into jail; and though we
had an argument upon our side in Captain Palisser's letter, neither
Catriona nor I were very keen to be using it in public. Upon all
accounts it seemed the most prudent to carry the girl to Paris to the
hands of her own chieftain, Macgregor of Bohaldie, who would be very
willing to help his kinswoman, on the one hand, and not at all anxious
to dishonour James upon the other.

We made but a slow journey of it up, for Catriona was not so good at the
riding as the running, and had scarce sat in a saddle since the
'Forty-five. But we made it out at last, reached Paris early of a
Sabbath morning, and made all speed, under Alan's guidance, to find
Bohaldie. He was finely lodged, and lived in a good style, having a
pension in the Scots Fund, as well as private means; greeted Catriona
like one of his own house, and seemed altogether very civil and
discreet, but not particularly open. We asked of the news of James More.
"Poor James!" said he, and shook his head and smiled, so that I thought
he knew further than he meant to tell. Then we showed him Palisser's
letter, and he drew a long face at that.

"Poor James!" said he again. "Well, there are worse folk than James
More, too. But this is dreadful bad. Tut, tut, he must have forgot
himself entirely! This is a most undesirable letter. But, for all that,
gentlemen, I cannot see what we would want to make it public for. It's
an ill bird that fouls his own nest, and we are all Scots folk and all
Hieland."

Upon this we were all agreed, save perhaps Alan; and still more upon the
question of our marriage, which Bohaldie took in his own hands, as
though there had been no such person as James More, and gave Catriona
away with very pretty manners and agreeable compliments in French. It
was not till all was over, and our healths drunk, that he told us James
was in that city, whither he had preceded us some days, and where he now
lay sick, and like to die. I thought I saw by my wife's face what way
her inclination pointed.

"And let us go see him, then," said I.

"If it is your pleasure," said Catriona. These were early days.

He was lodged in the same quarter of the city with his chief, in a great
house upon a corner; and we were guided up to the garret where he lay by
the sound of Highland piping. It seemed he had just borrowed a set of
them from Bohaldie to amuse his sickness; though he was no such hand as
was his brother Rob, he made good music of the kind; and it was strange
to observe the French folk crowding on the stairs, and some of them
laughing. He lay propped in a pallet. The first look of him I saw he was
upon his last business; and, doubtless, this was a strange place for him
to die in. But even now I find I can scarce dwell upon his end with
patience. Doubtless, Bohaldie had prepared him; he seemed to know we
were married, complimented us on the event, and gave us a benediction
like a patriarch.

"I have been never understood," said he. "I forgive you both without an
after-thought;" after which he spoke for all the world in his old
manner, was so obliging as to play us a tune or two upon his pipes, and
borrowed a small sum before I left. I could not trace even a hint of
shame in any part of his behaviour; but he was great upon forgiveness;
it seemed always fresh to him. I think he forgave me every time we met;
and when after some four days he passed away in a kind of odour of
affectionate sanctity, I could have torn my hair out for exasperation. I
had him buried; but what to put upon his tomb was quite beyond me, till
at last I considered the date would look best alone.

I thought it wiser to resign all thoughts of Leyden, where we had
appeared once as brother and sister, and it would certainly look strange
to return in a new character. Scotland would be doing for us; and
thither, after I had recovered that which I had left behind, we sailed
in a Low Country ship.

And now, Miss Barbara Balfour (to set the ladies first) and Mr. Alan
Balfour, younger of Shaws, here is the story brought fairly to an end. A
great many of the folk that took a part in it, you will find (if you
think well) that you have seen and spoken with. Alison Hastie in
Limekilns was the lass that rocked your cradle when you were too small
to know of it, and walked abroad with you in the policy when you were
bigger. That very fine great lady that is Miss Barbara's name-mamma is
no other than the same Miss Grant that made so much a fool of David
Balfour in the house of the Lord Advocate. And I wonder whether you
remember a little, lean, lively gentleman in a scratchwig and a
wraprascal, that came to Shaws very late of a dark night, and whom you
were awakened out of your beds and brought down to the dining-hall to be
presented to, by the name of Mr. Jamieson? Or has Alan forgotten what he
did at Mr. Jamieson's request--a most disloyal act--for which, by the
letter of the law, he might be hanged--no less than drinking the king's
health _across the water_? These were strange doings in a good Whig
house! But Mr. Jamieson is a man privileged, and might set fire to my
corn-barn; and the name they know him by now in France is the Chevalier
Stewart.

As for Davie and Catriona, I shall watch you pretty close in the next
days, and see if you are so bold as to be laughing at papa and mamma. It
is true we were not so wise as we might have been, and made a great deal
of sorrow out of nothing; but you will find as you grow up that even the
artful Miss Barbara, and even the valiant Mr. Alan will be not so very
much wiser than their parents. For the life of man upon this world of
ours is a funny business. They talk of the angels weeping; but I think
they must more often be holding their sides, as they look on; and there
was one thing I determined to do when I began this long story, and that
was to tell out everything as it befell.









CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.


The ancient and famous metropolis of the North sits overlooking a windy
estuary from the slope and summit of three hills.  No situation could be
more commanding for the head city of a kingdom; none better chosen for
noble prospects.  From her tall precipice and terraced gardens she looks
far and wide on the sea and broad champaigns.  To the east you may catch
at sunset the spark of the May lighthouse, where the Firth expands into
the German Ocean; and away to the west, over all the carse of Stirling,
you can see the first snows upon Ben Ledi.

But Edinburgh pays cruelly for her high seat in one of the vilest
climates under heaven.  She is liable to be beaten upon by all the winds
that blow, to be drenched with rain, to be buried in cold sea fogs out of
the east, and powdered with the snow as it comes flying southward from
the Highland hills.  The weather is raw and boisterous in winter, shifty
and ungenial in summer, and a downright meteorological purgatory in the
spring.  The delicate die early, and I, as a survivor, among bleak winds
and plumping rain, have been sometimes tempted to envy them their fate.
For all who love shelter and the blessings of the sun, who hate dark
weather and perpetual tilting against squalls, there could scarcely be
found a more unhomely and harassing place of residence.  Many such aspire
angrily after that Somewhere-else of the imagination, where all troubles
are supposed to end.  They lean over the great bridge which joins the New
Town with the Oldthat windiest spot, or high altar, in this northern
temple of the windsand watch the trains smoking out from under them and
vanishing into the tunnel on a voyage to brighter skies.  Happy the
passengers who shake off the dust of Edinburgh, and have heard for the
last time the cry of the east wind among her chimney-tops!  And yet the
place establishes an interest in peoples hearts; go where they will,
they find no city of the same distinction; go where they will, they take
a pride in their old home.

[Picture: Gate of Holyrood] Venice, it has been said, differs from
another cities in the sentiment which she inspires.  The rest may have
admirers; she only, a famous fair one, counts lovers in her train.  And,
indeed, even by her kindest friends, Edinburgh is not considered in a
similar sense.  These like her for many reasons, not any one of which is
satisfactory in itself.  They like her whimsically, if you will, and
somewhat as a virtuoso dotes upon his cabinet.  Her attraction is
romantic in the narrowest meaning of the term.  Beautiful as she is, she
is not so much beautiful as interesting.  She is pre-eminently Gothic,
and all the more so since she has set herself off with some Greek airs,
and erected classic temples on her crags.  In a word, and above all, she
is a curiosity.  The Palace of Holyrood has been left aside in the growth
of Edinburgh, and stands grey and silent in a workmans quarter and among
breweries and gas works.  It is a house of many memories.  Great people
of yore, kings and queens, buffoons and grave ambassadors, played their
stately farce for centuries in Holyrood.  Wars have been plotted, dancing
has lasted deep into the night,murder has been done in its chambers.
There Prince Charlie held his phantom levees, and in a very gallant
manner represented a fallen dynasty for some hours.  Now, all these
things of clay are mingled with the dust, the kings crown itself is
shown for sixpence to the vulgar; but the stone palace has outlived these
charges.  For fifty weeks together, it is no more than a show for
tourists and a museum of old furniture; but on the fifty-first, behold
the palace reawakened and mimicking its past.  The Lord Commissioner, a
kind of stage sovereign, sits among stage courtiers; a coach and six and
clattering escort come and go before the gate; at night, the windows are
lighted up, and its near neighbours, the workmen, may dance in their own
houses to the palace music.  And in this the palace is typical.  There is
a spark among the embers; from time to time the old volcano smokes.
Edinburgh has but partly abdicated, and still wears, in parody, her
metropolitan trappings.  Half a capital and half a country town, the
whole city leads a double existence; it has long trances of the one and
flashes of the other; like the king of the Black Isles, it is half alive
and half a monumental marble.  There are armed men and cannon in the
citadel overhead; you may see the troops marshalled on the high parade;
and at night after the early winter even-fall, and in the morning before
the laggard winter dawn, the wind carries abroad over Edinburgh the sound
of drums and bugles.  Grave judges sit bewigged in what was once the
scene of imperial deliberations.  Close by in the High Street perhaps the
trumpets may sound about the stroke of noon; and you see a troop of
citizens in tawdry masquerade; tabard above, heather-mixture trowser
below, and the men themselves trudging in the mud among unsympathetic
by-standers.  The grooms of a well-appointed circus tread the streets
with a better presence.  And yet these are the Heralds and Pursuivants of
Scotland, who are about to proclaim a new law of the United Kingdom
before two-score boys, and thieves, and hackney-coachmen.  Meanwhile
every hour the bell of the University rings out over the hum of the
streets, and every hour a double tide of students, coming and going,
fills the deep archways.  And lastly, one night in the springtimeor say
one morning rather, at the peep of daylate folk may hear voices of many
men singing a psalm in unison from a church on one side of the old High
Street; and a little after, or perhaps a little before, the sound of many
men singing a psalm in unison from another church on the opposite side of
the way.  There will be something in the words above the dew of Hermon,
and how goodly it is to see brethren dwelling together in unity.  And the
late folk will tell themselves that all this singing denotes the
conclusion of two yearly ecclesiastical parliamentsthe parliaments of
Churches which are brothers in many admirable virtues, but not specially
like brothers in this particular of a tolerant and peaceful life.

Again, meditative people will find a charm in a certain consonancy
between the aspect of the city and its odd and stirring history.  Few
places, if any, offer a more barbaric display of contrasts to the eye.
In the very midst stands one of the most satisfactory crags in naturea
Bass Rock upon dry land, rooted in a garden shaken by passing trains,
carrying a crown of battlements and turrets, and describing its war-like
shadow over the liveliest and brightest thoroughfare of the new town.
From their smoky beehives, ten stories high, the unwashed look down upon
the open squares and gardens of the wealthy; and gay people sunning
themselves along Princes Street, with its mile of commercial palaces all
beflagged upon some great occasion, see, across a gardened valley set
with statues, where the washings of the Old Town flutter in the breeze at
its high windows.  And then, upon all sides, what a clashing of
architecture!  In this one valley, where the life of the town goes most
busily forward, there may be seen, shown one above and behind another by
the accidents of the ground, buildings in almost every style upon the
globe.  Egyptian and Greek temples, Venetian palaces and Gothic spires,
are huddled one over another in a most admired disorder; while, above
all, the brute mass of the Castle and the summit of Arthurs Seat look
down upon these imitations with a becoming dignity, as the works of
Nature may look down the monuments of Art.  But Nature is a more
indiscriminate patroness than we imagine, and in no way frightened of a
strong effect.  The birds roost as willingly among the Corinthian
capitals as in the crannies of the crag; the same atmosphere and daylight
clothe the eternal rock and yesterdays imitation portico; and as the
soft northern sunshine throws out everything into a glorified
distinctnessor easterly mists, coming up with the blue evening, fuse all
these incongruous features into one, and the lamps begin to glitter along
the street, and faint lights to burn in the high windows across the
valleythe feeling grows upon you that this also is a piece of nature in
the most intimate sense; that this profusion of eccentricities, this
dream in masonry and living rock, is not a drop-scene in a theatre, but a
city in the world of every-day reality, connected by railway and
telegraph-wire with all the capitals of Europe, and inhabited by citizens
of the familiar type, who keep ledgers, and attend church, and have sold
their immortal portion to a daily paper.  By all the canons of romance,
the place demands to be half deserted and leaning towards decay; birds we
might admit in profusion, the play of the sun and winds, and a few
gipsies encamped in the chief thoroughfare; but these citizens with their
cabs and tramways, their trains and posters, are altogether out of key.
Chartered tourists, they make free with historic localities, and rear
their young among the most picturesque sites with a grand human
indifference.  To see them thronging by, in their neat clothes and
conscious moral rectitude, and with a little air of possession that
verges on the absurd, is not the least striking feature of the place.
{10}

And the story of the town is as eccentric as its appearance.  For
centuries it was a capital thatched with heather, and more than once, in
the evil days of English invasion, it has gone up in flame to heaven, a
beacon to ships at sea.  It was the jousting-ground of jealous nobles,
not only on Greenside, or by the Kings Stables, where set tournaments
were fought to the sound of trumpets and under the authority of the royal
presence, but in every alley where there was room to cross swords, and in
the main street, where popular tumult under the Blue Blanket alternated
with the brawls of outlandish clansmen and retainers.  Down in the palace
John Knox reproved his queen in the accents of modern democracy.  In the
town, in one of those little shops plastered like so many swallows nests
among the buttresses of the old Cathedral, that familiar autocrat, James
VI., would gladly share a bottle of wine with George Heriot the
goldsmith.  Up on the Pentland Hills, that so quietly look down on the
Castle with the city lying in waves around it, those mad and dismal
fanatics, the Sweet Singers, haggard from long exposure on the moors, sat
day and night with tearful psalmns to see Edinburgh consumed with fire
from heaven, like another Sodom or Gomorrah.  There, in the Grass-market,
stiff-necked, covenanting heroes, offered up the often unnecessary, but
not less honourable, sacrifice of their lives, and bade eloquent farewell
to sun, moon, and stars, and earthly friendships, or died silent to the
roll of drums.  Down by yon outlet rode Grahame of Claverhouse and his
thirty dragoons, with the town beating to arms behind their horses
tailsa sorry handful thus riding for their lives, but with a man at the
head who was to return in a different temper, make a dash that staggered
Scotland to the heart, and die happily in the thick of fight.  There
Aikenhead was hanged for a piece of boyish incredulity; there, a few
years afterwards, David Hume ruined Philosophy and Faith, an undisturbed
and well-reputed citizen; and thither, in yet a few years more, Burns
came from the plough-tail, as to an academy of gilt unbelief and
artificial letters.  There, when the great exodus was made across the
valley, and the New Town began to spread abroad its draughty
parallelograms, and rear its long frontage on the opposing hill, there
was such a flitting, such a change of domicile and dweller, as was never
excelled in the history of cities: the cobbler succeeded the earl; the
beggar ensconced himself by the judges chimney; what had been a palace
was used as a pauper refuge; and great mansions were so parcelled out
among the least and lowest in society, that the hearthstone of the old
proprietor was thought large enough to be partitioned off into a bedroom
by the new.




CHAPTER II. OLD TOWNTHE LANDS.


The Old Town, it is pretended, is the chief characteristic, and, from a
picturesque point of view, the liver-wing of Edinburgh.  It is one of the
most common forms of depreciation to throw cold water on the whole by
adroit over-commendation of a part, since everything worth judging,
whether it be a man, a work of art, or only a fine city, must be judged
upon its merits as a whole.  The Old Town depends for much of its effect
on the new quarters that lie around it, on the sufficiency of its
situation, and on the hills that back it up.  If you were to set it
somewhere else by itself, it would look remarkably like Stirling in a
bolder and loftier edition.  The point is to see this embellished
Stirling planted in the midst of a large, active, and fantastic modern
city; for there the two re-act in a picturesque sense, and the one is the
making of the other.

The Old Town occupies a sloping ridge or tail of diluvial matter,
protected, in some subsidence of the waters, by the Castle cliffs which
fortify it to the west.  On the one side of it and the other the new
towns of the south and of the north occupy their lower, broader, and more
gentle hill-tops.  Thus, the quarter of the Castle over-tops the whole
city and keeps an open view to sea and land.  It dominates for miles on
every side; and people on the decks of ships, or ploughing in quiet
country places over in Fife, can see the banner on the Castle
battlements, and the smoke of the Old Town blowing abroad over the
subjacent country.  A city that is set upon a hill.  It was, I suppose,
from this distant aspect that she got her nickname of _Auld Reekie_.
Perhaps it was given her by people who had never crossed her doors: day
after day, from their various rustic Pisgahs, they had seen the pile of
building on the hill-top, and the long plume of smoke over the plain; so
it appeared to them; so it had appeared to their fathers tilling the same
field; and as that was all they knew of the place, it could be all
expressed in these two words.

              [Picture: Cowfeeder Row and Head of West Port]

Indeed, even on a nearer view, the Old Town is properly smoked; and
though it is well washed with rain all the year round, it has a grim and
sooty aspect among its younger suburbs.  It grew, under the law that
regulates the growth of walled cities in precarious situations, not in
extent, but in height and density.  Public buildings were forced,
wherever there was room for them, into the midst of thoroughfares;
thoroughfares were diminished into lanes; houses sprang up story after
story, neighbour mounting upon neighbours shoulder, as in some Black
Hole of Calcutta, until the population slept fourteen or fifteen deep in
a vertical direction.  The tallest of these _lands_, as they are locally
termed, have long since been burnt out; but to this day it is not
uncommon to see eight or ten windows at a flight; and the cliff of
building which hangs imminent over Waverley Bridge would still put many
natural precipices to shame.  The cellars are already high above the
gazers head, planted on the steep hill-side; as for the garret, all the
furniture may be in the pawn-shop, but it commands a famous prospect to
the Highland hills.  The poor man may roost up there in the centre of
Edinburgh, and yet have a peep of the green country from his window; he
shall see the quarters of the well-to-do fathoms underneath, with their
broad squares and gardens; he shall have nothing overhead but a few
spires, the stone top-gallants of the city; and perhaps the wind may
reach him with a rustic pureness, and bring a smack of the sea or of
flowering lilacs in the spring.

It is almost the correct literary sentiment to deplore the revolutionary
improvements of Mr. Chambers and his following.  It is easy to be a
conservator of the discomforts of others; indeed, it is only our good
qualities we find it irksome to conserve.  Assuredly, in driving streets
through the black labyrinth, a few curious old corners have been swept
away, and some associations turned out of house and home.  But what
slices of sunlight, what breaths of clean air, have been let in!  And
what a picturesque world remains untouched!  You go under dark arches,
and down dark stairs and alleys.  The way is so narrow that you can lay a
hand on either wall; so steep that, in greasy winter weather, the
pavement is almost as treacherous as ice.  Washing dangles above washing
from the windows; the houses bulge outwards upon flimsy brackets; you see
a bit of sculpture in a dark corner; at the top of all, a gable and a few
crowsteps are printed on the sky.  Here, you come into a court where the
children are at play and the grown people sit upon their doorsteps, and
perhaps a church spire shows itself above the roofs.  Here, in the
narrowest of the entry, you find a great old mansion still erect, with
some insignia of its former statesome scutcheon, some holy or courageous
motto, on the lintel.  The local antiquary points out where famous and
well-born people had their lodging; and as you look up, out pops the head
of a slatternly woman from the countesss window.  The Bedouins camp
within Pharaohs palace walls, and the old war-ship is given over to the
rats.  We are already a far way from the days when powdered heads were
plentiful in these alleys, with jolly, port-wine faces underneath.  Even
in the chief thoroughfares Irish washings flutter at the windows, and the
pavements are encumbered with loiterers.

              [Picture: Old Bow-Head, Lawnmarket, Edinburgh]

These loiterers are a true character of the scene.  Some shrewd Scotch
workmen may have paused on their way to a job, debating Church affairs
and politics with their tools upon their arm.  But the most part are of a
different orderskulking jail-birds; unkempt, bare-foot children;
big-mouthed, robust women, in a sort of uniform of striped flannel
petticoat and short tartan shawl; among these, a few surpervising
constables and a dismal sprinkling of mutineers and broken men from
higher ranks in society, with some mark of better days upon them, like a
brand.  In a place no larger than Edinburgh, and where the traffic is
mostly centred in five or six chief streets, the same face comes often
under the notice of an idle stroller.  In fact, from this point of view,
Edinburgh is not so much a small city as the largest of small towns.  It
is scarce possible to avoid observing your neighbours; and I never yet
heard of any one who tried.  It has been my fortune, in this anonymous
accidental way, to watch more than one of these downward travellers for
some stages on the road to ruin.  One man must have been upwards of sixty
before I first observed him, and he made then a decent, personable figure
in broad-cloth of the best.  For three years he kept fallinggrease
coming and buttons going from the square-skirted coat, the face puffing
and pimpling, the shoulders growing bowed, the hair falling scant and
grey upon his head; and the last that ever I saw of him, he was standing
at the mouth of an entry with several men in moleskin, three parts drunk,
and his old black raiment daubed with mud.  I fancy that I still can hear
him laugh.  There was something heart-breaking in this gradual declension
at so advanced an age; you would have thought a man of sixty out of the
reach of these calamities; you would have thought that he was niched by
that time into a safe place in life, whence he could pass quietly and
honourably into the grave.

One of the earliest marks of these _dgringolades_ is, that the victim
begins to disappear from the New Town thoroughfares, and takes to the
High Street, like a wounded animal to the woods.  And such an one is the
type of the quarter.  It also has fallen socially.  A scutcheon over the
door somewhat jars in sentiment where there is a washing at every window.
The old man, when I saw him last, wore the coat in which he had played
the gentleman three years before; and that was just what gave him so
pre-eminent an air of wretchedness.

[Picture: High Street] It is true that the over-population was at least
as dense in the epoch of lords and ladies, and that now-a-days some
customs which made Edinburgh notorious of yore have been fortunately
pretermitted.  But an aggregation of comfort is not distasteful like an
aggregation of the reverse.  Nobody cares how many lords and ladies, and
divines and lawyers, may have been crowded into these houses in the
pastperhaps the more the merrier.  The glasses clink around the china
punch-bowl, some one touches the virginals, there are peacocks feathers
on the chimney, and the tapers burn clear and pale in the red firelight.
That is not an ugly picture in itself, nor will it become ugly upon
repetition.  All the better if the like were going on in every second
room; the _land_ would only look the more inviting.  Times are changed.
In one house, perhaps, two-score families herd together; and, perhaps,
not one of them is wholly out of the reach of want.  The great hotel is
given over to discomfort from the foundation to the chimney-tops;
everywhere a pinching, narrow habit, scanty meals, and an air of
sluttishness and dirt.  In the first room there is a birth, in another a
death, in a third a sordid drinking-bout, and the detective and the
Bible-reader cross upon the stairs.  High words are audible from dwelling
to dwelling, and children have a strange experience from the first; only
a robust soul, you would think, could grow up in such conditions without
hurt.  And even if God tempers His dispensations to the young, and all
the ill does not arise that our apprehensions may forecast, the sight of
such a way of living is disquieting to people who are more happily
circumstanced.  Social inequality is nowhere more ostentatious than at
Edinburgh.  I have mentioned already how, to the stroller along Princes
Street, the High Street callously exhibits its back garrets.  It is true,
there is a garden between.  And although nothing could be more glaring by
way of contrast, sometimes the opposition is more immediate; sometimes
the thing lies in a nutshell, and there is not so much as a blade of
grass between the rich and poor.  To look over the South Bridge and see
the Cowgate below full of crying hawkers, is to view one rank of society
from another in the twinkling of an eye.

One night I went along the Cowgate after every one was a-bed but the
policeman, and stopped by hazard before a tall _land_.  The moon touched
upon its chimneys, and shone blankly on the upper windows; there was no
light anywhere in the great bulk of building; but as I stood there it
seemed to me that I could hear quite a body of quiet sounds from the
interior; doubtless there were many clocks ticking, and people snoring on
their backs.  And thus, as I fancied, the dense life within made itself
faintly audible in my ears, family after family contributing its quota to
the general hum, and the whole pile beating in tune to its timepieces,
like a great disordered heart.  Perhaps it was little more than a fancy
altogether, but it was strangely impressive at the time, and gave me an
imaginative measure of the disproportion between the quantity of living
flesh and the trifling walls that separated and contained it.

There was nothing fanciful, at least, but every circumstance of terror
and reality, in the fall of the _land_ in the High Street.  The building
had grown rotten to the core; the entry underneath had suddenly closed up
so that the scavengers barrow could not pass; cracks and reverberations
sounded through the house at night; the inhabitants of the huge old human
bee-hive discussed their peril when they encountered on the stair; some
had even left their dwellings in a panic of fear, and returned to them
again in a fit of economy or self-respect; when, in the black hours of a
Sunday morning, the whole structure ran together with a hideous uproar
and tumbled story upon story to the ground.  The physical shock was felt
far and near; and the moral shock travelled with the morning milkmaid
into all the suburbs.  The church-bells never sounded more dismally over
Edinburgh than that grey forenoon.  Death had made a brave harvest, and,
like Samson, by pulling down one roof, destroyed many a home.  None who
saw it can have forgotten the aspect of the gable; here it was plastered,
there papered, according to the rooms; here the kettle still stood on the
hob, high overhead; and there a cheap picture of the Queen was pasted
over the chimney.  So, by this disaster, you had a glimpse into the life
of thirty families, all suddenly cut off from the revolving years.  The
_land_ had fallen; and with the _land_ how much!  Far in the country,
people saw a gap in the city ranks, and the sun looked through between
the chimneys in an unwonted place.  And all over the world, in London, in
Canada, in New Zealand, fancy what a multitude of people could exclaim
with truth: The house that I was born in fell last night!




CHAPTER III. THE PARLIAMENT CLOSE.


Time has wrought its changes most notably around the precincts of St.
Giless Church.  The church itself, if it were not for the spire, would
be unrecognisable; the _Krames_ are all gone, not a shop is left to
shelter in its buttresses; and zealous magistrates and a misguided
architect have shorn the design of manhood, and left it poor, naked, and
pitifully pretentious.  As St. Giless must have had in former days a
rich and quaint appearance now forgotten, so the neighbourhood was
bustling, sunless, and romantic.  It was here that the town was most
overbuilt; but the overbuilding has been all rooted out, and not only a
free fair-way left along the High Street with an open space on either
side of the church, but a great porthole, knocked in the main line of the
_lands_, gives an outlook to the north and the New Town.

[Picture: The Spire of St. Giless] There is a silly story of a
subterranean passage between the Castle and Holyrood, and a bold Highland
piper who volunteered to explore its windings.  He made his entrance by
the upper end, playing a strathspey; the curious footed it after him down
the street, following his descent by the sound of the chanter from below;
until all of a sudden, about the level of St. Giless, the music came
abruptly to an end, and the people in the street stood at fault with
hands uplifted.  Whether he was choked with gases, or perished in a quag,
or was removed bodily by the Evil One, remains a point of doubt; but the
piper has never again been seen or heard of from that day to this.
Perhaps he wandered down into the land of Thomas the Rhymer, and some
day, when it is least expected, may take a thought to revisit the sunlit
upper world.  That will be a strange moment for the cabmen on the stance
besides St. Giless, when they hear the drone of his pipes reascending
from the bowels of the earth below their horses feet.

But it is not only pipers who have vanished, many a solid bulk of masonry
has been likewise spirited into the air.  Here, for example, is the shape
of a heart let into the causeway.  This was the site of the Tolbooth, the
Heart of Midlothian, a place old in story and namefather to a noble book.
The walls are now down in the dust; there is no more _squalor carceris_
for merry debtors, no more cage for the old, acknowledged prison-breaker;
but the sun and the wind play freely over the foundations of the jail.
Nor is this the only memorial that the pavement keeps of former days.
The ancient burying-ground of Edinburgh lay behind St. Giless Church,
running downhill to the Cowgate and covering the site of the present
Parliament House.  It has disappeared as utterly as the prison or the
Luckenbooths; and for those ignorant of its history, I know only one
token that remains.  In the Parliament Close, trodden daily underfoot by
advocates, two letters and a date mark the resting-place of the man who
made Scotland over again in his own image, the indefatigable,
undissuadable John Knox.  He sleeps within call of the church that so
often echoed to his preaching.

Hard by the reformer, a bandy-legged and garlanded Charles Second, made
of lead, bestrides a tun-bellied charger.  The King has his backed
turned, and, as you look, seems to be trotting clumsily away from such a
dangerous neighbour.  Often, for hours together, these two will be alone
in the Close, for it lies out of the way of all but legal traffic.  On
one side the south wall of the church, on the other the arcades of the
Parliament House, enclose this irregular bight of causeway and describe
their shadows on it in the sun.  At either end, from round St. Giless
buttresses, you command a look into the High Street with its motley
passengers; but the stream goes by, east and west, and leaves the
Parliament Close to Charles the Second and the birds.  Once in a while, a
patient crowd may be seen loitering there all day, some eating fruit,
some reading a newspaper; and to judge by their quiet demeanour, you
would think they were waiting for a distribution of soup-tickets.  The
fact is far otherwise; within in the Justiciary Court a man is upon trial
for his life, and these are some of the curious for whom the gallery was
found too narrow.  Towards afternoon, if the prisoner is unpopular, there
will be a round of hisses when he is brought forth.  Once in a while,
too, an advocate in wig and gown, hand upon mouth, full of pregnant nods,
sweeps to and fro in the arcade listening to an agent; and at certain
regular hours a whole tide of lawyers hurries across the space.

The Parliament Close has been the scene of marking incidents in Scottish
history.  Thus, when the Bishops were ejected from the Convention in
1688, all fourteen of them gathered together with pale faces and stood
in a cloud in the Parliament Close: poor episcopal personages who were
done with fair weather for life!  Some of the west-country Societarians
standing by, who would have rejoiced more than in great sums to be at
their hanging, hustled them so rudely that they knocked their heads
together.  It was not magnanimous behaviour to dethroned enemies; but
one, at least, of the Societarians had groaned in the _boots_, and they
had all seen their dear friends upon the scaffold.  Again, at the woeful
Union, it was here that people crowded to escort their favourite from
the last of Scottish parliaments: people flushed with nationality, as
Boswell would have said, ready for riotous acts, and fresh from throwing
stones at the author of Robinson Crusoe as he looked out of window.

             [Picture: John Knoxs House in the High Street]

One of the pious in the seventeenth century, going to pass his _trials_
(examinations as we now say) for the Scottish Bar, beheld the Parliament
Close open and had a vision of the mouth of Hell.  This, and small
wonder, was the means of his conversion.  Nor was the vision unsuitable
to the locality; for after an hospital, what uglier piece is there in
civilisation than a court of law?  Hither come envy, malice, and all
uncharitableness to wrestle it out in public tourney; crimes, broken
fortunes, severed households, the knave and his victim, gravitate to this
low building with the arcade.  To how many has not St. Giless bell told
the first hour after ruin?  I think I see them pause to count the
strokes, and wander on again into the moving High Street, stunned and
sick at heart.

A pair of swing doors gives admittance to a hall with a carved roof, hung
with legal portraits, adorned with legal statuary, lighted by windows of
painted glass, and warmed by three vast fires.  This is the _Salle des
pas perdus_ of the Scottish Bar.  Here, by a ferocious custom, idle
youths must promenade from ten till two.  From end to end, singly or in
pairs or trios, the gowns and wigs go back and forward.  Through a hum of
talk and footfalls, the piping tones of a Macer announce a fresh cause
and call upon the names of those concerned.  Intelligent men have been
walking here daily for ten or twenty years without a rag of business or a
shilling of reward.  In process of time, they may perhaps be made the
Sheriff-Substitute and Fountain of Justice at Lerwick or Tobermory.
There is nothing required, you would say, but a little patience and a
taste for exercise and bad air.  To breathe dust and bombazine, to feed
the mind on cackling gossip, to hear three parts of a case and drink a
glass of sherry, to long with indescribable longings for the hour when a
man may slip out of his travesty and devote himself to golf for the rest
of the afternoon, and to do this day by day and year after year, may seem
so small a thing to the inexperienced!  But those who have made the
experiment are of a different way of thinking, and count it the most
arduous form of idleness.

More swing doors open into pigeon-holes where judges of the First Appeal
sit singly, and halls of audience where the supreme Lords sit by three or
four.  Here, you may see Scotts place within the bar, where he wrote
many a page of Waverley novels to the drone of judicial proceeding.  You
will hear a good deal of shrewdness, and, as their Lordships do not
altogether disdain pleasantry, a fair proportion of dry fun.  The
broadest of broad Scotch is now banished from the bench; but the courts
still retain a certain national flavour.  We have a solemn enjoyable way
of lingering on a case.  We treat law as a fine art, and relish and
digest a good distinction.  There is no hurry: point after point must be
rightly examined and reduced to principle; judge after judge must utter
forth his _obiter dicta_ to delighted brethren.

Besides the courts, there are installed under the same roof no less than
three libraries: two of no mean order; confused and semi-subterranean,
full of stairs and galleries; where you may see the most studious-looking
wigs fishing out novels by lanthorn light, in the very place where the
old Privy Council tortured Covenanters.  As the Parliament House is built
upon a slope, although it presents only one story to the north, it
measures half-a-dozen at least upon the south; and range after range of
vaults extend below the libraries.  Few places are more characteristic of
this hilly capital.  You descend one stone stair after another, and
wander, by the flicker of a match, in a labyrinth of stone cellars.  Now,
you pass below the Outer Hall and hear overhead, brisk but ghostly, the
interminable pattering of legal feet.  Now, you come upon a strong door
with a wicket: on the other side are the cells of the police office and
the trap-stair that gives admittance to the dock in the Justiciary Court.
Many a foot that has gone up there lightly enough, has been dead-heavy in
the descent.  Many a mans life has been argued away from him during long
hours in the court above.  But just now that tragic stage is empty and
silent like a church on a week-day, with the bench all sheeted up and
nothing moving but the sunbeams on the wall.  A little farther and you
strike upon a room, not empty like the rest, but crowded with
_productions_ from bygone criminal cases: a grim lumber: lethal weapons,
poisoned organs in a jar, a door with a shot-hole through the panel,
behind which a man fell dead.  I cannot fancy why they should preserve
them unless it were against the Judgment Day.  At length, as you continue
to descend, you see a peep of yellow gaslight and hear a jostling,
whispering noise ahead; next moment you turn a corner, and there, in a
whitewashed passage, is a machinery belt industriously turning on its
wheels.  You would think the engine had grown there of its own accord,
like a cellar fungus, and would soon spin itself out and fill the vaults
from end to end with its mysterious labours.  In truth, it is only some
gear of the steam ventilator; and you will find the engineers at hand,
and may step out of their door into the sunlight.  For all this while,
you have not been descending towards the earths centre, but only to the
bottom of the hill and the foundations of the Parliament House; low down,
to be sure, but still under the open heaven and in a field of grass.  The
daylight shines garishly on the back windows of the Irish quarter; on
broken shutters, wry gables, old palsied houses on the brink of ruin, a
crumbling human pig-sty fit for human pigs.  There are few signs of life,
besides a scanty washing or a face at a window: the dwellers are abroad,
but they will return at night and stagger to their pallets.




CHAPTER IV. LEGENDS.


The character of a place is often most perfectly expressed in its
associations.  An event strikes root and grows into a legend, when it has
happened amongst congenial surroundings.  Ugly actions, above all in ugly
places, have the true romantic quality, and become an undying property of
their scene.  To a man like Scott, the different appearances of nature
seemed each to contain its own legend ready made, which it was his to
call forth: in such or such a place, only such or such events ought with
propriety to happen; and in this spirit he made the _Lady of the Lake_
for Ben Venue, the _Heart of Midlothian_ for Edinburgh, and the _Pirate_,
so indifferently written but so romantically conceived, for the desolate
islands and roaring tideways of the North.  The common run of mankind
have, from generation to generation, an instinct almost as delicate as
that of Scott; but where he created new things, they only forget what is
unsuitable among the old; and by survival of the fittest, a body of
tradition becomes a work of art.  So, in the low dens and high-flying
garrets of Edinburgh, people may go back upon dark passages in the towns
adventures, and chill their marrow with winters tales about the fire:
tales that are singularly apposite and characteristic, not only of the
old life, but of the very constitution of built nature in that part, and
singularly well qualified to add horror to horror, when the wind pipes
around the tall _lands_, and hoots adown arched passages, and the
far-spread wilderness of city lamps keeps quavering and flaring in the
gusts.

[Picture: The Canongate] Here, it is the tale of Begbie the bank-porter,
stricken to the heart at a blow and left in his blood within a step or
two of the crowded High Street.  There, people hush their voices over
Burke and Hare; over drugs and violated graves, and the resurrection-men
smothering their victims with their knees.  Here, again, the fame of
Deacon Brodie is kept piously fresh.  A great man in his day was the
Deacon; well seen in good society, crafty with his hands as a
cabinet-maker, and one who could sing a song with taste.  Many a citizen
was proud to welcome the Deacon to supper, and dismissed him with regret
at a timeous hour, who would have been vastly disconcerted had he known
how soon, and in what guise, his visitor returned.  Many stories are told
of this redoubtable Edinburgh burglar, but the one I have in my mind most
vividly gives the key of all the rest.  A friend of Brodies, nested some
way towards heaven in one of these great _lands_, had told him of a
projected visit to the country, and afterwards, detained by some affairs,
put it off and stayed the night in town.  The good man had lain some time
awake; it was far on in the small hours by the Tron bell; when suddenly
there came a creak, a jar, a faint light.  Softly he clambered out of bed
and up to a false window which looked upon another room, and there, by
the glimmer of a thieves lantern, was his good friend the Deacon in a
mask.  It is characteristic of the town and the towns manners that this
little episode should have been quietly tided over, and quite a good time
elapsed before a great robbery, an escape, a Bow Street runner, a
cock-fight, an apprehension in a cupboard in Amsterdam, and a last step
into the air off his own greatly-improved gallows drop, brought the
career of Deacon William Brodie to an end.  But still, by the minds eye,
he may be seen, a man harassed below a mountain of duplicity, slinking
from a magistrates supper-room to a thieves ken, and pickeering among
the closes by the flicker of a dark lamp.

                 [Picture: Planestones Close, Canongate]

Or where the Deacon is out of favour, perhaps some memory lingers of the
great plagues, and of fatal houses still unsafe to enter within the
memory of man.  For in time of pestilence the discipline had been sharp
and sudden, and what we now call stamping out contagion was carried on
with deadly rigour.  The officials, in their gowns of grey, with a white
St. Andrews cross on back and breast, and a white cloth carried before
them on a staff, perambulated the city, adding the terror of mans
justice to the fear of Gods visitation.  The dead they buried on the
Borough Muir; the living who had concealed the sickness were drowned, if
they were women, in the Quarry Holes, and if they were men, were hanged
and gibbeted at their own doors; and wherever the evil had passed,
furniture was destroyed and houses closed.  And the most bogeyish part of
the story is about such houses.  Two generations back they still stood
dark and empty; people avoided them as they passed by; the boldest
schoolboy only shouted through the keyhole and made off; for within, it
was supposed, the plague lay ambushed like a basilisk, ready to flow
forth and spread blain and pustule through the city.  What a terrible
next-door neighbour for superstitious citizens!  A rat scampering within
would send a shudder through the stoutest heart.  Here, if you like, was
a sanitary parable, addressed by our uncleanly forefathers to their own
neglect.

And then we have Major Weir; for although even his house is now
demolished, old Edinburgh cannot clear herself of his unholy memory.  He
and his sister lived together in an odour of sour piety.  She was a
marvellous spinster; he had a rare gift of supplication, and was known
among devout admirers by the name of Angelical Thomas.  He was a tall,
black man, and ordinarily looked down to the ground; a grim countenance,
and a big nose.  His garb was still a cloak, and somewhat dark, and he
never went without his staff.  How it came about that Angelical Thomas
was burned in company with his staff, and his sister in gentler manner
hanged, and whether these two were simply religious maniacs of the more
furious order, or had real as well as imaginary sins upon their old-world
shoulders, are points happily beyond the reach of our intention.  At
least, it is suitable enough that out of this superstitious city some
such example should have been put forth: the outcome and fine flower of
dark and vehement religion.  And at least the facts struck the public
fancy and brought forth a remarkable family of myths.  It would appear
that the Majors staff went upon his errands, and even ran before him
with a lantern on dark nights.  Gigantic females, stentoriously laughing
and gaping with tehees of laughter at unseasonable hours of night and
morning, haunted the purlieus of his abode.  His house fell under such a
load of infamy that no one dared to sleep in it, until municipal
improvement levelled the structure to the ground.  And my father has
often been told in the nursery how the devils coach, drawn by six
coal-black horses with fiery eyes, would drive at night into the West
Bow, and belated people might see the dead Major through the glasses.

Another legend is that of the two maiden sisters.  A legend I am afraid
it may be, in the most discreditable meaning of the term; or perhaps
something worsea mere yesterdays fiction.  But it is a story of some
vitality, and is worthy of a place in the Edinburgh kalendar.  This pair
inhabited a single room; from the facts, it must have been double-bedded;
and it may have been of some dimensions: but when all is said, it was a
single room.  Here our two spinsters fell outon some point of
controversial divinity belike: but fell out so bitterly that there was
never a word spoken between them, black or white, from that day forward.
You would have thought they would separate: but no; whether from lack of
means, or the Scottish fear of scandal, they continued to keep house
together where they were.  A chalk line drawn upon the floor separated
their two domains; it bisected the doorway and the fireplace, so that
each could go out and in, and do her cooking, without violating the
territory of the other.  So, for years, they coexisted in a hateful
silence; their meals, their ablutions, their friendly visitors, exposed
to an unfriendly scrutiny; and at night, in the dark watches, each could
hear the breathing of her enemy.  Never did four walls look down upon an
uglier spectacle than these sisters rivalling in unsisterliness.  Here is
a canvas for Hawthorne to have turned into a cabinet picturehe had a
Puritanic vein, which would have fitted him to treat this Puritanic
horror; he could have shown them to us in their sicknesses and at their
hideous twin devotions, thumbing a pair of great Bibles, or praying aloud
for each others penitence with marrowy emphasis; now each, with kilted
petticoat, at her own corner of the fire on some tempestuous evening; now
sitting each at her window, looking out upon the summer landscape sloping
far below them towards the firth, and the field-paths where they had
wandered hand in hand; or, as age and infirmity grew upon them and
prolonged their toilettes, and their hands began to tremble and their
heads to nod involuntarily, growing only the more steeled in enmity with
years; until one fine day, at a word, a look, a visit, or the approach of
death, their hearts would melt and the chalk boundary be overstepped for
ever.

Alas! to those who know the ecclesiastical history of the racethe most
perverse and melancholy in mans annalsthis will seem only a figure of
much that is typical of Scotland and her high-seated capital above the
Fortha figure so grimly realistic that it may pass with strangers for a
caricature.  We are wonderful patient haters for conscience sake up here
in the North.  I spoke, in the first of these papers, of the Parliaments
of the Established and Free Churches, and how they can hear each other
singing psalms across the street.  There is but a street between them in
space, but a shadow between them in principle; and yet there they sit,
enchanted, and in damnatory accents pray for each others growth in
grace.  It would be well if there were no more than two; but the sects in
Scotland form a large family of sisters, and the chalk lines are thickly
drawn, and run through the midst of many private homes.  Edinburgh is a
city of churches, as though it were a place of pilgrimage.  You will see
four within a stone-cast at the head of the West Bow.  Some are crowded
to the doors; some are empty like monuments; and yet you will ever find
new ones in the building.  Hence that surprising clamour of church bells
that suddenly breaks out upon the Sabbath morning from Trinity and the
sea-skirts to Morningside on the borders of the hills.  I have heard the
chimes of Oxford playing their symphony in a golden autumn morning, and
beautiful it was to hear.  But in Edinburgh all manner of loud bells
join, or rather disjoin, in one swelling, brutal babblement of noise.
Now one overtakes another, and now lags behind it; now five or six all
strike on the pained tympanum at the same punctual instant of time, and
make together a dismal chord of discord; and now for a second all seem to
have conspired to hold their peace.  Indeed, there are not many uproars
in this world more dismal than that of the Sabbath bells in Edinburgh: a
harsh ecclesiastical tocsin; the outcry of incongruous orthodoxies,
calling on every separate conventicler to put up a protest, each in his
own synagogue, against right-hand extremes and left-hand defections.
And surely there are few worse extremes than this extremity of zeal; and
few more deplorable defections than this disloyalty to Christian love.
Shakespeare wrote a comedy of Much Ado about Nothing.  The Scottish
nation made a fantastic tragedy on the same subject.  And it is for the
success of this remarkable piece that these bells are sounded every
Sabbath morning on the hills above the Forth.  How many of them might
rest silent in the steeple, how many of these ugly churches might be
demolished and turned once more into useful building material, if people
who think almost exactly the same thoughts about religion would
condescend to worship God under the same roof!  But there are the chalk
lines.  And which is to pocket pride, and speak the foremost word?




CHAPTER V. GREYFRIARS.


It was Queen Mary who threw open the gardens of the Grey Friars: a new
and semi-rural cemetery in those days, although it has grown an antiquity
in its turn and been superseded by half-a-dozen others.  The Friars must
have had a pleasant time on summer evenings; for their gardens were
situated to a wish, with the tall castle and the tallest of the castle
crags in front.  Even now, it is one of our famous Edinburgh points of
view; and strangers are led thither to see, by yet another instance, how
strangely the city lies upon her hills.  The enclosure is of an irregular
shape; the double church of Old and New Greyfriars stands on the level at
the top; a few thorns are dotted here and there, and the ground falls by
terrace and steep slope towards the north.  The open shows many slabs and
table tombstones; and all round the margin, the place is girt by an array
of aristocratic mausoleums appallingly adorned.

Setting aside the tombs of Roubiliac, which belong to the heroic order of
graveyard art, we Scotch stand, to my fancy, highest among nations in the
matter of grimly illustrating death.  We seem to love for their own sake
the emblems of time and the great change; and even around country
churches you will find a wonderful exhibition of skulls, and crossbones,
and noseless angels, and trumpets pealing for the Judgment Day.  Every
mason was a pedestrian Holbein: he had a deep consciousness of death, and
loved to put its terrors pithily before the churchyard loiterer; he was
brimful of rough hints upon mortality, and any dead farmer was seized
upon to be a text.  The classical examples of this art are in Greyfriars.
In their time, these were doubtless costly monuments, and reckoned of a
very elegant proportion by contemporaries; and now, when the elegance is
not so apparent, the significance remains.  You may perhaps look with a
smile on the profusion of Latin mottoessome crawling endwise up the
shaft of a pillar, some issuing on a scroll from angels trumpetson the
emblematic horrors, the figures rising headless from the grave, and all
the traditional ingenuities in which it pleased our fathers to set forth
their sorrow for the dead and their sense of earthly mutability.  But it
is not a hearty sort of mirth.  Each ornament may have been executed by
the merriest apprentice, whistling as he plied the mallet; but the
original meaning of each, and the combined effect of so many of them in
this quiet enclosure, is serious to the point of melancholy.

Round a great part of the circuit, houses of a low class present their
backs to the churchyard.  Only a few inches separate the living from the
dead.  Here, a window is partly blocked up by the pediment of a tomb;
there, where the street falls far below the level of the graves, a
chimney has been trained up the back of a monument, and a red pot looks
vulgarly over from behind.  A damp smell of the graveyard finds its way
into houses where workmen sit at meat.  Domestic life on a small scale
goes forward visibly at the windows.  The very solitude and stillness of
the enclosure, which lies apart from the towns traffic, serves to
accentuate the contrast.  As you walk upon the graves, you see children
scattering crumbs to feed the sparrows; you hear people singing or
washing dishes, or the sound of tears and castigation; the linen on a
clothes-pole flaps against funereal sculpture; or perhaps the cat slips
over the lintel and descends on a memorial urn.  And as there is nothing
else astir, these incongruous sights and noises take hold on the
attention and exaggerate the sadness of the place.

                          [Picture: Greyfriars]

Greyfriars is continually overrun by cats.  I have seen one afternoon, as
many as thirteen of them seated on the grass beside old Milne, the Master
Builder, all sleek and fat, and complacently blinking, as if they had fed
upon strange meats.  Old Milne was chaunting with the saints, as we may
hope, and cared little for the company about his grave; but I confess the
spectacle had an ugly side for me; and I was glad to step forward and
raise my eyes to where the Castle and the roofs of the Old Town, and the
spire of the Assembly Hall, stood deployed against the sky with the
colourless precision of engraving.  An open outlook is to be desired from
a churchyard, and a sight of the sky and some of the worlds beauty
relieves a mind from morbid thoughts.

I shall never forget one visit.  It was a grey, dropping day; the grass
was strung with rain-drops; and the people in the houses kept hanging out
their shirts and petticoats and angrily taking them in again, as the
weather turned from wet to fair and back again.  A grave-digger, and a
friend of his, a gardener from the country, accompanied me into one after
another of the cells and little courtyards in which it gratified the
wealthy of old days to enclose their old bones from neighbourhood.  In
one, under a sort of shrine, we found a forlorn human effigy, very
realistically executed down to the detail of his ribbed stockings, and
holding in his hand a ticket with the date of his demise.  He looked most
pitiful and ridiculous, shut up by himself in his aristocratic precinct,
like a bad old boy or an inferior forgotten deity under a new
dispensation; the burdocks grew familiarly about his feet, the rain
dripped all round him; and the world maintained the most entire
indifference as to who he was or whither he had gone.  In another, a
vaulted tomb, handsome externally but horrible inside with damp and
cobwebs, there were three mounds of black earth and an uncovered thigh
bone.  This was the place of interment, it appeared, of a family with
whom the gardener had been long in service.  He was among old
acquaintances.  Thisll be Miss Margets, said he, giving the bone a
friendly kick.  The auld ---!  I have always an uncomfortable feeling
in a graveyard, at sight of so many tombs to perpetuate memories best
forgotten; but I never had the impression so strongly as that day.
People had been at some expense in both these cases: to provoke a
melancholy feeling of derision in the one, and an insulting epithet in
the other.  The proper inscription for the most part of mankind, I began
to think, is the cynical jeer, _cras tibi_.  That, if anything, will stop
the mouth of a carper; since it both admits the worst and carries the war
triumphantly into the enemys camp.

Greyfriars is a place of many associations.  There was one window in a
house at the lower end, now demolished, which was pointed out to me by
the gravedigger as a spot of legendary interest.  Burke, the resurrection
man, infamous for so many murders at five shillings a-head, used to sit
thereat, with pipe and nightcap, to watch burials going forward on the
green.  In a tomb higher up, which must then have been but newly
finished, John Knox, according to the same informant, had taken refuge in
a turmoil of the Reformation.  Behind the church is the haunted mausoleum
of Sir George Mackenzie: Bloody Mackenzie, Lord Advocate in the
Covenanting troubles and author of some pleasing sentiments on
toleration.  Here, in the last century, an old Heriots Hospital boy once
harboured from the pursuit of the police.  The Hospital is next door to
Greyfriarsa courtly building among lawns, where, on Founders Day, you
may see a multitude of children playing Kiss-in-the-Ring and Round the
Mulberry-bush.  Thus, when the fugitive had managed to conceal himself in
the tomb, his old schoolmates had a hundred opportunities to bring him
food; and there he lay in safety till a ship was found to smuggle him
abroad.  But his must have been indeed a heart of brass, to lie all day
and night alone with the dead persecutor; and other lads were far from
emulating him in courage.  When a mans soul is certainly in hell, his
body will scarce lie quiet in a tomb however costly; some time or other
the door must open, and the reprobate come forth in the abhorred garments
of the grave.  It was thought a high piece of prowess to knock at the
Lord Advocates mausoleum and challenge him to appear.  Bluidy
Mackingie, come oot if ye dar! sang the fool-hardy urchins.  But Sir
George had other affairs on hand; and the author of an essay on
toleration continues to sleep peacefully among the many whom he so
intolerantly helped to slay.

[Picture: The Grassmarket] For this _infelix campus_, as it is dubbed in
one of its own inscriptionsan inscription over which Dr. Johnson passed
a critical eyeis in many ways sacred to the memory of the men whom
Mackenzie persecuted.  It was here, on the flat tombstones, that the
Covenant was signed by an enthusiastic people.  In the long arm of the
church-yard that extends to Lauriston, the prisoners from Bothwell
Bridgefed on bread and water and guarded, life for life, by vigilant
marksmenlay five months looking for the scaffold or the plantations.
And while the good work was going forward in the Grassmarket, idlers in
Greyfriars might have heard the throb of the military drums that drowned
the voices of the martyrs.  Nor is this all: for down in the corner
farthest from Sir George, there stands a monument dedicated, in uncouth
Covenanting verse, to all who lost their lives in that contention.  There
is no moorsman shot in a snow shower beside Irongray or Comonell; there
is not one of the two hundred who were drowned off the Orkneys; nor so
much as a poor, over-driven, Covenanting slave in the American
plantations; but can lay claim to a share in that memorial, and, if such
things interest just men among the shades, can boast he has a monument on
earth as well as Julius Csar or the Pharaohs.  Where they may all lie, I
know not.  Far-scattered bones, indeed!  But if the reader cares to learn
how some of themor some part of some of themfound their way at length
to such honourable sepulture, let him listen to the words of one who was
their comrade in life and their apologist when they were dead.  Some of
the insane controversial matter I omit, as well as some digressions, but
leave the rest in Patrick Walkers language and orthography:

    The never to be forgotten Mr. _James Renwick_ told me, that he was
    Witness to their Public Murder at the _Gallowlee_, between _Leith_
    and _Edinburgh_, when he saw the Hangman hash and hagg off all their
    Five Heads, with _Patrick Foremans_ Right Hand: Their Bodies were
    all buried at the Gallows Foot; their Heads, with _Patricks_ Hand,
    were brought and put upon five Pikes on the _Pleasaunce-Port_. . . .
    Mr. _Renwick_ told me also that it was the first public Action that
    his Hand was at, to conveen Friends, and lift their murthered Bodies,
    and carried them to the West Churchyard of _Edinburgh_,not
    Greyfriars, this time,and buried them there.  Then they came about
    the City . . . . and took down these Five Heads and that Hand; and
    Day being come, they went quickly up the _Pleasaunce_; and when they
    came to _Lauristoun_ Yards, upon the South-side of the City, they
    durst not venture, being so light, to go and bury their Heads with
    their Bodies, which they designed; it being present Death, if any of
    them had been found.  _Alexander Tweedie_, a Friend, being with them,
    who at that Time was Gardner in these Yards, concluded to bury them
    in his Yard, being in a Box (wrapped in Linen), where they lay 45
    Years except 3 Days, being executed upon the 10th of _October_ 1681,
    and found the 7th Day of October 1726.  That Piece of Ground lay for
    some Years unlaboured; and trenching it, the Gardner found them,
    which affrighted him the Box was consumed.  Mr. _Schaw_, the Owner of
    these Yards, caused lift them, and lay them upon a Table in his
    Summer-house: Mr. _Schaws_ mother was so kind, as to cut out a
    Linen-cloth, and cover them.  They lay Twelve Days there, where all
    had Access to see them.  _Alexander Tweedie_, the foresaid Gardner,
    said, when dying, There was a Treasure hid in his Yard, but neither
    Gold nor Silver.  _Daniel Tweedie_, his Son, came along with me to
    that Yard, and told me that his Father planted a white Rose-bush
    above them, and farther down the Yard a red Rose-bush, which were
    more fruitful than any other Bush in the Yard. . . . Many cameto
    see the headsout of Curiosity; yet I rejoiced to see so many
    concerned grave Men and Women favouring the Dust of our Martyrs.
    There were Six of us concluded to bury them upon the Nineteenth Day
    of _October_ 1726, and every One of us to acquaint Friends of the Day
    and Hour, being _Wednesday_, the Day of the Week on which most of
    them were executed, and at 4 of the Clock at Night, being the Hour
    that most of them went to their resting Graves.  We caused make a
    compleat Coffin for them in Black, with four Yards of fine Linen, the
    way that our Martyrs Corps were managed. . . . Accordingly we kept
    the aforesaid Day and Hour, and doubled the Linen, and laid the Half
    of it below them, their nether jaws being parted from their Heads;
    but being young Men, their Teeth remained.  All were Witness to the
    Holes in each of their Heads, which the Hangman broke with his
    Hammer; and according to the Bigness of their Sculls, we laid the
    Jaws to them, and drew the other Half of the Linen above them, and
    stufft the Coffin with Shavings.  Some prest hard to go thorow the
    chief Parts of the City as was done at the Revolution; but this we
    refused, considering that it looked airy and frothy, to make such
    Show of them, and inconsistent with the solid serious Observing of
    such an affecting, surprizing unheard-of Dispensation: But took the
    ordinary Way of other Burials from that Place, to wit, we went east
    the Back of the Wall, and in at _Bristo-Port_, and down the Way to
    the Head of the _Cowgate_, and turned up to the Church-yard, where
    they were interred closs to the Martyrs Tomb, with the greatest
    Multitude of People Old and Young, Men and Women, Ministers and
    others, that ever I saw together.

And so there they were at last, in their resting graves.  So long as
men do their duty, even if it be greatly in a misapprehension, they will
be leading pattern lives; and whether or not they come to lie beside a
martyrs monument, we may be sure they will find a safe haven somewhere
in the providence of God.  It is not well to think of death, unless we
temper the thought with that of heroes who despised it.  Upon what
ground, is of small account; if it be only the bishop who was burned for
his faith in the antipodes, his memory lightens the heart and makes us
walk undisturbed among graves.  And so the martyrs monument is a
wholesome, heartsome spot in the field of the dead; and as we look upon
it, a brave influence comes to us from the land of those who have won
their discharge and, in another phrase of Patrick Walkers, got cleanly
off the stage.




CHAPTER VI. NEW TOWNTOWN AND COUNTRY.


It is as much a matter of course to decry the New Town as to exalt the
Old; and the most celebrated authorities have picked out this quarter as
the very emblem of what is condemnable in architecture.  Much may be
said, much indeed has been said, upon the text; but to the
unsophisticated, who call anything pleasing if it only pleases them, the
New Town of Edinburgh seems, in itself, not only gay and airy, but highly
picturesque.  An old skipper, invincibly ignorant of all theories of the
sublime and beautiful, once propounded as his most radiant notion for
Paradise: The new town of Edinburgh, with the wind a matter of a point
free.  He has now gone to that sphere where all good tars are promised
pleasant weather in the song, and perhaps his thoughts fly somewhat
higher.  But there are bright and temperate dayswith soft air coming
from the inland hills, military music sounding bravely from the hollow of
the gardens, the flags all waving on the palaces of Princes Streetwhen I
have seen the town through a sort of glory, and shaken hands in sentiment
with the old sailor.  And indeed, for a man who has been much tumbled
round Orcadian skerries, what scene could be more agreeable to witness?
On such a day, the valley wears a surprising air of festival.  It seems
(I do not know how else to put my meaning) as if it were a trifle too
good to be true.  It is what Paris ought to be.  It has the scenic
quality that would best set off a life of unthinking, open-air diversion.
It was meant by nature for the realisation of the society of comic
operas.  And you can imagine, if the climate were but towardly, how all
the world and his wife would flock into these gardens in the cool of the
evening, to hear cheerful music, to sip pleasant drinks, to see the moon
rise from behind Arthurs Seat and shine upon the spires and monuments
and the green tree-tops in the valley.  Alas! and the next morning the
rain is splashing on the windows, and the passengers flee along Princes
Street before the galloping squalls.

                     [Picture: The Royal Institution]

It cannot be denied that the original design was faulty and
short-sighted, and did not fully profit by the capabilities of the
situation.  The architect was essentially a town bird, and he laid out
the modern city with a view to street scenery, and to street scenery
alone.  The country did not enter into his plan; he had never lifted his
eyes to the hills.  If he had so chosen, every street upon the northern
slope might have been a noble terrace and commanded an extensive and
beautiful view.  But the space has been too closely built; many of the
houses front the wrong way, intent, like the Man with the Muck-Rake, on
what is not worth observation, and standing discourteously back-foremost
in the ranks; and, in a word, it is too often only from attic-windows, or
here and there at a crossing, that you can get a look beyond the city
upon its diversified surroundings.  But perhaps it is all the more
surprising, to come suddenly on a corner, and see a perspective of a mile
or more of falling street, and beyond that woods and villas, and a blue
arm of sea, and the hills upon the farther side.

Fergusson, our Edinburgh poet, Burnss model, once saw a butterfly at the
Town Cross; and the sight inspired him with a worthless little ode.  This
painted country man, the dandy of the rose garden, looked far abroad in
such a humming neighbourhood; and you can fancy what moral considerations
a youthful poet would supply.  But the incident, in a fanciful sort of
way, is characteristic of the place.  Into no other city does the sight
of the country enter so far; if you do not meet a butterfly, you shall
certainly catch a glimpse of far-away trees upon your walk; and the place
is full of theatre tricks in the way of scenery.  You peep under an arch,
you descend stairs that look as if they would land you in a cellar, you
turn to the back-window of a grimy tenement in a lane:and behold! you
are face-to-face with distant and bright prospects.  You turn a corner,
and there is the sun going down into the Highland hills.  You look down
an alley, and see ships tacking for the Baltic.

For the country people to see Edinburgh on her hill-tops, is one thing;
it is another for the citizen, from the thick of his affairs, to overlook
the country.  It should be a genial and ameliorating influence in life;
it should prompt good thoughts and remind him of Natures unconcern: that
he can watch from day to day, as he trots officeward, how the Spring
green brightens in the wood or the field grows black under a moving
ploughshare.  I have been tempted, in this connexion, to deplore the
slender faculties of the human race, with its penny-whistle of a voice,
its dull cars, and its narrow range of sight.  If you could see as people
are to see in heaven, if you had eyes such as you can fancy for a
superior race, if you could take clear note of the objects of vision, not
only a few yards, but a few miles from where you stand:think how
agreeably your sight would be entertained, how pleasantly your thoughts
would be diversified, as you walked the Edinburgh streets!  For you might
pause, in some business perplexity, in the midst of the city traffic, and
perhaps catch the eye of a shepherd as he sat down to breathe upon a
heathery shoulder of the Pentlands; or perhaps some urchin, clambering in
a country elm, would put aside the leaves and show you his flushed and
rustic visage; or a fisher racing seawards, with the tiller under his
elbow, and the sail sounding in the wind, would fling you a salutation
from between Anster and the May.

To be old is not the same thing as to be picturesque; nor because the Old
Town bears a strange physiognomy, does it at all follow that the New Town
shall look commonplace.  Indeed, apart from antique houses, it is curious
how much description would apply commonly to either.  The same sudden
accidents of ground, a similar dominating site above the plain, and the
same superposition of one rank of society over another, are to be
observed in both.  Thus, the broad and comely approach to Princes Street
from the east, lined with hotels and public offices, makes a leap over
the gorge of the Low Calton; if you cast a glance over the parapet, you
look direct into that sunless and disreputable confluent of Leith Street;
and the same tall houses open upon both thoroughfares.  This is only the
New Town passing overhead above its own cellars; walking, so to speak,
over its own children, as is the way of cities and the human race.  But
at the Dean Bridge, you may behold a spectacle of a more novel order.
The river runs at the bottom of a deep valley, among rocks and between
gardens; the crest of either bank is occupied by some of the most
commodious streets and crescents in the modern city; and a handsome
bridge unites the two summits.  Over this, every afternoon, private
carriages go spinning by, and ladies with card-cases pass to and fro
about the duties of society.  And yet down below, you may still see, with
its mills and foaming weir, the little rural village of Dean.  Modern
improvement has gone overhead on its high-level viaduct; and the extended
city has cleanly overleapt, and left unaltered, what was once the summer
retreat of its comfortable citizens.  Every town embraces hamlets in its
growth; Edinburgh herself has embraced a good few; but it is strange to
see one still survivingand to see it some hundreds of feet below your
path.  Is it Torre del Greco that is built above buried Herculaneum?
Herculaneum was dead at least; but the sun still shines upon the roofs of
Dean; the smoke still rises thriftily from its chimneys; the dusty miller
comes to his door, looks at the gurgling water, hearkens to the turning
wheel and the birds about the shed, and perhaps whistles an air of his
own to enrich the symphonyfor all the world as if Edinburgh were still
the old Edinburgh on the Castle Hill, and Dean were still the quietest of
hamlets buried a mile or so in the green country.

                    [Picture: In the Village of Dean]

It is not so long ago since magisterial David Hume lent the authority of
his example to the exodus from the Old Town, and took up his new abode in
a street which is still (so oddly may a jest become perpetuated) known as
Saint David Street.  Nor is the town so large but a holiday schoolboy may
harry a birds nest within half a mile of his own door.  There are places
that still smell of the plough in memorys nostrils.  Here, one had heard
a blackbird on a hawthorn; there, another was taken on summer evenings to
eat strawberries and cream; and you have seen a waving wheatfield on the
site of your present residence.  The memories of an Edinburgh boy are but
partly memories of the town.  I look back with delight on many an
escalade of garden walls; many a ramble among lilacs full of piping
birds; many an exploration in obscure quarters that were neither town nor
country; and I think that both for my companions and myself, there was a
special interest, a point of romance, and a sentiment as of foreign
travel, when we hit in our excursions on the butt-end of some former
hamlet, and found a few rustic cottages embedded among streets and
squares.  The tunnel to the Scotland Street Station, the sight of the
trains shooting out of its dark maw with the two guards upon the brake,
the thought of its length and the many ponderous edifices and open
thoroughfares above, were certainly things of paramount impressiveness to
a young mind.  It was a subterranean passage, although of a larger bore
than we were accustomed to in Ainsworths novels; and these two words,
subterreanean passage, were in themselves an irresistible attraction,
and seemed to bring us nearer in spirit to the heroes we loved and the
black rascals we secretly aspired to imitate.  To scale the Castle Rock
from West Princes Street Gardens, and lay a triumphal hand against the
rampart itself, was to taste a high order of romantic pleasure.  And
there are other sights and exploits which crowd back upon my mind under a
very strong illumination of remembered pleasure.  But the effect of not
one of them all will compare with the discoverers joy, and the sense of
old Time and his slow changes on the face of this earth, with which I
explored such corners as Cannonmills or Water Lane, or the nugget of
cottages at Broughton Market.  They were more rural than the open
country, and gave a greater impression of antiquity than the oldest
_land_ upon the High Street.  They too, like Fergussons butterfly, had a
quaint air of having wandered far from their own place; they looked
abashed and homely, with their gables and their creeping plants, their
outside stairs and running mill-streams; there were corners that smelt
like the end of the country garden where I spent my Aprils; and the
people stood to gossip at their doors, as they might have done in
Colinton or Cramond.

In a great measure we may, and shall, eradicate this haunting flavour of
the country.  The last elm is dead in Elm Row; and the villas and the
workmens quarters spread apace on all the borders of the city.  We can
cut down the trees; we can bury the grass under dead paving-stones; we
can drive brisk streets through all our sleepy quarters; and we may
forget the stories and the playgrounds of our boyhood.  But we have some
possessions that not even the infuriate zeal of builders can utterly
abolish and destroy.  Nothing can abolish the hills, unless it be a
cataclysm of nature which shall subvert Edinburgh Castle itself and lay
all her florid structures in the dust.  And as long as we have the hills
and the Firth, we have a famous heritage to leave our children.  Our
windows, at no expense to us, are most artfully stained to represent a
landscape.  And when the Spring comes round, and the hawthorns begin to
flower, and the meadows to smell of young grass, even in the thickest of
our streets, the country hilltops find out a young mans eyes, and set
his heart beating for travel and pure air.




CHAPTER VII. THE VILLA QUARTERS.


Mr. Ruskins denunciation of the New Town of Edinburgh includes, as I
have heard it repeated, nearly all the stone and lime we have to show.
Many however find a grand air and something settled and imposing in the
better parts; and upon many, as I have said, the confusion of styles
induces an agreeable stimulation of the mind.  But upon the subject of
our recent villa architecture, I am frankly ready to mingle my tears with
Mr. Ruskins, and it is a subject which makes one envious of his large
declamatory and controversial eloquence.

Day by day, one new villa, one new object of offence, is added to
another; all around Newington and Morningside, the dismallest structures
keep springing up like mushrooms; the pleasant hills are loaded with
them, each impudently squatted in its garden, each roofed and carrying
chimneys like a house.  And yet a glance of an eye discovers their true
character.  They are not houses; for they were not designed with a view
to human habitation, and the internal arrangements are, as they tell me,
fantastically unsuited to the needs of man.  They are not buildings; for
you can scarcely say a thing is built where every measurement is in
clamant disproportion with its neighbour.  They belong to no style of
art, only to a form of business much to be regretted.

Why should it be cheaper to erect a structure where the size of the
windows bears no rational relation to the size of the front?  Is there
any profit in a misplaced chimney-stalk?  Does a hard-working, greedy
builder gain more on a monstrosity than on a decent cottage of equal
plainness?  Frankly, we should say, No.  Bricks may be omitted, and green
timber employed, in the construction of even a very elegant design; and
there is no reason why a chimney should be made to vent, because it is so
situated as to look comely from without.  On the other hand, there is a
noble way of being ugly: a high-aspiring fiasco like the fall of Lucifer.
There are daring and gaudy buildings that manage to be offensive, without
being contemptible; and we know that fools rush in where angels fear to
tread.  But to aim at making a common-place villa, and to make it
insufferably ugly in each particular; to attempt the homeliest
achievement, and to attain the bottom of derided failure; not to have any
theory but profit and yet, at an equal expense, to outstrip all
competitors in the art of conceiving and rendering permanent deformity;
and to do all this in what is, by nature, one of the most agreeable
neighbourhoods in Britain:what are we to say, but that this also is a
distinction, hard to earn although not greatly worshipful?

Indifferent buildings give pain to the sensitive; but these things offend
the plainest taste.  It is a danger which threatens the amenity of the
town; and as this eruption keeps spreading on our borders, we have ever
the farther to walk among unpleasant sights, before we gain the country
air.  If the population of Edinburgh were a living, autonomous body, it
would arise like one man and make night hideous with arson; the builders
and their accomplices would be driven to work, like the Jews of yore,
with the trowel in one hand and the defensive cutlass in the other; and
as soon as one of these masonic wonders had been consummated,
right-minded iconoclasts should fall thereon and make an end of it at
once.

Possibly these words may meet the eye of a builder or two.  It is no use
asking them to employ an architect; for that would be to touch them in a
delicate quarter, and its use would largely depend on what architect they
were minded to call in.  But let them get any architect in the world to
point out any reasonably well-proportioned villa, not his own design; and
let them reproduce that model to satiety.




CHAPTER VIII. THE CALTON HILL.


The east of new Edinburgh is guarded by a craggy hill, of no great
elevation, which the town embraces.  The old London road runs on one side
of it; while the New Approach, leaving it on the other hand, completes
the circuit.  You mount by stairs in a cutting of the rock to find
yourself in a field of monuments.  Dugald Stewart has the honours of
situation and architecture; Burns is memorialised lower down upon a spur;
Lord Nelson, as befits a sailor, gives his name to the top-gallant of the
Calton Hill.  This latter erection has been differently and yet, in both
cases, aptly compared to a telescope and a butter-churn; comparisons
apart, it ranks among the vilest of mens handiworks.  But the chief
feature is an unfinished range of columns, the Modern Ruin as it has
been called, an imposing object from far and near, and giving Edinburgh,
even from the sea, that false air; of a Modern Athens which has earned
for her so many slighting speeches.  It was meant to be a National
Monument; and its present state is a very suitable monument to certain
national characteristics.  The old Observatorya quaint brown building on
the edge of the steepand the new Observatorya classical edifice with a
domeoccupy the central portion of the summit.  All these are scattered
on a green turf, browsed over by some sheep.

                        [Picture: The Calton Hill]

The scene suggests reflections on fame and on mans injustice to the
dead.  You see Dugald Stewart rather more handsomely commemorated than
Burns.  Immediately below, in the Canongate churchyard, lies Robert
Fergusson, Burnss master in his art, who died insane while yet a
stripling; and if Dugald Stewart has been somewhat too boisterously
acclaimed, the Edinburgh poet, on the other hand, is most unrighteously
forgotten.  The votaries of Burns, a crew too common in all ranks in
Scotland and more remarkable for number than discretion, eagerly suppress
all mention of the lad who handed to him the poetic impulse and, up to
the time when he grew famous, continued to influence him in his manner
and the choice of subjects.  Burns himself not only acknowledged his debt
in a fragment of autobiography, but erected a tomb over the grave in
Canongate churchyard.  This was worthy of an artist, but it was done in
vain; and although I think I have read nearly all the biographies of
Burns, I cannot remember one in which the modesty of nature was not
violated, or where Fergusson was not sacrificed to the credit of his
followers originality.  There is a kind of gaping admiration that would
fain roll Shakespeare and Bacon into one, to have a bigger thing to gape
at; and a class of men who cannot edit one author without disparaging all
others.  They are indeed mistaken if they think to please the great
originals; and whoever puts Fergusson right with fame, cannot do better
than dedicate his labours to the memory of Burns, who will be the best
delighted of the dead.

                       [Picture: Queen Marys Bath]

Of all places for a view, this Calton Hill is perhaps the best; since you
can see the Castle, which you lose from the Castle, and Arthurs Seat,
which you cannot see from Arthurs Seat.  It is the place to stroll on
one of those days of sunshine and east wind which are so common in our
more than temperate summer.  The breeze comes off the sea, with a little
of the freshness, and that touch of chill, peculiar to the quarter, which
is delightful to certain very ruddy organizations and greatly the reverse
to the majority of mankind.  It brings with it a faint, floating haze, a
cunning decolourizer, although not thick enough to obscure outlines near
at hand.  But the haze lies more thickly to windward at the far end of
Musselburgh Bay; and over the Links of Aberlady and Berwick Law and the
hump of the Bass Rock it assumes the aspect of a bank of thin sea fog.

[Picture: Arthurs Seat] Immediately underneath upon the south, you
command the yards of the High School, and the towers and courts of the
new Jaila large place, castellated to the extent of folly, standing by
itself on the edge of a steep cliff, and often joyfully hailed by
tourists as the Castle.  In the one, you may perhaps see female prisoners
taking exercise like a string of nuns; in the other, schoolboys running
at play and their shadows keeping step with them.  From the bottom of the
valley, a gigantic chimney rises almost to the level of the eye, a taller
and a shapelier edifice than Nelsons Monument.  Look a little farther,
and there is Holyrood Palace, with its Gothic frontal and ruined abbey,
and the red sentry pacing smartly too and fro before the door like a
mechanical figure in a panorama.  By way of an outpost, you can single
out the little peak-roofed lodge, over which Rizzios murderers made
their escape and where Queen Mary herself, according to gossip, bathed in
white wine to entertain her loveliness.  Behind and overhead, lie the
Queens Park, from Muschats Cairn to Dumbiedykes, St. Margarets Loch,
and the long wall of Salisbury Crags: and thence, by knoll and rocky
bulwark and precipitous slope, the eye rises to the top of Arthurs Seat,
a hill for magnitude, a mountain in virtue of its bold design.  This upon
your left.  Upon the right, the roofs and spires of the Old Town climb
one above another to where the citadel prints its broad bulk and jagged
crown of bastions on the western sky.Perhaps it is now one in the
afternoon; and at the same instant of time, a ball rises to the summit of
Nelsons flagstaff close at hand, and, far away, a puff of smoke followed
by a report bursts from the half-moon battery at the Castle.  This is the
time-gun by which people set their watches, as far as the sea coast or in
hill farms upon the Pentlands.To complete the view, the eye enfilades
Princes Street, black with traffic, and has a broad look over the valley
between the Old Town and the New: here, full of railway trains and
stepped over by the high North Bridge upon its many columns, and there,
green with trees and gardens.

                       [Picture: Back of Greenside]

On the north, the Calton Hill is neither so abrupt in itself nor has it
so exceptional an outlook; and yet even here it commands a striking
prospect.  A gully separates it from the New Town.  This is Greenside,
where witches were burned and tournaments held in former days.  Down that
almost precipitous bank, Bothwell launched his horse, and so first, as
they say, attracted the bright eyes of Mary.  It is now tesselated with
sheets and blankets out to dry, and the sound of people beating carpets
is rarely absent.  Beyond all this, the suburbs run out to Leith; Leith
camps on the seaside with her forest of masts; Leith roads are full of
ships at anchor; the sun picks out the white pharos upon Inchkeith
Island; the Firth extends on either hand from the Ferry to the May; the
towns of Fifeshire sit, each in its bank of blowing smoke, along the
opposite coast; and the hills enclose the view, except to the farthest
east, where the haze of the horizon rests upon the open sea.  There lies
the road to Norway: a dear road for Sir Patrick Spens and his Scots
Lords; and yonder smoke on the hither side of Largo Law is Aberdour, from
whence they sailed to seek a queen for Scotland.

    O lang, lang, may the ladies sit,
       Wi their fans into their hand,
    Or ere they see Sir Patrick Spens
       Come sailing to the land!

The sight of the sea, even from a city, will bring thoughts of storm and
sea disaster.  The sailors wives of Leith and the fisherwomen of
Cockenzie, not sitting languorously with fans, but crowding to the tail
of the harbour with a shawl about their ears, may still look vainly for
brave Scotsmen who will return no more, or boats that have gone on their
last fishing.  Since Sir Patrick sailed from Aberdour, what a multitude
have gone down in the North Sea!  Yonder is Auldhame, where the London
smack went ashore and wreckers cut the rings from ladies fingers; and a
few miles round Fife Ness is the fatal Inchcape, now a star of guidance;
and the lee shore to the east of the Inchcape, is that Forfarshire coast
where Mucklebackit sorrowed for his son.

These are the main features of the scene roughly sketched.  How they are
all tilted by the inclination of the ground, how each stands out in
delicate relief against the rest, what manifold detail, and play of sun
and shadow, animate and accentuate the picture, is a matter for a person
on the spot, and turning swiftly on his heels, to grasp and bind together
in one comprehensive look.  It is the character of such a prospect, to be
full of change and of things moving.  The multiplicity embarrasses the
eye; and the mind, among so much, suffers itself to grow absorbed with
single points.  You remark a tree in a hedgerow, or follow a cart along a
country road.  You turn to the city, and see children, dwarfed by
distance into pigmies, at play about suburban doorsteps; you have a
glimpse upon a thoroughfare where people are densely moving; you note
ridge after ridge of chimney-stacks running downhill one behind another,
and church spires rising bravely from the sea of roofs.  At one of the
innumerable windows, you watch a figure moving; on one of the multitude
of roofs, you watch clambering chimney-sweeps.  The wind takes a run and
scatters the smoke; bells are heard, far and near, faint and loud, to
tell the hour; or perhaps a bird goes dipping evenly over the housetops,
like a gull across the waves.  And here you are in the meantime, on this
pastoral hillside, among nibbling sheep and looked upon by monumental
buildings.

Return thither on some clear, dark, moonless night, with a ring of frost
in the air, and only a star or two set sparsedly in the vault of heaven;
and you will find a sight as stimulating as the hoariest summit of the
Alps.  The solitude seems perfect; the patient astronomer, flat on his
back under the Observatory dome and spying heavens secrets, is your only
neighbour; and yet from all round you there come up the dull hum of the
city, the tramp of countless people marching out of time, the rattle of
carriages and the continuous keen jingle of the tramway bells.  An hour
or so before, the gas was turned on; lamplighters scoured the city; in
every house, from kitchen to attic, the windows kindled and gleamed forth
into the dusk.  And so now, although the town lies blue and darkling on
her hills, innumerable spots of the bright element shine far and near
along the pavements and upon the high facades.  Moving lights of the
railway pass and repass below the stationary lights upon the bridge.
Lights burn in the jail.  Lights burn high up in the tall _lands_ and on
the Castle turrets, they burn low down in Greenside or along the Park.
They run out one beyond the other into the dark country.  They walk in a
procession down to Leith, and shine singly far along Leith Pier.  Thus,
the plan of the city and her suburbs is mapped out upon the ground of
blackness, as when a child pricks a drawing full of pinholes and exposes
it before a candle; not the darkest night of winter can conceal her high
station and fanciful design; every evening in the year she proceeds to
illuminate herself in honour of her own beauty; and as if to complete the
schemeor rather as if some prodigal Pharaoh were beginning to extend to
the adjacent sea and countryhalf-way over to Fife, there is an outpost
of light upon Inchkeith, and far to seaward, yet another on the May.

And while you are looking, across upon the Castle Hill, the drums and
bugles begin to recall the scattered garrison; the air thrills with the
sound; the bugles sing aloud; and the last rising flourish mounts and
melts into the darkness like a star: a martial swan-song, fitly rounding
in the labours of the day.




CHAPTER IX. WINTER AND NEW YEAR.


The Scotch dialect is singularly rich in terms of reproach against the
winter wind.  _Snell_, _blae_, _nirly_, and _scowthering_, are four of
these significant vocables; they are all words that carry a shiver with
them; and for my part, as I see them aligned before me on the page, I am
persuaded that a big wind comes tearing over the Firth from Burntisland
and the northern hills; I think I can hear it howl in the chimney, and as
I set my face northwards, feel its smarting kisses on my cheek.  Even in
the names of places there is often a desolate, inhospitable sound; and I
remember two from the near neighbourhood of Edinburgh, Cauldhame and
Blaw-weary, that would promise but starving comfort to their inhabitants.
The inclemency of heaven, which has thus endowed the language of Scotland
with words, has also largely modified the spirit of its poetry.  Both
poverty and a northern climate teach men the love of the hearth and the
sentiment of the family; and the latter, in its own right, inclines a
poet to the praise of strong waters.  In Scotland, all our singers have a
stave or two for blazing fires and stout potations:to get indoors out of
the wind and to swallow something hot to the stomach, are benefits so
easily appreciated where they dwelt!

And this is not only so in country districts where the shepherd must wade
in the snow all day after his flock, but in Edinburgh itself, and nowhere
more apparently stated than in the works of our Edinburgh poet,
Fergusson.  He was a delicate youth, I take it, and willingly slunk from
the robustious winter to an inn fire-side.  Love was absent from his
life, or only present, if you prefer, in such a form that even the least
serious of Burnss amourettes was ennobling by comparison; and so there
is nothing to temper the sentiment of indoor revelry which pervades the
poor boys verses.  Although it is characteristic of his native town, and
the manners of its youth to the present day, this spirit has perhaps done
something to restrict his popularity.  He recalls a supper-party
pleasantry with something akin to tenderness; and sounds the praises of
the act of drinking as if it were virtuous, or at least witty, in itself.
The kindly jar, the warm atmosphere of tavern parlours, and the revelry
of lawyers clerks, do not offer by themselves the materials of a rich
existence.  It was not choice, so much as an external fate, that kept
Fergusson in this round of sordid pleasures.  A Scot of poetic
temperament, and without religious exaltation, drops as if by nature into
the public-house.  The picture may not be pleasing; but what else is a
man to do in this dogs weather?

To none but those who have themselves suffered the thing in the body, can
the gloom and depression of our Edinburgh winter be brought home.  For
some constitutions there is something almost physically disgusting in the
bleak ugliness of easterly weather; the wind wearies, the sickly sky
depresses them; and they turn back from their walk to avoid the aspect of
the unrefulgent sun going down among perturbed and pallid mists.  The
days are so short that a man does much of his business, and certainly all
his pleasure, by the haggard glare of gas lamps.  The roads are as heavy
as a fallow.  People go by, so drenched and draggle-tailed that I have
often wondered how they found the heart to undress.  And meantime the
wind whistles through the town as if it were an open meadow; and if you
lie awake all night, you hear it shrieking and raving overhead with a
noise of shipwrecks and of falling houses.  In a word, life is so
unsightly that there are times when the heart turns sick in a mans
inside; and the look of a tavern, or the thought of the warm, fire-lit
study, is like the touch of land to one who has been long struggling with
the seas.

As the weather hardens towards frost, the world begins to improve for
Edinburgh people.  We enjoy superb, sub-arctic sunsets, with the profile
of the city stamped in indigo upon a sky of luminous green.  The wind may
still be cold, but there is a briskness in the air that stirs good blood.
People do not all look equally sour and downcast.  They fall into two
divisions: one, the knight of the blue face and hollow paunch, whom
Winter has gotten by the vitals; the other well lined with New-years
fare, conscious of the touch of cold on his periphery, but stepping
through it by the glow of his internal fires.  Such an one I remember,
triply cased in grease, whom no extremity of temperature could vanquish.
Well, would be his jovial salutation, heres a sneezer!  And the look
of these warm fellows is tonic, and upholds their drooping
fellow-townsmen.  There is yet another class who do not depend on
corporal advantages, but support the winter in virtue of a brave and
merry heart.  One shivering evening, cold enough for frost but with too
high a wind, and a little past sundown, when the lamps were beginning to
enlarge their circles in the growing dusk, a brace of barefoot lassies
were seen coming eastward in the teeth of the wind.  If the one was as
much as nine, the other was certainly not more than seven.  They were
miserably clad; and the pavement was so cold, you would have thought no
one could lay a naked foot on it unflinching.  Yet they came along
waltzing, if you please, while the elder sang a tune to give them music.
The person who saw this, and whose heart was full of bitterness at the
moment, pocketed a reproof which has been of use to him ever since, and
which he now hands on, with his good wishes, to the reader.

At length, Edinburgh, with her satellite hills and all the sloping
country, are sheeted up in white.  If it has happened in the dark hours,
nurses pluck their children out of bed and run with them to some
commanding window, whence they may see the change that has been worked
upon earths face.  A the hills are covered wi snaw, they sing, and
Winters noo come fairly!  And the children, marvelling at the silence
and the white landscape, find a spell appropriate to the season in the
words.  The reverberation of the snow increases the pale daylight, and
brings all objects nearer the eye.  The Pentlands are smooth and
glittering, with here and there the black ribbon of a dry-stone dyke, and
here and there, if there be wind, a cloud of blowing snow upon a
shoulder.  The Firth seems a leaden creek, that a man might almost jump
across, between well-powdered Lothian and well-powdered Fife.  And the
effect is not, as in other cities, a thing of half a day; the streets are
soon trodden black, but the country keeps its virgin white; and you have
only to lift your eyes and look over miles of country snow.  An
indescribable cheerfulness breathes about the city; and the well-fed
heart sits lightly and beats gaily in thebosom.  It is New-years
weather.

New-years Day, the great national festival, is a time of family
expansions and of deep carousal.  Sometimes, by a sore stoke of fate for
this Calvinistic people, the years anniversary fails upon a Sunday, when
the public-houses are inexorably closed, when singing and even whistling
is banished from our homes and highways, and the oldest toper feels
called upon to go to church.  Thus pulled about, as if between two
loyalties, the Scotch have to decide many nice cases of conscience, and
ride the marches narrowly between the weekly and the annual observance.
A party of convivial musicians, next door to a friend of mine, hung
suspended in this manner on the brink of their diversions.  From ten
oclock on Sunday night, my friend heard them tuning their instruments:
and as the hour of liberty drew near, each must have had his music open,
his bow in readiness across the fiddle, his foot already raised to mark
the time, and his nerves braced for execution; for hardly had the twelfth
stroke sounded from the earliest steeple, before they had launced forth
into a secular bravura.

Currant-loaf is now popular eating in all house-holds.  For weeks before
the great morning, confectioners display stacks of Scotch buna dense,
black substance, inimical to lifeand full moons of shortbread adorned
with mottoes of peel or sugar-plum, in honour of the season and the
family affections.  Frae Auld Reekie, A guid New Year to ye a, For
the Auld Folk at Hame, are among the most favoured of these devices.
Can you not see the carrier, after half-a-days journey on pinching
hill-roads, draw up before a cottage in Teviotdale, or perhaps in Manor
Glen among the rowans, and the old people receiving the parcel with moist
eyes and a prayer for Jock or Jean in the city?  For at this season, on
the threshold of another year of calamity and stubborn conflict, men feel
a need to draw closer the links that unite them; they reckon the number
of their friends, like allies before a war; and the prayers grow longer
in the morning as the absent are recommended by name into Gods keeping.

On the day itself, the shops are all shut as on a Sunday; only taverns,
toyshops, and other holiday magazines, keep open doors.  Every one looks
for his handsel.  The postman and the lamplighters have left, at every
house in their districts, a copy of vernacular verses, asking and
thanking in a breath; and it is characteristic of Scotland that these
verses may have sometimes a touch of reality in detail or sentiment and a
measure of strength in the handling.  All over the town, you may see
comforterd schoolboys hasting to squander their half-crowns.  There are
an infinity of visits to be paid; all the world is in the street, except
the daintier classes; the sacramental greeting is heard upon all sides;
Auld Lang Syne is much in peoples mouths; and whisky and shortbread are
staple articles of consumption.  From an early hour a stranger will be
impressed by the number of drunken men; and by afternoon drunkenness has
spread to the women.  With some classes of society, it is as much a
matter of duty to drink hard on New-years Day as to go to church on
Sunday.  Some have been saving their wages for perhaps a month to do the
season honour.  Many carry a whisky-bottle in their pocket, which they
will press with embarrassing effusion on a perfect stranger.  It is
inexpedient to risk ones body in a cab, or not, at least, until after a
prolonged study of the driver.  The streets, which are thronged from end
to end, become a place for delicate pilotage.  Singly or arm-in-arm, some
speechless, others noisy and quarrelsome, the votaries of the New Year go
meandering in and out and cannoning one against another; and now and
again, one falls and lies as he has fallen.  Before night, so many have
gone to bed or the police office, that the streets seem almost clearer.
And as _guisards_ and _first-footers_ are now not much seen except in
country places, when once the New Year has been rung in and proclaimed at
the Tron railings, the festivities begin to find their way indoors and
something like quiet returns upon the town.  But think, in these piled
_lands_, of all the senseless snorers, all the broken heads and empty
pockets!

Of old, Edinburgh University was the scene of heroic snowballing; and one
riot obtained the epic honours of military intervention.  But the great
generation, I am afraid, is at an end; and even during my own college
days, the spirit appreciably declined.  Skating and sliding, on the other
hand, are honoured more and more; and curling, being a creature of the
national genius, is little likely to be disregarded.  The patriotism that
leads a man to eat Scotch bun will scarce desert him at the curling-pond.
Edinburgh, with its long, steep pavements, is the proper home of sliders;
many a happy urchin can slide the whole way to school; and the profession
of errand-boy is transformed into a holiday amusement.  As for skating,
there is scarce any city so handsomely provided.  Duddingstone Loch lies
under the abrupt southern side of Arthurs Seat; in summer a shield of
blue, with swans sailing from the reeds; in winter, a field of ringing
ice.  The village church sits above it on a green promontory; and the
village smoke rises from among goodly trees.  At the church gates, is the
historical _joug_; a place of penance for the neck of detected sinners,
and the historical _louping-on stane_, from which Dutch-built lairds and
farmers climbed into the saddle.  Here Prince Charlie slept before the
battle of Prestonpans; and here Deacon Brodie, or one of his gang, stole
a plough coulter before the burglary in Chessels Court.  On the opposite
side of the loch, the ground rises to Craigmillar Castle, a place
friendly to Stuart Mariolaters.  It is worth a climb, even in summer, to
look down upon the loch from Arthurs Seat; but it is tenfold more so on
a day of skating.  The surface is thick with people moving easily and
swiftly and leaning over at a thousand graceful inclinations; the crowd
opens and closes, and keeps moving through itself like water; and the ice
rings to half a mile away, with the flying steel.  As night draws on, the
single figures melt into the dusk, until only an obscure stir, and coming
and going of black clusters, is visible upon the loch.  A little longer,
and the first torch is kindled and begins to flit rapidly across the ice
in a ring of yellow reflection, and this is followed by another and
another, until the whole field is full of skimming lights.




CHAPTER X. TO THE PENTLAND HILLS.


On three sides of Edinburgh, the country slopes downward from the city,
here to the sea, there to the fat farms of Haddington, there to the
mineral fields of Linlithgow.  On the south alone, it keeps rising until
it not only out-tops the Castle but looks down on Arthurs Seat.  The
character of the neighbourhood is pretty strongly marked by a scarcity of
hedges; by many stone walls of varying height; by a fair amount of
timber, some of it well grown, but apt to be of a bushy, northern profile
and poor in foliage; by here and there a little river, Esk or Leith or
Almond, busily journeying in the bottom of its glen; and from almost
every point, by a peep of the sea or the hills.  There is no lack of
variety, and yet most of the elements are common to all parts; and the
southern district is alone distinguished by considerable summits and a
wide view.

From Boroughmuirhead, where the Scottish army encamped before Flodden,
the road descends a long hill, at the bottom of which and just as it is
preparing to mount upon the other side, it passes a toll-bar and issues
at once into the open country.  Even as I write these words, they are
being antiquated in the progress of events, and the chisels are tinkling
on a new row of houses.  The builders have at length adventured beyond
the toll which held them in respect so long, and proceed to career in
these fresh pastures like a herd of colts turned loose.  As Lord
Beaconsfield proposed to hang an architect by way of stimulation, a man,
looking on these doomed meads, imagines a similar example to deter the
builders; for it seems as if it must come to an open fight at last to
preserve a corner of green country unbedevilled.  And here, appropriately
enough, there stood in old days a crow-haunted gibbet, with two bodies
hanged in chains.  I used to be shown, when a child, a flat stone in the
roadway to which the gibbet had been fixed.  People of a willing fancy
were persuaded, and sought to persuade others, that this stone was never
dry.  And no wonder, they would add, for the two men had only stolen
fourpence between them.

For about two miles the road climbs upwards, a long hot walk in summer
time.  You reach the summit at a place where four ways meet, beside the
toll of Fairmilehead.  The spot is breezy and agreeable both in name and
aspect.  The hills are close by across a valley: Kirk Yetton, with its
long, upright scars visible as far as Fife, and Allermuir the tallest on
this side with wood and tilled field running high upon their borders, and
haunches all moulded into innumerable glens and shelvings and variegated
with heather and fern.  The air comes briskly and sweetly off the hills,
pure from the elevation and rustically scented by the upland plants; and
even at the toll, you may hear the curlew calling on its mate.  At
certain seasons, when the gulls desert their surfy forelands, the birds
of sea and mountain hunt and scream together in the same field by
Fairmilehead.  The winged, wild things intermix their wheelings, the
sea-birds skim the tree-tops and fish among the furrows of the plough.
These little craft of air are at home in all the world, so long as they
cruise in their own element; and, like sailors, ask but food and water
from the shores they coast.

Below, over a stream, the road passes Bow Bridge, now a dairy-farm, but
once a distillery of whisky.  It chanced, some time in the past century,
that the distiller was on terms of good-fellowship with the visiting
officer of excise.  The latter was of an easy, friendly disposition, and
a master of convivial arts.  Now and again, he had to walk out of
Edinburgh to measure the distillers stock; and although it was agreeable
to find his business lead him in a friends direction, it was unfortunate
that the friend should be a loser by his visits.  Accordingly, when he
got about the level of Fairmilehead, the gauger would take his flute,
without which he never travelled, from his pocket, fit it together, and
set manfully to playing, as if for his own delectation and inspired by
the beauty of the scene.  His favourite air, it seems, was Over the
hills and far away.  At the first note, the distiller pricked his ears.
A flute at Fairmilehead? and playing Over the hills and far away?  This
must be his friendly enemy, the gauger.  Instantly horses were harnessed,
and sundry barrels of whisky were got upon a cart, driven at a gallop
round Hill End, and buried in the mossy glen behind Kirk Yetton.  In the
same breath, you may be sure, a fat fowl was put to the fire, and the
whitest napery prepared for the back parlour.  A little after, the
gauger, having had his fill of music for the moment, came strolling down
with the most innocent air imaginable, and found the good people at Bow
Bridge taken entirely unawares by his arrival, but none the less glad to
see him.  The distillers liquor and the gaugers flute would combine to
speed the moments of digestion; and when both were somewhat mellow, they
would wind up the evening with Over the hills and far away to an
accompaniment of knowing glances.  And at least, there is a smuggling
story, with original and half-idyllic features.

A little further, the road to the right passes an upright stone in a
field.  The country people call it General Kays monument.  According to
them, an officer of that name had perished there in battle at some
indistinct period before the beginning of history.  The date is
reassuring; for I think cautious writers are silent on the Generals
exploits.  But the stone is connected with one of those remarkable
tenures of land which linger on into the modern world from Feudalism.
Whenever the reigning sovereign passes by, a certain landed proprietor is
held bound to climb on to the top, trumpet in hand, and sound a flourish
according to the measure of his knowledge in that art.  Happily for a
respectable family, crowned heads have no great business in the Pentland
Hills.  But the story lends a character of comicality to the stone; and
the passer-by will sometimes chuckle to himself.

The district is dear to the superstitious.  Hard by, at the back-gate of
Comiston, a belated carter beheld a lady in white, with the most
beautiful, clear shoes upon her feet, who looked upon him in a very
ghastly manner and then vanished; and just in front is the Hunters
Tryst, once a roadside inn, and not so long ago haunted by the devil in
person.  Satan led the inhabitants a pitiful existence.  He shook the
four corners of the building with lamentable outcries, beat at the doors
and windows, overthrew crockery in the dead hours of the morning, and
danced unholy dances on the roof.  Every kind of spiritual disinfectant
was put in requisition; chosen ministers were summoned out of Edinburgh
and prayed by the hour; pious neighbours sat up all night making a noise
of psalmody; but Satan minded them no more than the wind about the
hill-tops; and it was only after years of persecution, that he left the
Hunters Tryst in peace to occupy himself with the remainder of mankind.
What with General Kay, and the white lady, and this singular visitation,
the neighbourhood offers great facilities to the makers of sun-myths; and
without exactly casting in ones lot with that disenchanting school of
writers, one cannot help hearing a good deal of the winter wind in the
last story.  That nicht, says Burns, in one of his happiest moments,

    _That nicht a child might understand_
    _The deil had business on his hand_.

And if people sit up all night in lone places on the hills, with Bibles
and tremulous psalms, they will be apt to hear some of the most fiendish
noises in the world; the wind will beat on doors and dance upon roofs for
them, and make the hills howl around their cottage with a clamour like
the judgment-day.

The road goes down through another valley, and then finally begins to
scale the main slope of the Pentlands.  A bouquet of old trees stands
round a white farmhouse; and from a neighbouring dell, you can see smoke
rising and leaves ruffling in the breeze.  Straight above, the hills
climb a thousand feet into the air.  The neighbourhood, about the time of
lambs, is clamorous with the bleating of flocks; and you will be
awakened, in the grey of early summer mornings, by the barking of a dog
or the voice of a shepherd shouting to the echoes.  This, with the hamlet
lying behind unseen, is Swanston.

The place in the dell is immediately connected with the city.  Long ago,
this sheltered field was purchased by the Edinburgh magistrates for the
sake of the springs that rise or gather there.  After they had built
their water-house and laid their pipes, it occurred to them that the
place was suitable for junketing.  Once entertained, with jovial
magistrates and public funds, the idea led speedily to accomplishment;
and Edinburgh could soon boast of a municipal Pleasure House.  The dell
was turned into a garden; and on the knoll that shelters it from the
plain and the sea winds, they built a cottage looking to the hills.  They
brought crockets and gargoyles from old St. Giless which they were then
restoring, and disposed them on the gables and over the door and about
the garden; and the quarry which had supplied them with building
material, they draped with clematis and carpeted with beds of roses.  So
much for the pleasure of the eye; for creature comfort, they made a
capacious cellar in the hillside and fitted it with bins of the hewn
stone.  In process of time, the trees grew higher and gave shade to the
cottage, and the evergreens sprang up and turned the dell into a thicket.
There, purple magistrates relaxed themselves from the pursuit of
municipal ambition; cocked hats paraded soberly about the garden and in
and out among the hollies; authoritative canes drew ciphering upon the
path; and at night, from high upon the hills, a shepherd saw lighted
windows through the foliage and heard the voice of city dignitaries
raised in song.

The farm is older.  It was first a grange of Whitekirk Abbey, tilled and
inhabited by rosy friars.  Thence, after the Reformation, it passed into
the hands of a true-blue Protestant family.  During the covenanting
troubles, when a night conventicle was held upon the Pentlands, the farm
doors stood hospitably open till the morning; the dresser was laden with
cheese and bannocks, milk and brandy; and the worshippers kept slipping
down from the hill between two exercises, as couples visit the
supper-room between two dances of a modern ball.  In the Forty-Five, some
foraging Highlanders from Prince Charlies army fell upon Swanston in the
dawn.  The great-grandfather of the late farmer was then a little child;
him they awakened by plucking the blankets from his bed, and he
remembered, when he was an old man, their truculent looks and uncouth
speech.  The churn stood full of cream in the dairy, and with this they
made their brose in high delight.  It was braw brose, said one of them.
At last they made off, laden like camels with their booty; and Swanston
Farm has lain out of the way of history from that time forward.  I do not
know what may be yet in store for it.  On dark days, when the mist runs
low upon the hill, the house has a gloomy air as if suitable for private
tragedy.  But in hot July, you can fancy nothing more perfect than the
garden, laid out in alleys and arbours and bright, old-fashioned
flower-plots, and ending in a miniature ravine, all trellis-work and moss
and tinkling waterfall, and housed from the sun under fathoms of broad
foliage.

The hamlet behind is one of the least considerable of hamlets, and
consists of a few cottages on a green beside a burn.  Some of them (a
strange thing in Scotland) are models of internal neatness; the beds
adorned with patchwork, the shelves arrayed with willow-pattern plates,
the floors and tables bright with scrubbing or pipe-clay, and the very
kettle polished like silver.  It is the sign of a contented old age in
country places, where there is little matter for gossip and no street
sights.  Housework becomes an art; and at evening, when the cottage
interior shines and twinkles in the glow of the fire, the housewife folds
her hands and contemplates her finished picture; the snow and the wind
may do their worst, she has made herself a pleasant corner in the world.
The city might be a thousand miles away, and yet it was from close by
that Mr. Bough painted the distant view of Edinburgh which has been
engraved for this collection; and you have only to look at the etching,
{118} to see how near it is at hand.  But hills and hill people are not
easily sophisticated; and if you walk out here on a summer Sunday, it is
as like as not the shepherd may set his dogs upon you.  But keep an
unmoved countenance; they look formidable at the charge, but their hearts
are in the right place, and they will only bark and sprawl about you on
the grass, unmindful of their masters excitations.

Kirk Yetton forms the north-eastern angle of the range; thence, the
Pentlands trend off to south and west.  From the summit you look over a
great expanse of champaign sloping to the sea, and behold a large variety
of distant hills.  There are the hills of Fife, the hills of Peebles, the
Lammermoors and the Ochils, more or less mountainous in outline, more or
less blue with distance.  Of the Pentlands themselves, you see a field of
wild heathery peaks with a pond gleaming in the midst; and to that side
the view is as desolate as if you were looking into Galloway or
Applecross.  To turn to the other is like a piece of travel.  Far out in
the lowlands Edinburgh shows herself, making a great smoke on clear days
and spreading her suburbs about her for miles; the Castle rises darkly in
the midst, and close by, Arthurs Seat makes a bold figure in the
landscape.  All around, cultivated fields, and woods, and smoking
villages, and white country roads, diversify the uneven surface of the
land.  Trains crawl slowly abroad upon the railway lines; little ships
are tacking in the Firth; the shadow of a mountainous cloud, as large as
a parish, travels before the wind; the wind itself ruffles the wood and
standing corn, and sends pulses of varying colour across the landscape.
So you sit, like Jupiter upon Olympus, and look down from afar upon mens
life.  The city is as silent as a city of the dead: from all its humming
thoroughfares, not a voice, not a footfall, reaches you upon the hill.
The sea-surf, the cries of ploughmen, the streams and the mill-wheels,
the birds and the wind, keep up an animated concert through the plain;
from farm to farm, dogs and crowing cocks contend together in defiance;
and yet from this Olympian station, except for the whispering rumour of a
train, the world has fallen into a dead silence, and the business of town
and country grown voiceless in your ears.  A crying hill-bird, the bleat
of a sheep, a wind singing in the dry grass, seem not so much to
interrupt, as to accompany, the stillness; but to the spiritual ear, the
whole scene makes a music at once human and rural, and discourses
pleasant reflections on the destiny of man.  The spiry habitable city,
ships, the divided fields, and browsing herds, and the straight highways,
tell visibly of mans active and comfortable ways; and you may be never
so laggard and never so unimpressionable, but there is something in the
view that spirits up your blood and puts you in the vein for cheerful
labour.

Immediately below is Fairmilehead, a spot of roof and a smoking chimney,
where two roads, no thicker than packthread, intersect beside a hanging
wood.  If you are fanciful, you will be reminded of the gauger in the
story.  And the thought of this old exciseman, who once lipped and
fingered on his pipe and uttered clear notes from it in the mountain air,
and the words of the song he affected, carry your mind Over the hills
and far away to distant countries; and you have a vision of Edinburgh
not, as you see her, in the midst of a little neighbourhood, but as a
boss upon the round world with all Europe and the deep sea for her
surroundings.  For every place is a centre to the earth, whence highways
radiate or ships set sail for foreign ports; the limit of a parish is not
more imaginary than the frontier of an empire; and as a man sitting at
home in his cabinet and swiftly writing books, so a city sends abroad an
influence and a portrait of herself.  There is no Edinburgh emigrant, far
or near, from China to Peru, but he or she carries some lively pictures
of the mind, some sunset behind the Castle cliffs, some snow scene, some
maze of city lamps, indelible in the memory and delightful to study in
the intervals of toil.  For any such, if this book fall in their way,
here are a few more home pictures.  It would be pleasant, if they should
recognise a house where they had dwelt, or a walk that they had taken.





I

LIFE OF STEVENSON

Robert Louis Stevenson[1] was born at Edinburgh on the 13 November
1850. His father, Thomas, and his grandfather, Robert, were both
distinguished light-house engineers; and the maternal grandfather,
Balfour, was a Professor of Moral Philosophy, who lived to be ninety
years old. There was, therefore, a combination of _Lux et Veritas_ in
the blood of young Louis Stevenson, which in _Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde_
took the form of a luminous portrayal of a great moral idea.

In the language of Pope, Stevenson's life was a long disease. Even as
a child, his weak lungs caused great anxiety to all the family except
himself; but although Death loves a shining mark, it took over forty
years of continuous practice for the grim archer to send the black
arrow home. It is perhaps fortunate for English literature that his
health was no better; for the boy craved an active life, and would
doubtless have become an engineer. He made a brave attempt to pursue
this calling, but it was soon evident that his constitution made it
impossible. After desultory schooling, and an immense amount of
general reading, he entered the University of Edinburgh, and then
tried the study of law. Although the thought of this profession became
more and more repugnant, and finally intolerable, he passed his final
examinations satisfactorily. This was in 1875.

He had already begun a series of excursions to the south of France and
other places, in search of a climate more favorable to his incipient
malady; and every return to Edinburgh proved more and more
conclusively that he could not live in Scotch mists. He had made the
acquaintance of a number of literary men, and he was consumed with a
burning ambition to become a writer. Like Ibsen's _Master-Builder_,
there was a troll in his blood, which drew him away to the continent
on inland voyages with a canoe and lonely tramps with a donkey; these
gave him material for books full of brilliant pictures, shrewd
observations, and irrepressible humour. He contributed various
articles to magazines, which were immediately recognised by critics
like Leslie Stephen as bearing the unmistakable mark of literary
genius; but they attracted almost no attention from the general
reading public, and their author had only the consciousness of good
work for his reward. In 1880 he was married.

Stevenson's first successful work was _Treasure Island_, which was
published in book form in 1883, and has already become a classic. This
did not, however, bring him either a good income or general fame. His
great reputation dates from the publication of the _Strange Case of
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,_ which appeared in 1886. That work had an
instant and unqualified success, especially in America, and made its
author's name known to the whole English-speaking world. _Kidnapped_
was published the same year, and another masterpiece, _The Master of
Ballantrae_, in 1889.

After various experiments with different climates, including that of
Switzerland, Stevenson sailed for America in August 1887. The winter
of 1887-88 he spent at Saranac Lake, under the care of Dr. Trudeau,
who became one of his best friends. In 1890 he settled at Samoa in the
Pacific. Here he entered upon a career of intense literary activity,
and yet found time to take an active part in the politics of the
island, and to give valuable assistance in internal improvements.

The end came suddenly, exactly as he would have wished it, and
precisely as he had unconsciously predicted in the last radiant,
triumphant sentences of his great essay, _Aes Triplex_. He had been at
work on a novel, _St. Ives_, one of his poorer efforts, and whose
composition grew steadily more and more distasteful, until he found
that he was actually writing against the grain. He threw this aside
impatiently, and with extraordinary energy and enthusiasm began a new
story, _Weir of Hermiston_, which would undoubtedly have been his
masterpiece, had he lived to complete it. In luminosity of style, in
nobleness of conception, in the almost infallible choice of words,
this astonishing fragment easily takes first place in Stevenson's
productions. At the end of a day spent in almost feverish dictation,
the third of December 1894, he suddenly fainted, and died without
regaining consciousness. "Death had not been suffered to take so much
as an illusion from his heart. In the hot-fit of life, a-tiptoe on the
highest point of being, he passed at a bound on to the other side. The
noise of the mallet and chisel was scarcely quenched, the trumpets
were hardly done blowing, when, trailing with him clouds of glory,
this happy-starred, full-blooded spirit shot into the spiritual land."

He was buried at the summit of a mountain, the body being carried on
the shoulders of faithful Samoans, who might have sung Browning's
noble hymn,

  "Let us begin and carry up this corpse,
    Singing together!
  Leave we the common crofts, the vulgar thorpes
    Each in its tether
  Sleeping safe on the bosom of the plain...
  That's the appropriate country; there, man's thought,
    Rarer, intenser,
  Self-gathered for an outbreak, as it ought,
    Chafes in the censer.
  Leave we the unlettered plain its herd and crop;
    Seek we sepulture
  On a tall mountain...
  Thither our path lies; wind we up the heights:
    Wait ye the warning!
  Our low life was the level's and the night's;
    He's for the morning.
  Step to a tune, square chests, erect each head,
    'Ware the beholders!
  This is our master, famous, calm and dead,
    Borne on our shoulders...

  Here--here's his place, where meteors shoot clouds form,
              Lightnings are loosened,
  Stars come and go! Let joy break with the storm,
              Peace let the dew send!
  Lofty designs must close in like effects
              Loftily lying,
  Leave him--still loftier than the world suspects,
              Living and dying."


II

PERSONALITY AND CHARACTER

Stevenson had a motley personality, which is sufficiently evident in
his portraits. There was in him the Puritan, the man of the world, and
the vagabond. There was something too of the obsolete soldier of
fortune, with the cocked and feathered hat, worn audaciously on one
side. There was also a touch of the elfin, the uncanny--the mysterious
charm that belongs to the borderland between the real and the unreal
world--the element so conspicuous and so indefinable in the art of
Hawthorne. Writers so different as Defoe, Cooper, Poe, and Sir Thomas
Browne, are seen with varying degrees of emphasis in his literary
temperament. He was whimsical as an imaginative child; and everyone
has noticed that he never grew old. His buoyant optimism was based on
a chronic experience of physical pain, for pessimists like
Schopenhauer are usually men in comfortable circumstances, and of
excellent bodily health. His courage and cheerfulness under depressing
circumstances are so splendid to contemplate that some critics believe
that in time his _Letters_ may be regarded as his greatest literary
work, for they are priceless in their unconscious revelation of a
beautiful soul.

Great as Stevenson was as a writer, he was still greater as a Man. So
many admirable books have been written by men whose character will not
bear examination, that it is refreshing to find one Master-Artist
whose daily life was so full of the fruits of the spirit. As his
romances have brought pleasure to thousands of readers, so the
spectacle of his cheerful march through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death is a constant source of comfort and inspiration. One feels
ashamed of cowardice and petty irritation after witnessing the steady
courage of this man. His philosophy of life is totally different from
that of Stoicism; for the Stoic says, "Grin and bear it," and usually
succeeds in doing neither. Stevenson seems to say, "Laugh and forget
it," and he showed us how to do both.

Stevenson had the rather unusual combination of the Artist and the
Moralist, both elements being marked in his writings to a very high
degree. The famous and oft-quoted sonnet by his friend, the late Mr.
Henley, gives a vivid picture:

  "Thin-legged, thin-chested, slight unspeakably,
  Neat-footed and weak-fingered: in his face--
  Lean, large-honed, curved of beak, and touched with race,
  Bold-lipped, rich-tinted, mutable as the sea,
  The brown eyes radiant with vivacity--
  There shown a brilliant and romantic grace,
  A spirit intense and rare, with trace on trace
  Of passion, impudence, and energy.
  Valiant in velvet, light in ragged luck,
  Most vain, most generous, sternly critical,
  Buffoon and poet, lover and sensualist;
  A deal of Ariel, just a streak of Puck,
  Much Antony, of Hamlet most of all,
  And something of the Shorter Catechist."

He was not primarily a moral teacher, like Socrates or Thomas Carlyle;
nor did he feel within him the voice of a prophetic mission. The
virtue of his writings consists in their wholesome ethical quality, in
their solid health. Fresh air is often better for the soul than the
swinging of the priest's censer. At a time when the school of Zola was
at its climax, Stevenson opened the windows and let in the pleasant
breeze. For the morbid and unhealthy period of adolescence, his books
are more healthful than many serious moral works. He purges the mind
of uncleanness, just as he purged contemporary fiction.

As Stevenson's correspondence with his friends like Sidney Colvin and
William Archer reveals the social side of his nature, so his
correspondence with the Unseen Power in which he believed shows that
his character was essentially religious. A man's letters are often a
truer picture of his mind than a photograph; and when these epistles
are directed not to men and women, but to the Supreme Intelligence,
they form a real revelation of their writer's heart. Nothing betrays
the personality of a man more clearly than his prayers, and the
following petition that Stevenson composed for the use of his
household at Vailima, bears the stamp of its author.

  "At Morning. The day returns and brings us the petty round of
  irritating concerns and duties. Help us to play the man, help us to
  perform them with laughter and kind faces, let cheerfulness abound
  with industry. Give us to go blithely on our business all this day,
  bring us to our resting beds weary and content and undishonoured,
  and grant us in the end the gift of sleep."


III

STEVENSON'S VERSATILITY

Stevenson was a poet, a dramatist, an essayist, and a novelist,
besides writing many political, geographical, and biographical
sketches. As a poet, his fame is steadily waning. The tendency at
first was to rank him too high, owing to the undeniable charm of many
of the poems in the _Child's Garden of Verses_. The child's view of
the world, as set forth in these songs, is often originally and
gracefully expressed; but there is little in Stevenson's poetry that
is of permanent value, and it is probable that most of it will be
forgotten. This fact is in a way a tribute to his genius; for his
greatness as a prose writer has simply eclipsed his reputation as a
poet.

His plays were failures. They illustrate the familiar truth that a man
may have positive genius as a dramatic writer, and yet fail as a
dramatist. There are laws that govern the stage which must be obeyed;
play-writing is a great art in itself, entirely distinct from literary
composition. Even Browning, the most intensely dramatic poet of the
nineteenth century, was not nearly so successful in his dramas as in
his dramatic lyrics and romances.

His essays attracted at first very little attention; they were too
fine and too subtle to awaken popular enthusiasm. It was the success
of his novels that drew readers back to the essays, just as it was the
vogue of Sudermann's plays that made his earlier novels popular. One
has only to read such essays, however, as those printed in this volume
to realise not only their spirit and charm, but to feel instinctively
that one is reading English Literature. They are exquisite works of
art, written in an almost impeccable style. By many judicious readers,
they are placed above his works of fiction. They certainly constitute
the most original portion of his entire literary output. It is
astonishing that this young Scotchman should have been able to make so
many actually new observations on a game so old as Life. There is a
shrewd insight into the motives of human conduct that makes some of
these graceful sketches belong to the literature of philosophy, using
the word philosophy in its deepest and broadest sense. The essays are
filled with whimsical paradoxes, keen and witty as those of Bernard
Shaw, without having any of the latter's cynicism, iconoclasm, and
sinister attitude toward morality. For the real foundation of even the
lightest of Stevenson's works is invariably ethical.

His fame as a writer of prose romances grows brighter every year. His
supreme achievement was to show that a book might be crammed with the
most wildly exciting incidents, and yet reveal profound and acute
analysis of character, and be written with consummate art. His tales
have all the fertility of invention and breathless suspense of Scott
and Cooper, while in literary style they immeasurably surpass the
finest work of these two great masters.

His best complete story, is, I think, _Treasure Island_. There is a
peculiar brightness about this book which even the most notable of the
later works failed to equal. Nor was it a trifling feat to make a
blind man and a one-legged man so formidable that even the reader is
afraid of them. Those who complain that this is merely a pirate story
forget that in art the subject is of comparatively little importance,
whereas the treatment is everything. To say, as some do, that there is
no difference between _Treasure Island_ and a cheap tale of blood and
thunder, is equivalent to saying that there is no difference between
the Sistine Madonna and a chromo Virgin.


IV

THE PERSONAL ESSAY

The Personal Essay is a peculiar form of literature, entirely
different from critical essays like those of Matthew Arnold and from
purely reflective essays, like those of Bacon. It is a species of
writing somewhat akin to autobiography or firelight conversation;
where the writer takes the reader entirely into his confidence, and
chats pleasantly with him on topics that may be as widely apart as the
immortality of the soul and the proper colour of a necktie. The first
and supreme master of this manner of writing was Montaigne, who
belongs in the front rank of the world's greatest writers of prose.
Montaigne talks endlessly on the most trivial subjects without ever
becoming trivial. To those who really love reading and have some
sympathy with humanity, Montaigne's _Essays_ are a "perpetual refuge
and delight," and it is interesting to reflect how far in literary
fame this man, who talked about his meals, his horse, and his cat,
outshines thousands of scholarly and talented writers, who discussed
only the most serious themes in politics and religion. The great
English prose writers in the field of the personal essay during the
seventeenth century were Sir Thomas Browne, Thomas Fuller, and Abraham
Cowley, though Walton's _Compleat Angler_ is a kindred work. Browne's
_Religio Medici_, and his delightful _Garden of Cyrus_, old Tom
Fuller's quaint _Good Thoughts in Bad Times_ and Cowley's charming
_Essays_ are admirable examples of this school of composition.
Burton's wonderful _Anatomy of Melancholy_ is a colossal personal
essay. Some of the papers of Steele and Addison in the _Tatler_,
_Guardian,_ and the _Spectator_ are of course notable; but it was not
until the appearance of Charles Lamb that the personal essay reached
its climax in English literature. Over the pages of the _Essays of
Elia_ hovers an immortal charm--the charm of a nature inexhaustible in
its humour and kindly sympathy for humanity. Thackeray was another
great master of the literary easy-chair, and is to some readers more
attractive in this attitude than as a novelist. In America we have had
a few writers who have reached eminence in this form, beginning with
Washington Irving, and including Donald G. Mitchell, whose _Reveries
of a Bachelor_ has been read by thousands of people for over fifty
years.

As a personal essayist Stevenson seems already to belong to the first
rank. He is both eclectic and individual. He brought to his pen the
reminiscences of varied reading, and a wholly original touch of
fantasy. He was literally steeped in the gorgeous Gothic diction of
the seventeenth century, but he realised that such a prose style as
illumines the pages of William Drummond's _Cypress Grove_ and Browne's
_Urn Burial_ was a lost art. He attempted to imitate such writing only
in his youthful exercises, for his own genius was forced to express
itself in an original way. All of his personal essays have that air of
distinction which attracts and holds one's attention as powerfully in
a book as it does in social intercourse. Everything that he has to say
seems immediately worth saying, and worth hearing, for he was one of
those rare men who had an interesting mind. There are some literary
artists who have style and nothing else, just as there are some great
singers who have nothing but a voice. The true test of a book, like
that of an individual, is whether or not it improves upon
acquaintance. Stevenson's essays reflect a personality that becomes
brighter as we draw nearer. This fact makes his essays not merely
entertaining reading, but worthy of serious and prolonged study.

[Note 1: His name was originally Robert Lewis Balfour Stevenson. He
later dropped the "Balfour" and changed the spelling of "Lewis" to
"Louis," but the name was always pronounced "Lewis."]


BIBLIOGRAPHY

The following information is taken from Col. Prideaux's admirable
_Bibliography_ of Stevenson, London, 1903. I have given the titles and
dates of only the more important publications in book form; and of the
critical works on Stevenson, I have included only a few of those that
seem especially useful to the student and general reader. The detailed
facts about the separate publications of each essay included in the
present volume are fully given in my notes.


WORKS

1878. An Inland Voyage.
1879. Travels with a Donkey.
1881. Virginibus Puerisque.
1882. Familiar Studies of Men and Books.
1882. New Arabian Nights.
1883. Treasure Island.
1885. Prince Otto.
1885. A Child's Garden of Verses.
1885. More New Arabian Nights. The Dynamiter.
1886. Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
1886. Kidnapped.
1887. The Merry Men.
1887. Memories and Portraits.
1888. The Black Arrow.
1889. The Master of Ballantrae. (A few copies privately printed in
      1888.)
1889. The Wrong Box.
1890. Father Damien.
1892. Across the Plains.
1892. The Wrecker.
1893. Island Nights' Entertainments.
1893. Catriona.
1894. The Ebb Tide.
1895. Vailima Letters.
1896. Weir of Hermiston.
1898. St. Ives.
1899. Letters, Two Volumes.


NOTE. The _Edinburgh Edition_ of the _works_, in twenty-eight volumes,
is often referred to by bibliographers; it can now be obtained only at
second-hand bookshops, or at auction sales. The best complete edition
on the market is the _Thistle Edition_, in twenty-six volumes,
including the _Life_ and the _Letters_, published by Charles
Scribner's Sons, New York.


WORKS ON STEVENSON

_Life of Robert Louis Stevenson_, by Graham Balfour. 1901. Two
Volumes. _This is the standard Life, and indispensable._

_Robert Louis Stevenson_, by Henry James, in _Partial Portraits,_
1894. _Admirable criticism_.

_Robert Louis Stevenson_, by Walter Raleigh. 1895. _An excellent
appreciation of his character and work._

_Robert Louis Stevenson: Personal Memories_, by Edmund Gosse, in
_Critical Kit-Kats,_ 1896. _Entertaining gossip._

_Stevenson's Shrine, The Record of a Pilgrimage_, by Laura Stubbs.
1903. _Very interesting full-page illustrations._

_(For further critical books and articles, which are numerous, consult
Prideaux.)_


ESSAYS OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON


I

ON THE ENJOYMENT OF UNPLEASANT PLACES

It is a difficult matter[1] to make the most of any given place, and
we have much in our own power. Things looked at patiently from one
side after another generally end by showing a side that is beautiful.
A few months ago some words were said in the _Portfolio_ as to an
"austere regimen in scenery"; and such a discipline was then
recommended as "healthful and strengthening to the taste." That is the
text, so to speak, of the present essay. This discipline in
scenery,[2] it must be understood, is something more than a mere walk
before breakfast to whet the appetite. For when we are put down in
some unsightly neighborhood, and especially if we have come to be more
or less dependent on what we see, we must set ourselves to hunt out
beautiful things with all the ardour and patience of a botanist after
a rare plant. Day by day we perfect ourselves in the art of seeing
nature more favourably. We learn to live with her, as people learn to
live with fretful or violent spouses: to dwell lovingly on what is
good, and shut our eyes against all that is bleak or inharmonious. We
learn, also, to come to each place in the right spirit. The traveller,
as Brantme quaintly tells us, "_fait des discours en soi pour se
soutenir en chemin_";[3] and into these discourses he weaves something
out of all that he sees and suffers by the way; they take their tone
greatly from the varying character of the scene; a sharp ascent brings
different thoughts from a level road; and the man's fancies grow
lighter as he comes out of the wood into a clearing. Nor does the
scenery any more affect the thoughts than the thoughts affect the
scenery. We see places through our humours as though differently
colored glasses. We are ourselves a term in the equation, a note of
the chord, and make discord or harmony almost at will. There is no
fear for the result, if we can but surrender ourselves sufficiently to
the country that surrounds and follows us, so that we are ever
thinking suitable thoughts or telling ourselves some suitable sort of
story as we go. We become thus, in some sense, a centre of beauty; we
are provocative of beauty,[4] much as a gentle and sincere character
is provocative of sincerity and gentleness in others. And even where
there is no harmony to be elicited by the quickest and most obedient
of spirits, we may still embellish a place with some attraction of
romance. We may learn to go far afield for associations, and handle
them lightly when we have found them. Sometimes an old print comes to
our aid; I have seen many a spot lit up at once with picturesque
imaginations, by a reminiscence of Callot, or Sadeler, or Paul
Brill.[5] Dick Turpin[6] has been my lay figure for many an English
lane. And I suppose the Trossachs would hardly be the Trossachs[7] for
most tourists if a man of admirable romantic instinct had not peopled
it for them with harmonious figures, and brought them thither their
minds rightly prepared for the impression. There is half the battle in
this preparation. For instance: I have rarely been able to visit, in
the proper spirit, the wild and inhospitable places of our own
Highlands. I am happier where it is tame and fertile, and not readily
pleased without trees.[8] I understand that there are some phases of
mental trouble that harmonise well with such surroundings, and that
some persons, by the dispensing power of the imagination, can go back
several centuries in spirit, and put themselves into sympathy with the
hunted, houseless, unsociable way of life that was in its place upon
these savage hills. Now, when I am sad, I like nature to charm me out
of my sadness, like David before Saul;[9] and the thought of these
past ages strikes nothing in me but an unpleasant pity; so that I can
never hit on the right humour for this sort of landscape, and lose
much pleasure in consequence. Still, even here, if I were only let
alone, and time enough were given, I should have all manner of
pleasure, and take many clear and beautiful images away with me when I
left. When we cannot think ourselves into sympathy with the great
features of a country, we learn to ignore them, and put our head among
the grass for flowers, or pore, for long times together, over the
changeful current of a stream. We come down to the sermon in
stones,[10] when we are shut out from any poem in the spread
landscape. We begin to peep and botanise, we take an interest in birds
and insects, we find many things beautiful in miniature. The reader
will recollect the little summer scene in _Wuthering Heights_[11]--the
one warm scene, perhaps, in all that powerful, miserable novel--and
the great feature that is made therein by grasses and flowers and a
little sunshine: this is in the spirit of which I now speak. And,
lastly, we can go indoors; interiors are sometimes as beautiful, often
more picturesque, than the shows of the open air, and they have that
quality of shelter of which I shall presently have more to say.

With all this in mind, I have often been tempted to put forth the
paradox that any place is good enough to live a life in, while it is
only in a few, and those highly favoured, that we can pass a few hours
agreeably. For, if we only stay long enough, we become at home in the
neighbourhood. Reminiscences spring up, like flowers, about
uninteresting corners. We forget to some degree the superior
loveliness of other places, and fall into a tolerant and sympathetic
spirit which is its own reward and justification. Looking back the
other day on some recollections of my own, I was astonished to find
how much I owed to such a residence; six weeks in one unpleasant
country-side had done more, it seemed, to quicken and educate my
sensibilities than many years in places that jumped more nearly with
my inclination.

The country to which I refer was a level and treeless plateau, over
which the winds cut like a whip. For miles on miles it was the same. A
river, indeed, fell into the sea near the town where I resided; but
the valley of the river was shallow and bald, for as far up as ever I
had the heart to follow it. There were roads, certainly, but roads
that had no beauty or interest; for, as there was no timber, and but
little irregularity of surface, you saw your whole walk exposed to you
from the beginning: there was nothing left to fancy, nothing to
expect, nothing to see by the wayside, save here and there an
unhomely-looking homestead, and here and there a solitary, spectacled
stone-breaker;[12] and you were only accompanied, as you went doggedly
forward by the gaunt telegraph-posts and the hum of the resonant wires
in the keen sea-wind. To one who has learned to know their song in
warm pleasant places by the Mediterranean, it seemed to taunt the
country, and make it still bleaker by suggested contrast. Even the
waste places by the side of the road were not, as Hawthorne liked to
put it, "taken back to Nature" by any decent covering of vegetation.
Wherever the land had the chance, it seemed to lie fallow. There is a
certain tawny nudity of the South, bare sunburnt plains, coloured like
a lion, and hills clothed only in the blue transparent air; but this
was of another description--this was the nakedness of the North; the
earth seemed to know that it was naked, and was ashamed and cold.[13]

It seemed to be always blowing on that coast. Indeed, this had passed
into the speech of the inhabitants, and they saluted each other when
they met with "Breezy, breezy," instead of the customary "Fine day" of
farther south. These continual winds were not like the harvest breeze,
that just keeps an equable pressure against your face as you walk, and
serves to set all the trees talking over your head, or bring round you
the smell of the wet surface of the country after a shower. They were
of the bitter, hard, persistent sort, that interferes with sight and
respiration, and makes the eyes sore. Even such winds as these have
their own merit in proper time and place. It is pleasant to see them
brandish great masses of shadow. And what a power they have over the
colour of the world! How they ruffle the solid woodlands in their
passage, and make them shudder and whiten like a single willow! There
is nothing more vertiginous than a wind like this among the woods,
with all its sights and noises; and the effect gets between some
painters and their sober eyesight, so that, even when the rest of
their picture is calm, the foliage is coloured like foliage in a
gale.[14] There was nothing, however, of this sort to be noticed in a
country where there were no trees and hardly any shadows, save the
passive shadows and clouds or those of rigid houses and walls. But the
wind was nevertheless an occasion of pleasure; for nowhere could you
taste more fully the pleasure of a sudden lull, or a place of
opportune shelter. The reader knows what I mean; he must remember how,
when he has sat himself down behind a dyke on a hill-side, he
delighted to hear the wind hiss vainly through the crannies at his
back; how his body tingled all over with warmth, and it began to dawn
upon him, with a sort of slow surprise, that the country was
beautiful, the heather purple, and the faraway hills all marbled with
sun and shadow. Wordsworth, in a beautiful passage[15] of the
"Prelude," has used this as a figure for the feeling struck in us by
the quiet by-streets of London after the uproar of the great
thoroughfares; and the comparison may be turned the other way with as
good effect:

  "Meanwhile the roar continues, till at length,
  Escaped as from an enemy we turn,
  Abruptly into some sequestered nook,
  Still as a shelter'd place when winds blow loud!"

I remember meeting a man once, in a train, who told me of what must
have been quite the most perfect instance of this pleasure of escape.
He had gone up, one sunny, windy morning, to the top of a great
cathedral somewhere abroad; I think it was Cologne Cathedral, the
great unfinished marvel by the Rhine;[16] and after a long while in
dark stairways, he issued at last into the sunshine, on a platform
high above the town. At that elevation it was quite still and warm;
the gale was only in the lower strata of the air, and he had forgotten
it in the quiet interior of the church and during his long ascent; and
so you may judge of his surprise when, resting his arms on the sunlit
balustrade and looking over into the _Place_ far below him, he saw the
good people holding on their hats and leaning hard against the wind as
they walked. There is something, to my fancy, quite perfect in this
little experience of my fellow-traveller's. The ways of men seem
always very trivial to us when we find ourselves alone on a
church-top, with the blue sky and a few tall pinnacles, and see far
below us the steep roofs and foreshortened buttresses, and the silent
activity of the city streets; but how much more must they not have
seemed so to him as he stood, not only above other men's business, but
above other men's climate, in a golden zone like Apollo's![17]

This was the sort of pleasure I found in the country of which I write.
The pleasure was to be out of the wind, and to keep it in memory all
the time, and hug oneself upon the shelter. And it was only by the sea
that any such sheltered places were to be found. Between the black
worm-eaten headlands there are little bights and havens, well screened
from the wind and the commotion of the external sea, where the sand
and weeds look up into the gazer's face from a depth of tranquil
water, and the sea-birds, screaming and flickering from the ruined
crags, alone disturb the silence and the sunshine. One such place has
impressed itself on my memory beyond all others. On a rock by the
water's edge, old fighting men of the Norse breed had planted a double
castle; the two stood wall to wall like semi-detached villas; and yet
feud had run so high between their owners, that one, from out of a
window, shot the other as he stood in his own doorway. There is
something in the juxtaposition of these two enemies full of tragic
irony. It is grim to think of bearded men and bitter women taking
hateful counsel together about the two hall-fires at night,[18] when
the sea boomed against the foundations and the wild winter wind was
loose over the battlements. And in the study we may reconstruct for
ourselves some pale figure of what life then was. Not so when we are
there; when we are there such thoughts come to us only to intensify a
contrary impression, and association is turned against itself.[19] I
remember walking thither three afternoons in succession, my eyes weary
with being set against the wind, and how, dropping suddenly over the
edge of the down, I found myself in a new world of warmth and shelter.
The wind, from which I had escaped, "as from an enemy,"[20] was
seemingly quite local. It carried no clouds with it, and came from
such a quarter that it did not trouble the sea within view. The two
castles, black and ruinous as the rocks about them, were still
distinguishable from these by something more insecure and fantastic in
the outline, something that the last storm had left imminent and the
next would demolish entirely. It would be difficult to render in words
the sense of peace that took possession of me on these three
afternoons. It was helped out, as I have said, by the contrast. The
shore was battered and bemauled by previous tempests; I had the memory
at heart of the insane strife of the pigmies who had erected these two
castles and lived in them in mutual distrust and enmity, and knew I
had only to put my head out of this little cup of shelter to find the
hard wind blowing in my eyes; and yet there were the two great tracts
of motionless blue air and peaceful sea looking on, unconcerned and
apart, at the turmoil of the present moment and the memorials of the
precarious past. There is ever something transitory and fretful in the
impression of a high wind under a cloudless sky; it seems to have no
root in the constitution of things; it must speedily begin to faint
and wither away like a cut flower. And on those days the thought of
the wind and the thought of human life came very near together in my
mind. Our noisy years did indeed seem moments[21] in the being of the
eternal silence: and the wind, in the face of that great field of
stationary blue, was as the wind of a butterfly's wing. The placidity
of the sea was a thing likewise to be remembered. Shelley speaks of
the sea as "hungering for calm,"[22] and in this place one learned to
understand the phrase. Looking down into these green waters from the
broken edge of the rock, or swimming leisurely in the sunshine, it
seemed to me that they were enjoying their own tranquillity; and when
now and again it was disturbed by a wind ripple on the surface, or the
quick black passage of a fish far below, they settled back again (one
could fancy) with relief.

On shore, too, in the little nook of shelter, everything was so
subdued and still that the least particular struck in me a pleasurable
surprise. The desultory crackling of the whin-pods[23] in the
afternoon sun usurped the ear. The hot, sweet breath of the bank, that
had been saturated all day long with sunshine, and now exhaled it into
my face, was like the breath of a fellow-creature. I remember that I
was haunted by two lines of French verse; in some dumb way they seemed
to fit my surroundings and give expression to the contentment that was
in me, and I kept repeating to myself--

  "Mon coeur est un luth suspendu,[24]
  Sitt qu'on le touche, il rsonne."

I can give no reason why these lines came to me at this time; and for
that very cause I repeat them here. For all I know, they may serve to
complete the impression in the mind of the reader, as they were
certainly a part of it for me.

And this happened to me in the place of all others where I liked least
to stay. When I think of it I grow ashamed of my own ingratitude. "Out
of the strong came forth sweetness."[25] There, in the bleak and gusty
North, I received, perhaps, my strongest impression of peace. I saw
the sea to be great and calm; and the earth, in that little corner,
was all alive and friendly to me. So, wherever a man is, he will find
something to please and pacify him: in the town he will meet pleasant
faces of men and women, and see beautiful flowers at a window, or hear
a cage-bird singing at the corner of the gloomiest street; and for the
country, there is no country without some amenity--let him only look
for it in the right spirit, and he will surely find.


NOTES

This article first appeared in the _Portfolio_, for November 1874, and
was not reprinted until two years after Stevenson's death, in 1896,
when it was included in the _Miscellanies_ (Edinburgh Edition,
_Miscellanies_, Vol. IV, pp. 131-142). The editor of the _Portfolio_
was the well-known art critic, Philip Gilbert Hamerton (1834-1894),
author of the _Intellectual Life_ (1873). Just one year before,
Stevenson had had printed in the _Portfolio_ his first contribution to
any periodical, _Roads_. Although _The Enjoyment of Unpleasant Places_
attracted scarcely any attention on its first appearance, and has
since become practically forgotten, there is perhaps no better essay
among his earlier works with which to begin a study of his
personality, temperament, and style. In its cheerful optimism this
article is particularly characteristic of its author. It should be
remembered that when this essay was first printed, Stevenson was only
twenty-four years old.

[Note 1: _It is a difficult matter_, etc. The appreciation of nature
is a quite modern taste, for although people have always loved the
scenery which reminds them of home, it was not at all fashionable in
England to love nature for its own sake before 1740. Thomas Gray was
the first person in Europe who seems to have exhibited a real love of
mountains (see his _Letters_). A study of the development of the
appreciation of nature before and after Wordsworth (England's greatest
nature poet) is exceedingly interesting. See Myra Reynolds, _The
Treatment of Nature in English Poetry between Pope and Wordsworth_
(1896).]

[Note 2: _This discipline in scenery._ Note what is said on this
subject in Browning's extraordinary poem, _Fra Lippo Lippi_, vs.
300-302.

  "For, don't you mark? We're made so that we love
  First when we see them painted, things we have passed
  Perhaps a hundred times nor cared to see."]

[Note 3: _Brantme quaintly tells us, "fait des discours en soi pour
se soutenir en chemin."_ Freely translated, "the traveller talks to
himself to keep up his courage on the road." Pierre de Bourdeille,
Abb de Brantme, (cir. 1534-1614), travelled all over Europe. His
works were not published till long after his death, in 1665. Several
complete editions of his writings in numerous volumes have appeared in
the nineteenth century, one edited by the famous writer, Prosper
Mrime.]

[Note 4: _We are provocative of beauty._ Compare again, _Fra Lippo
Lippi_, vs. 215 et seq.

  "Or say there's beauty with no soul at all--
  (I never saw it--put the case the same--)
  If you get simple beauty and nought else,
  You get about the best thing God invents:
  That's somewhat: and you'll find the soul you have missed,
  Within yourself, when you return him thanks."]

[Note 5: _Callot, or Sadeler, or Paul Brill._ Jacques Callot was an
eminent French artist of the XVII century, born at Nancy in 1592, died
1635. Matthaeus and Paul Brill were two celebrated Dutch painters.
Paul, the younger brother of Matthaeus, was born about 1555, and died
in 1626. His development in landscape-painting was remarkable. Gilles
Sadeler, born at Antwerp 1570, died at Prague 1629, a famous artist,
and nephew of two well-known engravers. He was called the "Phoenix of
Engraving."]

[Note 6: _Dick Turpin_. Dick Turpin was born in Essex, England, and
was originally a butcher. Afterwards he became a notorious highwayman,
and was finally executed for horse-stealing, 10 April 1739. He and his
steed Black Bess are well described in W. H. Ainsworth's _Rookwood_,
and in his _Ballads_.]

[Note 7: _The Trossachs_. The word means literally, "bristling
country." A beautifully romantic tract, beginning immediately to the
east of Loch Katrine in Perth, Scotland. Stevenson's statement, "if a
man of admirable romantic instinct had not peopled it for them with
harmonious figures," refers to Walter Scott, and more particularly to
the _Lady of the Lake_ (1810).]

[Note 8: _I am happier where it is tame and fertile, and not readily
pleased without trees_. Notice the kind of country he begins to
describe in the next paragraph. Is there really any contradiction in
his statements?]

[Note 9: _Like David before Saul_. David charmed Saul out of his
sadness, according to the Biblical story, not with nature, but with
music. See I _Samuel_ XVI. 14-23. But in Browning's splendid poem,
_Saul_ (1845), nature and music are combined in David's inspired
playing.

"And I first played the tune all our sheep know," etc.]

[Note 10: _The sermon in stones_. See the beginning of the second act
of _As You Like It_, where the exiled Duke says,

  "And this our life exempt from public haunt
  Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
  Sermons in stones and good in everything."

It is not at all certain that Shakspere used the word "sermons" here
in the modern sense; he very likely meant merely discourses,
conversations.]

[Note 11: _Wuthering Heights_. The well-known novel (1847) by Emily
Bronte (1818-1848) sister of the more famous Charlotte Bronte. The
"little summer scene" Stevenson mentions, is in Chapter XXIV.]

[Note 12: _A solitary, spectacled stone-breaker_. To the pedestrian or
cyclist, no difference between Europe and America is more striking
than the comparative excellence of the country roads. The roads in
Europe, even in lonely and remote districts, where one may travel for
hours without seeing a house, are usually in perfect condition, hard,
white and absolutely smooth. The slightest defect or abrasion is
immediately repaired by one of these stone-breakers Stevenson
mentions, a solitary individual, his eyes concealed behind large green
goggles, to protect them from the glare and the flying bits of stone.]

[Note 13: _Ashamed and cold_. An excellent example of what Ruskin
called "the pathetic fallacy."]

[Note 14: _The foliage is coloured like foliage in a gale_. Cf.
Tennyson, _In Memoriam_, LXXII:--

  "With blasts that blow the poplar white."]

[Note 15: _Wordsworth, in a beautiful passage_. The passage Stevenson
quotes is in Book VII of _The Prelude_, called _Residence in London_.]

[Note 16: _Cologne Cathedral, the great unfinished marvel by the
Rhine_. This great cathedral, generally regarded as the most perfect
Gothic church in the world, was begun in 1248, and was not completed
until 1880, seven years after Stevenson wrote this essay.]

[Note 17: _In a golden zone like Apollo's._ The Greek God Apollo,
later identified with Helios, the Sun-god. The twin towers of Cologne
Cathedral are over 500 feet high, so that the experience described
here is quite possible.]

[Note 18: _The two hall-fires at night_. In mediaeval castles, the
hall was the general living-room, used regularly for meals, for
assemblies, and for all social requirements. The modern word
"dining-hall" preserves the old significance of the word. The familiar
expression, "bower and hall," is simply, in plain prose, bedroom and
sitting-room.]

[Note 19: _Association is turned against itself_. It is seldom that
Stevenson uses an expression that is not instantly transparently
clear. Exactly what does he mean by this phrase?]

[Note 20: "_As from an enemy_." Alluding to the passage Stevenson has
quoted above, from Wordsworth's _Prelude_.]

[Note 21: _Our noisy years did indeed seem moments_. A favorite
reflection of Stevenson's, occurring in nearly all his serious
essays.]

[Note 22: _Shelley speaks of the sea as "hungering for calm."_ This
passage occurs in the poem _Prometheus Unbound_, Act III, end of Scene
2.

  "Behold the Nereids under the green sea--
  Their wavering limbs borne on the wind like stream,
  Their white arms lifted o'er their streaming hair,
  With garlands pied and starry sea-flower crowns,--
  Hastening to grace their mighty Sister's joy.
  It is the unpastured sea hungering for calm."]

[Note 23: _Whin-pods._ "Whin" is from the Welsh _wyn_, meaning
"weed." Whin is gorse or furze, and the sound Stevenson alludes to is
frequently heard in Scotland.]

[Note 24: "_Mon coeur est un luth suspendu_." These beautiful words
are from the poet Branger (1780-1857). It is probable that Stevenson
found them first not in the original, but in reading the tales of Poe,
for the "two lines of French verse" that "haunted" Stevenson are
quoted by Poe at the beginning of one of his most famous pieces, _The
Fall of the House of Usher_, where, however, the third, and not the
first person is used:--

  "_Son_ coeur est un luth suspendu;
  Sitt qu'on le touche il rsonne."]

[Note 25: "_Out of the strong came forth sweetness_." Alluding to the
riddle propounded by Samson. See the book of _Judges_, Chapter XIV.]


II

AN APOLOGY FOR IDLERS

BOSWELL: "We grow weary when idle."

JOHNSON: "That is, sir, because others being busy, we want company;
but if we were idle, there would be no growing weary; we should all
entertain one another."[1]

Just now, when every one is bound, under pain of a decree in absence
convicting them of _lse_-respectability,[2] to enter on some
lucrative profession, and labour therein with something not far short
of enthusiasm, a cry from the opposite party who are content when they
have enough, and like to look on and enjoy in the meanwhile, savours a
little of bravado and gasconade.[3] And yet this should not be.
Idleness so called, which does not consist in doing nothing, but in
doing a great deal not recognised in the dogmatic formularies of the
ruling class, has as good a right to state its position as industry
itself. It is admitted that the presence of people who refuse to enter
in the great handicap race for sixpenny pieces, is at once an insult
and a disenchantment for those who do. A fine fellow (as we see so
many) takes his determination, votes for the sixpences, and in the
emphatic Americanism, "goes for" them.[4] And while such an one is
ploughing distressfully up the road, it is not hard to understand his
resentment, when he perceives cool persons in the meadows by the
wayside, lying with a handkerchief over their ears and a glass at
their elbow. Alexander is touched in a very delicate place by the
disregard of Diogenes.[5] Where was the glory of having taken Rome[6]
for these tumultuous barbarians, who poured into the Senate house, and
found the Fathers sitting silent and unmoved by their success? It is a
sore thing to have laboured along and scaled the arduous hilltops, and
when all is done, find humanity indifferent to your achievement. Hence
physicists condemn the unphysical; financiers have only a superficial
toleration for those who know little of stocks; literary persons
despise the unlettered; and people of all pursuits combine to
disparage those who have none.

But though this is one difficulty of the subject, it is not the
greatest. You could not be put in prison for speaking against
industry, but you can be sent to Coventry[7] for speaking like a fool.
The greatest difficulty with most subjects is to do them well;
therefore, please to remember this is an apology. It is certain that
much may be judiciously argued in favour of diligence; only there is
something to be said against it, and that is what, on the present
occasion, I have to say. To state one argument is not necessarily to
be deaf to all others, and that a man has written a book of travels in
Montenegro, is no reason why he should never have been to Richmond.[8]

It is surely beyond a doubt that people should be a good deal idle in
youth. For though here and there a Lord Macaulay may escape from
school honours[9] with all his wits about him, most boys pay so dear
for their medals that they never afterwards have a shot in their
locker, "and begin the world bankrupt." And the same holds true during
all the time a lad is educating himself, or suffering others to
educate him. It must have been a very foolish old gentleman who
addressed Johnson at Oxford in these words: "Young man, ply your book
diligently now, and acquire a stock of knowledge; for when years come
upon you, you will find that poring upon books will be but an irksome
task." The old gentleman seems to have been unaware that many other
things besides reading grow irksome, and not a few become impossible,
by the time a man has to use spectacles and cannot walk without a
stick. Books are good enough in their own way, but they are a mighty
bloodless substitute for life. It seems a pity to sit, like the Lady
of Shalott,[10] peering into a mirror, with your back turned on all
the bustle and glamour of reality. And if a man reads very hard, as
the old anecdote reminds us, he will have little time for thoughts.

If you look back on your own education, I am sure it will not be the
full, vivid, instructive hours of truantry that you regret; you would
rather cancel some lack-lustre periods between sleep and waking[11] in
the class. For my own part, I have attended a good many lectures in my
time. I still remember that the spinning of a top is a case of Kinetic
Stability. I still remember that Emphyteusis is not a disease, nor
Stillicide[12] a crime. But though I would not willingly part with
such scraps of science, I do not set the same store by them as by
certain other odds and ends that I came by in the open street while I
was playing truant. This is not the moment to dilate on that mighty
place of education, which was the favourite school of Dickens and of
Balzac,[13] and turns out yearly many inglorious masters in the
Science of the Aspects of Life. Suffice it to say this: if a lad does
not learn in the streets, it is because he has no faculty of learning.
Nor is the truant always in the streets, for if he prefers, he may go
out by the gardened suburbs into the country. He may pitch on some
tuft of lilacs over a burn, and smoke innumerable pipes to the tune of
the water on the stones. A bird will sing in the thicket. And there he
may fall into a vein of kindly thought, and see things in a new
perspective. Why, if this be not education, what is? We may conceive
Mr. Worldly Wiseman[14] accosting such an one, and the conversation
that should thereupon ensue:--

"How, now, young fellow, what dost thou here?"

"Truly, sir, I take mine ease."

"Is not this the hour of the class? and should'st thou not be plying
thy Book with diligence, to the end thou mayest obtain knowledge?"

"Nay, but thus also I follow after Learning, by your leave."

"Learning, quotha! After what fashion, I pray thee? Is it
mathematics?"

"No, to be sure."

"Is it metaphysics?"

"Nor that."

"Is it some language?"

"Nay, it is no language."

"Is it a trade?"

"Nor a trade neither."

"Why, then, what is't?"

"Indeed, sir, as a time may soon come for me to go upon Pilgrimage, I
am desirous to note what is commonly done by persons in my case, and
where are the ugliest Sloughs and Thickets on the Road; as also, what
manner of Staff is of the best service. Moreover, I lie here, by this
water, to learn by root-of-heart a lesson which my master teaches me
to call Peace, or Contentment."

Hereupon, Mr. Worldly Wiseman was much commoved with passion, and
shaking his cane with a very threatful countenance, broke forth upon
this wise: "Learning, quotha!" said he; "I would have all such rogues
scourged by the Hangman!"

And so he would go his way, ruffling out his cravat with a crackle of
starch, like a turkey when it spread its feathers.

Now this, of Mr. Wiseman, is the common opinion. A fact is not called
a fact, but a piece of gossip, if it does not fall into one of your
scholastic categories. An inquiry must be in some acknowledged
direction, with a name to go by; or else you are not inquiring at all,
only lounging; and the workhouse is too good for you. It is supposed
that all knowledge is at the bottom of a well, or the far end of a
telescope. Sainte-Beuve,[15] as he grew older, came to regard all
experience as a single great book, in which to study for a few years
ere we go hence; and it seemed all one to him whether you should read
in Chapter xx., which is the differential calculus, or in Chapter
xxxix., which is hearing the band play in the gardens. As a matter of
fact, an intelligent person, looking out of his eyes and hearkening in
his ears, with a smile on his face all the time, will get more true
education than many another in a life of heroic vigils. There is
certainly some chill and arid knowledge to be found upon the summits
of formal and laborious science; but it is all round about you, and
for the trouble of looking, that you will acquire the warm and
palpitating facts of life. While others are filling their memory with
a lumber of words, one-half of which they will forget before the week
be out, your truant may learn some really useful art: to play the
fiddle, to know a good cigar, or to speak with ease and opportunity to
all varieties of men. Many who have "plied their book diligently," and
know all about some one branch or another of accepted lore, come out
of the study with an ancient and owl-like demeanour, and prove dry,
stockish, and dyspeptic in all the better and brighter parts of life.
Many make a large fortune, who remain underbred and pathetically
stupid to the last. And meantime there goes the idler, who began life
along with them--by your leave, a different picture. He has had time
to take care of his health and his spirits; he has been a great deal
in the open air, which is the most salutary of all things for both
body and mind; and if he has never read the great Book in very
recondite places, he has dipped into it and skimmed it over to
excellent purpose. Might not the student afford some Hebrew roots, and
the business man some of his half-crowns, for a share of the idler's
knowledge of life at large, and Art of Living? Nay, and the idler has
another and more important quality than these. I mean his wisdom. He
who has much looked on at the childish satisfaction of other people in
their hobbies, will regard his own with only a very ironical
indulgence. He will not be heard among the dogmatists. He will have a
great and cool allowance for all sorts of people and opinions. If he
finds no out-of-the-way truths, he will identify himself with no very
burning falsehood. His way took him along a by-road, not much
frequented, but very even and pleasant, which is called Commonplace
Lane, and leads to the Belvedere of Commonsense.[16] Thence he shall
command an agreeable, if no very noble prospect; and while others
behold the East and West, the Devil and the Sunrise, he will be
contentedly aware of a sort of morning hour upon all sublunary things,
with an army of shadows running speedily and in many different
directions into the great daylight of Eternity. The shadows and the
generations, the shrill doctors and the plangent wars,[17] go by into
ultimate silence and emptiness; but underneath all this, a man may
see, out of the Belvedere windows, much green and peaceful landscape;
many firelit parlours; good people laughing, drinking, and making love
as they did before the Flood or the French Revolution; and the old
shepherd[18] telling his tale under the hawthorn.

Extreme _busyness_, whether at school or college, kirk or market, is a
symptom of deficient vitality; and a faculty for idleness implies a
catholic appetite and a strong sense of personal identity. There is a
sort of dead-alive, hackneyed people about, who are scarcely conscious
of living except in the exercise of some conventional occupation.
Bring these fellows into the country, or set them aboard ship, and you
will see how they pine for their desk or their study. They have no
curiosity; they cannot give themselves over to random provocations;
they do not take pleasure in the exercise of their faculties for its
own sake; and unless Necessity lays about them with a stick, they will
even stand still. It is no good speaking to such folk: they _cannot_
be idle, their nature is not generous enough; and they pass those
hours in a sort of coma, which are not dedicated to furious moiling in
the gold-mill. When they do not require to go to the office, when they
are not hungry and have no mind to drink, the whole breathing world is
a blank to them. If they have to wait an hour or so for a train, they
fall into a stupid trance with their eyes open. To see them, you would
suppose there was nothing to look at and no one to speak with; you
would imagine they were paralysed or alienated; and yet very possibly
they are hard workers in their own way, and have good eyesight for a
flaw in a deed or a turn of the market. They have been to school and
college, but all the time they had their eye on the medal; they have
gone about in the world and mixed with clever people, but all the time
they were thinking of their own affairs. As if a man's soul were not
too small to begin with, they have dwarfed and narrowed theirs by a
life of all work and no play; until here they are at forty, with a
listless attention, a mind vacant of all material of amusement, and
not one thought to rub against another, while they wait for the train.
Before he was breeched, he might have clambered on the boxes; when he
was twenty, he would have stared at the girls; but now the pipe is
smoked out, the snuffbox empty, and my gentleman sits bolt upright
upon a bench, with lamentable eyes. This does not appeal to me as
being Success in Life.

But it is not only the person himself who suffers from his busy
habits, but his wife and children, his friends and relations, and down
to the very people he sits with in a railway carriage or an omnibus.
Perpetual devotion to what a man calls his business, is only to be
sustained by perpetual neglect of many other things. And it is not by
any means certain that a man's business is the most important thing he
has to do. To an impartial estimate it will seem clear that many of
the wisest, most virtuous, and most beneficent parts that are to be
played upon the Theatre of Life are filled by gratuitous performers,
and pass, among the world at large, as phases of idleness. For in that
Theatre not only the walking gentlemen, singing chambermaids, and
diligent fiddlers in the orchestra, but those who look on and clap
their hands from the benches, do really play a part and fulfil
important offices towards the general result. You are no doubt very
dependent on the care of your lawyer and stockbroker, of the guards
and signalmen who convey you rapidly from place to place, and the
policemen who walk the streets for your protection; but is there not a
thought of gratitude in your heart for certain other benefactors who
set you smiling when they fall in your way, or season your dinner with
good company? Colonel Newcome helped to lose his friend's money; Fred
Bayham had an ugly trick of borrowing shirts; and yet they were better
people to fall among than Mr. Barnes. And though Falstaff was neither
sober nor very honest, I think I could name one or two long-faced
Barabbases whom the world could better have done without. Hazlitt
mentions that he was more sensible of obligation to Northcote,[19] who
had never done him anything he could call a service, than to his whole
circle of ostentatious friends; for he thought a good companion
emphatically the greatest benefactor. I know there are people in the
world who cannot feel grateful unless the favour has been done them at
the cost of pain and difficulty. But this is a churlish disposition. A
man may send you six sheets of letter-paper covered with the most
entertaining gossip, or you may pass half an hour pleasantly, perhaps
profitably, over an article of his; do you think the service would be
greater, if he had made the manuscript in his heart's blood, like a
compact with the devil? Do you really fancy you should be more
beholden to your correspondent, if he had been damning you all the
while for your importunity? Pleasures are more beneficial than duties
because, like the quality of mercy,[20] they are not strained, and
they are twice blest. There must always be two to a kiss, and there
may be a score in a jest; but wherever there is an element of
sacrifice, the favour is conferred with pain, and, among generous
people, received with confusion. There is no duty we so much underrate
as the duty of being happy. By being happy, we sow anonymous benefits
upon the world, which remain unknown even to ourselves, or when they
are disclosed, surprise nobody so much as the benefactor. The other
day, a ragged, barefoot boy ran down the street after a marble, with
so jolly an air that he set every one he passed into a good humour;
one of these persons, who had been delivered from more than usually
black thoughts, stopped the little fellow and gave him some money with
this remark: "You see what sometimes comes of looking pleased." If he
had looked pleased before, he had now to look both pleased and
mystified. For my part, I justify this encouragement of smiling rather
than tearful children; I do not wish to pay for tears anywhere but
upon the stage; but I am prepared to deal largely in the opposite
commodity. A happy man or woman is a better thing to find than a
five-pound note. He or she is a radiating focus of good-will; and
their entrance into a room is as though another candle had been
lighted. We need not care whether they could prove the forty-seventh
proposition; they do a better thing than that, they practically
demonstrate the great Theorum of the liveableness of Life.
Consequently, if a person cannot be happy without remaining idle, idle
he should remain. It is a revolutionary precept; but thanks to hunger
and the workhouse, one not easily to be abused; and within practical
limits, it is one of the most incontestable truths in the whole Body
of Morality. Look at one of your industrious fellows for a moment, I
beseech you. He sows hurry and reaps indigestion; he puts a vast deal
of activity out to interest, and receives a large measure of nervous
derangement in return. Either he absents himself entirely from all
fellowship, and lives a recluse in a garret, with carpet slippers and
a leaden inkpot; or he comes among people swiftly and bitterly, in a
contraction of his whole nervous system, to discharge some temper
before he returns to work. I do not care how much or how well he
works, this fellow is an evil feature in other people's lives. They
would be happier if he were dead. They could easier do without his
services in the Circumlocution Office, than they can tolerate his
fractious spirits. He poisons life at the well-head. It is better to
be beggared out of hand by a scapegrace nephew, than daily hag-ridden
by a peevish uncle.

And what, in God's name, is all this pother about? For what cause do
they embitter their own and other people's lives? That a man should
publish three or thirty articles a year, that he should finish or not
finish his great allegorical picture, are questions of little interest
to the world. The ranks of life are full; and although a thousand
fall, there are always some to go into the breach. When they told Joan
of Arc[21] she should be at home minding women's work, she answered
there were plenty to spin and wash. And so, even with your own rare
gifts! When nature is "so careless of the single life,"[22] why should
we coddle ourselves into the fancy that our own is of exceptional
importance? Suppose Shakespeare had been knocked on the head some dark
night in Sir Thomas Lucy's[23] preserves, the world would have wagged
on better or worse, the pitcher gone to the well, the scythe to the
corn, and the student to his book; and no one been any the wiser of
the loss. There are not many works extant, if you look the alternative
all over, which are worth the price of a pound of tobacco to a man of
limited means. This is a sobering reflection for the proudest of our
earthly vanities. Even a tobacconist may, upon consideration, find no
great cause for personal vainglory in the phrase; for although tobacco
is an admirable sedative, the qualities necessary for retailing it are
neither rare nor precious in themselves. Alas and alas! you may take
it how you will, but the services of no single individual are
indispensable. Atlas[24] was just a gentleman with a protracted
nightmare! And yet you see merchants who go and labour themselves into
a great fortune and thence into bankruptcy court; scribblers who keep
scribbling at little articles until their temper is a cross to all who
come about them, as though Pharaoh should set the Israelites to make a
pin instead of a pyramid;[25] and fine young men who work themselves
into a decline,[26] and are driven off in a hearse with white plumes
upon it. Would you not suppose these persons had been whispered, by
the Master of the Ceremonies, the promise of some momentous destiny?
and that this lukewarm bullet on which they play their farces was the
bull's-eye and centrepoint of all the universe? And yet it is not so.
The ends for which they give away their priceless youth, for all they
know, may be chimerical or hurtful; the glory and riches they expect
may never come, or may find them indifferent; and they and the world
they inhabit are so inconsiderable that the mind freezes at the
thought.


NOTES

This essay was first printed in the _Cornhill Magazine_, for July
1877, Vol. XXXVI, pp. 80-86. It was next published in the volume,
_Virginibus Puerisque_, in 1881. Although this book contains some of
the most admirable specimens of Stevenson's style, it did not have a
large sale, and it was not until 1887 that another edition Appeared.
The editor of the _Cornhill Magazine_ from 1871 to 1882 was Leslie
Stephen (1832-1904), whose kindness and encouragement to the new
writer were of the utmost importance at this critical time. That so
grave and serious a critic as Leslie Stephen should have taken such
delight in a _jeu d'esprit_ like _Idlers_, is proof, if any were
needed, for the breadth of his literary outlook. Stevenson had been at
work on this article a year before its appearance, which shows that
his _Apology for Idlers_ demanded from him anything but idling. As
Graham Balfour says, in his _Life of Stevenson_, I, 122, "Except
before his own conscience, there was hardly any time when the author
of the _Apology for Idlers_ ever really neglected the tasks of his
true vocation." In July 1876 he wrote to Mrs. Sitwell, "A paper called
'A Defence of Idlers' (which is really a defence of R.L.S.) is in a
good way." A year later, after the publication of the article, he
wrote (in August 1877) to Sidney Colvin, "Stephen has written to me
apropos of 'Idlers,' that something more in that vein would be
agreeable to his views. From Stephen I count that a devil of a lot."
It is noteworthy that this charming essay had been refused by
_Macmillan's Magazine_ before Stephen accepted it for the _Cornhill._
(_Life,_ I, 180).

[Note 1: The conversation between Boswell and Johnson, quoted at the
beginning of the essay, occurred on the 26 October 1769, at the famous
Mitre Tavern. In Stevenson's quotation, the word "all" should be
inserted after the word "were" to correspond with the original text,
and to make sense. Johnson, though constitutionally lazy, was no
defender of Idlers, and there is a sly humour in Stevenson's appealing
to him as authority. Boswell says in his _Life_, under date of 1780,
"He would allow no settled indulgence of idleness upon principle, and
always repelled every attempt to urge excuses for it. A friend one day
suggested, that it was not wholesome to study soon after dinner.
JOHNSON: 'Ah, sir, don't give way to such a fancy. At one time of my
life I had taken it into my head that it was not wholesome to study
between breakfast and dinner.'"]

[Note 2: _Lse-respectability._ From the French verb _leser_, to hurt,
to injure. The most common employment of this verb is in the phrase
"_lse-majest,"_ high treason. Stevenson's mood here is like that of
Lowell, when he said regretfully, speaking of the eighteenth century,
"Responsibility for the universe had not then been invented." (_Essay
on Gray_.)]

[Note 3: _Gasconade_. Boasting. The inhabitants of Gascony
(_Gascogne)_ a province in the south-west of France, are proverbial
not only for their impetuosity and courage, but for their willingness
to brag of the possession of these qualities. Excellent examples of
the typical Gascon in literature are D'Artagnan in Dumas's _Trois
Mousquetaires_ (1844) and Cyrano in Rostand's splendid drama, _Cyrano
de Bergerac_ (1897).]

[Note 4: _In the emphatic Americanism, "goes for" them._ When
Stevenson wrote this (1876-77), he had not yet been in America. Two
years later, in 1879, when he made the journey across the plains, he
had many opportunities to record Americanisms far more emphatic than
the harmless phrase quoted here, which can hardly be called an
Americanism. Murray's _New English Dictionary_ gives excellent English
examples of this particular sense of "go for" in the years 1641, 1790,
1864, and 1882!]

[Note 5: _Alexander is touched in a very delicate place_. Alluding to
the famous interview between the young Alexander and the old Diogenes,
which took place at Corinth about 330 B.C. Alexander asked Diogenes in
what way he could be of service to him, and the philosopher replied
gruffly, "By standing out of my sunshine." As a young man Diogenes had
been given to all excesses of dissipation; but he later went to the
opposite extreme of asceticism, being one of the earliest and most
striking illustrations of "plain living and high thinking." The
debauchery of his youth and the privation and exposure of his old age
did not deeply affect his hardy constitution, for he is said to have
lived to the age of ninety. In the charming play by the Elizabethan,
John Lyly, _A moste excellente Comedie of Alexander, Campaspe, and
Diogenes_ (1584), the conversations between the man who has conquered
the world and the man who has overcome the world are highly
entertaining.]

[Note 6: _Where was the glory of having taken Rome_. This refers to
the invasion by the Gauls about the year 389 B. C. A good account is
given in T. Arnold's _History of Rome_ I, pp. 534 et seq.]

[Note 7: _Sent to Coventry_. The origin of this proverb, which means
of course, "to ostracise," probably dates back to 1647, when,
according to Clarendon's _History of the Great Rebellion_, VI, par.
83, Royalist prisoners were sent to the parliamentary stronghold of
Coventry, in Warwickshire.]

[Note 8: _Montenegro ... Richmond_. Montenegro is one of the smallest
principalities in the world, about 3,550 square miles. It is in the
Balkan peninsula, to the east of the lower Adriatic, between
Austro-Hungary and Turkey. When Stevenson was writing this essay,
1876-77, Montenegro was the subject of much discussion, owing to the
part she took in the Russo-Turkish war. The year after this article
was published (1878) Montenegro reached the coast of the Adriatic for
the first time, and now has two tiny seaports. Tennyson celebrated the
hardy virtues of the inhabitants in his sonnet _Montenegro_, written
in 1877.

  "O smallest among peoples! rough rock-throne
  Of Freedom! warriors beating back the swarm
  Of Turkish Islam for five hundred years."

_Richmond_ is on the river Thames, close to the city of London.]

[Note 9: _Lord Macaulay may escape from school honours._ Stevenson
here alludes to the oft-heard statement that the men who succeed in
after life have generally been near the foot of their classes at
school and college. It is impossible to prove either the falsity or
truth of so general a remark, but it is easier to point out men who
have been successful both at school and in life, than to find
sufficient evidence that school and college prizes prevent further
triumphs. Macaulay, who is noted by Stevenson as an exception, was
precocious enough to arouse the fears rather than the hopes of his
friends. When he was four years old, he hurt his finger, and a lady
inquiring politely as to whether the injured member was better, the
infant replied gravely, "Thank you, Madam, the agony is abated."]

[Note 10: _The Lady of Shalott_. See Tennyson's beautiful poem (1833).

  "And moving thro' a mirror clear
  That hangs before her all the year,
  Shadows of the world appear."]

[Note 11: _Some lack-lustre periods between sleep and waking._ Cf.
_King Lear_, Act I, Sc. 2, vs. 15. "Got 'tween asleep and wake."]

[Note 12: _Kinetic Stability ... _Emphyteusis ... Stillicide_ For
Kinetic Stability, see any modern textbook on Physics. _Emphyteusis_
is the legal renting of ground; _Stillicide_, a continual dropping of
water, as from the eaves of a house. These words, _Emphyteusis_ and
_Stillicide_, are terms in Roman Law. Stevenson is of course making
fun of the required studies of Physics and Roman Law, and of their
lack of practical value to him in his chosen career.]

[Note 13: _The favourite school of Dickens and of Balzac_. The great
English novelist Dickens (1812-1870) and his greater French
contemporary Balzac (1799-1850), show in their works that their chief
school was Life.]

[Note 14: _Mr. Worldly Wiseman_. The character in Bunyan's _Pilgrim's
Progress_ (1678), who meets Christian soon after his setting out from
the City of Destruction. _Pilgrim's Progress_ was a favorite book of
Stevenson's; he alludes to it frequently in his essays. See also his
own article _Bagster's Pilgrim's Progress_, first published in the
_Magazine of Art_ in February 1882. This essay is well worth reading,
and the copies of the pictures which he includes are extremely
diverting.]

[Note 15: _Sainte-Beuve._ The French writer Sainte-Beuve (1804-1869)
is usually regarded today as the greatest literary critic who ever
lived. His constant change of convictions enabled him to see life from
all sides.]

[Note 16: _Belvedere of Commonsense_. Belvedere is an Italian word,
which referred originally to a place of observation on the top of a
house, from which one might enjoy an extensive prospect. A portion of
the Vatican in Rome is called the Belvedere, thus lending this name to
the famous statue of Apollo, which stands there. On the continent,
anything like a summer-house is often called a Belvedere. One of the
most interesting localities which bears this name is the Belvedere
just outside of Weimar, in Germany, where Goethe used to act in his
own dramas in the open air theatre.]

[Note 17: _The plangent wars_. Plangent is from the Latin _plango_, to
strike, to beat. Stevenson's use of the word is rather unusual in
English.]

[Note 18: _The old shepherd telling his tale_.. See Milton,
_L'Allegro:_--

  "And every shepherd tells his tale
  Under the hawthorn in the dale."

"Tells his tale" means of course "counts his sheep," not "tells a
story." The old use of the word "tell" for "count" survives to-day in
the word "teller" in a parliamentary assemblage, or in a bank.]

[Note 19: _Colonel Newcome ... Fred Bayham ... Mr. Barnes ... Falstaff
... Barabbases ... Hazlitt ... Northcote._ Colonel Newcome, the great
character in Thackeray's _The Newcomes_ (1854). _Fred Bayham_ and
_Barnes Newcome_ are persons in the same story. One of the best essays
on Falstaff is the one printed in the first series of Mr. Augustine
Birrell's _Obiter Dicta_ (1884). This essay would have pleased
Thackeray. One of the finest epitaphs in literature is that pronounced
over the supposedly dead body of Falstaff by Prince Hal--"I could have
better spared a better man." (_King Henry IV_, Part I, Act V, Sc. 4.)
_Barabbas_ was the robber who was released at the time of the trial of
Christ.... _William Hazlitt_ (1778-1830), the well-known essayist,
published in 1830 the _Conversations_ of _James Northcote_
(1746-1831). Northcote was an artist and writer, who had been an
assistant in the studio of Sir Joshua Reynolds. Stevenson projected a
_Life of Hazlitt_, but later abandoned the undertaking. (_Life,_ I,
230.)]

[Note 20: _The quality of mercy_. See Portia's wonderful speech in the
_Merchant of Venice_, Act IV, Scene I.]

[Note 21: _Joan of Arc_. The famous inspired French peasant girl, who
led the armies of her king to victory, and who was burned at Rouen in
1431. She was variously regarded as a harlot and a saint. In
Shakspere's historical plays, she is represented in the basest manner,
from conventional motives of English patriotism. Voltaire's scandalous
work, _La Pucelle_, and Schiller's noble _Jungfrau von Orleans_ make
an instructive contrast. She has been the subject of many dramas and
works of poetry and fiction. Her latest prominent admirer is Mark
Twain, whose historical romance _Joan of Arc_ is one of the most
carefully written, though not one of the most characteristic of his
books.]

[Note 22: "_So careless of the single life_." See Tennyson's _In
Memoriam_, LV, where the poet discusses the pessimism caused by
regarding the apparent indifference of nature to the happiness of the
individual.

  "Are God and Nature then at strife,
  That Nature lends such evil dreams?
  So careful of the type she seems,
  So careless of the single life."]

[Note 23: _Shakespeare ... Sir Thomas Lucy_. The familiar tradition
that Shakspere as a boy was a poacher on the preserves of his
aristocratic neighbor, Sir Thomas Lucy. See Halliwell-Phillipps's
_Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare_. In 1879, at the first
performance of _As You Like It_ at the Stratford Memorial Theatre, the
deer brought on the stage in Act IV, Scene 2, had been shot that very
morning by H.S. Lucy, Esq., of Charlecote Park, a descendant of the
owner of the herd traditionally attacked by the future dramatist.]

[Note 24: _Atlas_. In mythology, the leader of the Titans, who fought
the Gods, and was condemned by Zeus to carry the weight of the vault
of heaven on his head and hands. In the sixteenth century the name
Atlas was given to a collection of maps by Mercator, probably because
a picture of Atlas had been commonly placed on the title-pages of
geographical works.]

[Note 25: _Pharaoh ... Pyramid_. For _Pharaoh's_ experiences with the
Israelites, see the book of _Exodus_. Pharaoh was merely the name
given by the children of Israel to the rulers of Egypt: cf. Caesar,
Kaiser, etc. ... The Egyptian pyramids were regarded as one of the
seven wonders of ancient times, the great pyramid weighing over six
million tons. The pyramids were used for the tombs of monarchs.]

[Note 26: _Young men who work themselves into a decline._ Compare the
tone of the close of this essay with that of the conclusion of _AEs
Triplex_. Stevenson himself died in the midst of the most arduous work
possible--the making of a literary masterpiece.]


III

AES TRIPLEX[1]

The changes wrought by death are in themselves so sharp and final, and
so terrible and melancholy in their consequences, that the thing
stands alone in man's experience, and has no parallel upon earth. It
outdoes all other accidents because it is the last of them. Sometimes
it leaps suddenly upon its victims, like a Thug;[2] sometimes it lays
a regular siege and creeps upon their citadel during a score of years.
And when the business is done, there is sore havoc made in other
people's lives, and a pin knocked out by which many subsidiary
friendships hung together. There are empty chairs, solitary walks, and
single beds at night. Again in taking away our friends, death does not
take them away utterly, but leaves behind a mocking, tragical, and
soon intolerable residue, which must be hurriedly concealed. Hence a
whole chapter of sights and customs striking to the mind, from the
pyramids of Egypt to the gibbets and dule trees[3] of mediaeval
Europe. The poorest persons have a bit of pageant going towards the
tomb; memorial stones are set up over the least memorable; and, in
order to preserve some show of respect for what remains of our old
loves and friendships, we must accompany it with much grimly ludicrous
ceremonial, and the hired undertaker parades before the door. All
this, and much more of the same sort, accompanied by the eloquence of
poets, has gone a great way to put humanity in error; nay, in many
philosophies the error has been embodied and laid down with every
circumstance of logic; although in real life the bustle and swiftness,
in leaving people little time to think, have not left them time enough
to go dangerously wrong in practice.

As a matter of fact, although few things are spoken of with more
fearful whisperings than this prospect of death, few have less
influence on conduct under healthy circumstances. We have all heard of
cities in South America built upon the side of fiery mountains, and
how, even in this tremendous neighbourhood, the inhabitants are not a
jot more impressed by the solemnity of mortal conditions than if they
were delving gardens in the greenest corner of England. There are
serenades and suppers and much gallantry among the myrtles overhead;
and meanwhile the foundation shudders underfoot, the bowels of the
mountain growl, and at any moment living ruin may leap sky-high into
the moonlight, and tumble man and his merry-making in the dust. In the
eyes of very young people, and very dull old ones, there is something
indescribably reckless and desperate in such a picture. It seems not
credible that respectable married people, with umbrellas, should find
appetite for a bit of supper within quite a long distance of a fiery
mountain; ordinary life begins to smell of high-handed debauch when it
is carried on so close to a catastrophe; and even cheese and salad, it
seems, could hardly be relished in such circumstances without
something like a defiance of the Creator. It should be a place for
nobody but hermits dwelling in prayer and maceration, or mere
born-devils drowning care in a perpetual carouse.

And yet, when one comes to think upon it calmly, the situation of
these South American citizens forms only a very pale figure for the
state of ordinary mankind. This world itself, travelling blindly and
swiftly in overcrowded space, among a million other worlds travelling
blindly and swiftly in contrary directions, may very well come by a
knock that would set it into explosion like a penny squib. And what,
pathologically looked at, is the human body with all its organs, but a
mere bagful of petards? The least of these is as dangerous to the
whole economy as the ship's powder-magazine to the ship; and with
every breath we breathe, and every meal we eat, we are putting one or
more of them in peril. If we clung as devotedly as some philosophers
pretend we do to the abstract idea of life, or were half as frightened
as they make out we are, for the subversive accident that ends it all,
the trumpets might sound[4] by the hour and no one would follow them
into battle--the blue-peter might fly at the truck,[5] but who would
climb into a sea-going ship? Think (if these philosophers were right)
with what a preparation of spirit we should affront the daily peril of
the dinner-table: a deadlier spot than any battlefield in history,
where the far greater proportion of our ancestors have miserably left
their bones! What woman would ever be lured into marriage, so much
more dangerous than the wildest sea? And what would it be to grow old?
For, after a certain distance, every step we take in life we find the
ice growing thinner below our feet, and all around us and behind us we
see our contemporaries going through. By the time a man gets well into
the seventies, his continued existence is a mere miracle; and when he
lays his old bones in bed for the night, there is an overwhelming
probability that he will never see the day. Do the old men mind it, as
a matter of fact? Why, no. They were never merrier; they have their
grog at night, and tell the raciest stories; they hear of the death of
people about their own age, or even younger, not as if it was a grisly
warning, but with a simple childlike pleasure at having outlived
someone else; and when a draught might puff them out like a fluttering
candle, or a bit of a stumble shatter them like so much glass, their
old hearts keep sound and unaffrighted, and they go on, bubbling with
laughter, through years of man's age compared to which the valley at
Balaclava[6] was as safe and peaceful as a village cricket-green on
Sunday. It may fairly be questioned (if we look to the peril only)
whether it was a much more daring feat for Curtius[7] to plunge into
the gulf, than for any old gentleman of ninety to doff his clothes and
clamber into bed.

Indeed, it is a memorable subject for consideration, with what
unconcern and gaiety mankind pricks on along the Valley of the Shadow
of Death. The whole way is one wilderness of snares, and the end of
it, for those who fear the last pinch, is irrevocable ruin. And yet we
go spinning through it all, like a party for the Derby.[8] Perhaps the
reader remembers one of the humorous devices of the deified
Caligula:[9] how he encouraged a vast concourse of holiday-makers on
to his bridge over Baiae[10] bay; and when they were in the height of
their enjoyment, turned loose the Praetorian guards[11] among the
company, and had them tossed into the sea. This is no bad miniature of
the dealings of nature with the transitory race of man. Only, what a
chequered picnic we have of it, even while it lasts! and into what
great waters, not to be crossed by any swimmer, God's pale Praetorian
throws us over in the end!

We live the time that a match flickers; we pop the cork of a
ginger-beer bottle, and the earthquake swallows us on the instant. Is
it not odd, is it not incongruous, is it not, in the highest sense of
human speech, incredible, that we should think so highly of the
ginger-beer, and regard so little the devouring earthquake? The love
of Life and the fear of Death are two famous phrases that grow harder
to understand the more we think about them. It is a well-known fact
that an immense proportion of boat accidents would never happen if
people held the sheet in their hands instead of making it fast; and
yet, unless it be some martinet of a professional mariner or some
landsman with shattered nerves, every one of God's creatures makes it
fast. A strange instance of man's unconcern and brazen boldness in the
face of death!

We confound ourselves with metaphysical phrases, which we import into
daily talk with noble inappropriateness. We have no idea of what death
is, apart from its circumstances and some of its consequences to
others; and although we have some experience of living, there is not a
man on earth who has flown so high into abstraction as to have any
practical guess at the meaning of the Word _life_. All literature,
from Job and Omar Khayyam to Thomas Carlyle or Walt Whitman,[12] is
but an attempt to look upon the human state with such largeness of
view as shall enable us to rise from the consideration of living to
the Definition of Life. And our sages give us about the best
satisfaction in their power when they say that it is a vapour, or a
show, or made out of the same stuff with dreams.[13] Philosophy, in
its more rigid sense, has been at the same work for ages; and after a
myriad bald heads have wagged over the problem, and piles of words
have been heaped one upon another into dry and cloudy volumes without
end, philosophy has the honour of laying before us, with modest pride,
her contribution towards the subject: that life is a Permanent
Possibility of Sensation.[14] Truly a fine result! A man may very well
love beef, or hunting, or a woman; but surely, surely, not a Permanent
Possibility of Sensation. He may be afraid of a precipice, or a
dentist, or a large enemy with a club, or even an undertaker's man;
but not certainly of abstract death. We may trick with the word life
in its dozen senses until we are weary of tricking; we may argue in
terms of all the philosophies on earth, but one fact remains true
throughout--that we do not love life, in the sense that we are greatly
preoccupied about its conservation; that we do not, properly speaking,
love life at all, but living. Into the views of the least careful
there will enter some degree of providence; no man's eyes are fixed
entirely on the passing hour; but although we have some anticipation
of good health, good weather, wine, active employment, love, and
self-approval, the sum of these anticipations does not amount to
anything like a general view of life's possibilities and issues; nor
are those who cherish them most vividly, at all the most scrupulous of
their personal safety. To be deeply interested in the accidents of our
existence, to enjoy keenly the mixed texture of human experience,
rather leads a man to disregard precautions, and risk his neck against
a straw. For surely the love of living is stronger in an Alpine
climber roping over a peril, or a hunter riding merrily at a stiff
fence, than in a creature who lives upon a diet and walks a measured
distance in the interest of his constitution.

There is a great deal of very vile nonsense talked upon both sides of
the matter: tearing divines reducing life to the dimensions of a mere
funeral procession, so short as to be hardly decent; and melancholy
unbelievers yearning for the tomb as if it were a world too far away.
Both sides must feel a little ashamed of their performances now and
again when they draw in their chairs to dinner. Indeed, a good meal
and a bottle of wine is an answer to most standard works upon the
question. When a man's heart warms to his viands, he forgets a great
deal of sophistry, and soars into a rosy zone of contemplation. Death
may be knocking at the door, like the Commander's statue;[15] we have
something else in hand, thank God, and let him knock. Passing bells
are ringing all the world over. All the world over, and every
hour,[16] someone is parting company with all his aches and ecstasies.
For us also the trap is laid. But we are so fond of life that we have
no leisure to entertain the terror of death. It is a honeymoon with us
all through, and none of the longest. Small blame to us if we give our
whole hearts to this glowing bride of ours, to the appetites, to
honour, to the hungry curiosity of the mind, to the pleasure of the
eyes in nature, and the pride of our own nimble bodies.

We all of us appreciate the sensations; but as for caring about the
Permanence of the Possibility, a man's head is generally very bald,
and his senses very dull, before he comes to that. Whether we regard
life as a lane leading to a dead wall--a mere bag's end,[17] as the
French say--or whether we think of it as a vestibule or gymnasium,
where we wait our turn and prepare our faculties for some more noble
destiny; whether we thunder in a pulpit, or pule in little atheistic
poetry-books, about its vanity and brevity; whether we look justly for
years of health and vigour, or are about to mount into a Bath-chair,
as a step towards the hearse; in each and all of these views and
situations there is but one conclusion possible: that a man should
stop his ears against paralysing terror, and run the race that is set
before him with a single mind. No one surely could have recoiled with
more heartache and terror from the thought of death than our respected
lexicographer; and yet we know how little it affected his conduct, how
wisely and boldly he walked, and in what a fresh and lively vein he
spoke of life. Already an old man, he ventured on his Highland tour;
and his heart, bound with triple brass, did not recoil before
twenty-seven individual cups of tea.[18] As courage and intelligence
are the two qualities best worth a good man's cultivation, so it is
the first part of intelligence to recognise our precarious estate in
life, and the first part of courage to be not at all abashed before
the fact. A frank and somewhat headlong carriage, not looking too
anxiously before, not dallying in maudlin regret over the past, stamps
the man who is well armoured for this world.

And not only well armoured for himself, but a good friend and a good
citizen to boot. We do not go to cowards for tender dealing; there is
nothing so cruel as panic; the man who has least fear for his own
carcass, has most time to consider others. That eminent chemist who
took his walks abroad in tin shoes, and subsisted wholly upon tepid
milk, had all his work cut out for him in considerate dealings with
his own digestion. So soon as prudence has begun to grow up in the
brain, like a dismal fungus, it finds its first expression in a
paralysis of generous acts. The victim begins to shrink spiritually;
he develops a fancy for parlours with a regulated temperature, and
takes his morality on the principle of tin shoes and tepid milk. The
care of one important body or soul becomes so engrossing, that all the
noises of the outer world begin to come thin and faint into the
parlour with the regulated temperature; and the tin shoes go equably
forward over blood and rain. To be overwise is to ossify; and the
scruple-monger ends by standing stockstill. Now the man who has his
heart on his sleeve, and a good whirling weathercock of a brain, who
reckons his life as a thing to be dashingly used and cheerfully
hazarded, makes a very different acquaintance of the world, keeps all
his pulses going true and fast, and gathers impetus as he runs, until,
if he be running towards anything better than wildfire, he may shoot
up and become a constellation in the end. Lord look after his health,
Lord have a care of his soul, says he; and he has at the key of the
position, and swashes through incongruity and peril towards his aim.
Death is on all sides of him with pointed batteries, as he is on all
sides of all of us; unfortunate surprises gird him round; mim-mouthed
friends[19] and relations hold up their hands in quite a little
elegiacal synod about his path: and what cares he for all this? Being
a true lover of living, a fellow with something pushing and
spontaneous in his inside, he must, like any other soldier, in any
other stirring, deadly warfare, push on at his best pace until he
touch the goal. "A peerage or Westminster Abbey!"[20] cried Nelson in
his bright, boyish, heroic manner. These are great incentives; not for
any of these, but for the plain satisfaction of living, of being about
their business in some sort or other, do the brave, serviceable men of
every nation tread down the nettle danger,[21] and pass flyingly over
all the stumbling-blocks of prudence. Think of the heroism of Johnson,
think of that superb indifference to mortal limitation that set him
upon his dictionary, and carried him through triumphantly until the
end! Who, if he were wisely considerate of things at large, would ever
embark upon any work much more considerable than a halfpenny post
card? Who would project a serial novel, after Thackeray and Dickens
had each fallen in mid-course?[22] Who would find heart enough to
begin to live, if he dallied with the consideration of death?

And, after all, what sorry and pitiful quibbling all this is! To
forego all the issues of living in a parlour with a regulated
temperature--as if that were not to die a hundred times over, and for
ten years at a stretch! As if it were not to die in one's own
lifetime, and without even the sad immunities of death! As if it were
not to die, and yet be the patient spectators of our own pitiable
change! The Permanent Possibility is preserved, but the sensations
carefully held at arm's length, as if one kept a photographic plate in
a dark chamber. It is better to lose health like a spendthrift than to
waste it like a miser. It is better to live and be done with it, than
to die daily in the sickroom. By all means begin your folio; even if
the doctor does not give you a year, even if he hesitates about a
month, make one brave push and see what can be accomplished in a week.
It is not only in finished undertakings that we ought to honour useful
labour. A spirit goes out of the man who means execution, which
outlives the most untimely ending. All who have meant good work with
their whole hearts, have done good work,[23] although they may die
before they have the time to sign it. Every heart that has beat strong
and cheerfully has left a hopeful impulse behind it in the world, and
bettered the tradition of mankind. And even if death catch people,
like an open pitfall, and in mid-career, laying out vast projects, and
planning monstrous foundations, flushed with hope, and their mouths
full of boastful language, they should be at once tripped up and
silenced: is there not something brave and spirited in such a
termination? and does not life go down with a better grace, foaming in
full body over a precipice, than miserably straggling to an end in
sandy deltas? When the Greeks made their fine saying that those whom
the gods love die young,[24] I cannot help believing they had this
sort of death also in their eye. For surely, at whatever age it
overtake the man, this is to die young. Death has not been suffered to
take so much as an illusion from his heart. In the hot-fit of life, a
tip-toe on the highest point of being, he passes at a bound on to the
other side. The noise of the mallet and chisel is scarcely quenched,
the trumpets are hardly done blowing, when, trailing with him clouds
of glory,[25] this happy-starred, full-blooded spirit shoots into the
spiritual land.


NOTES

This essay, which is commonly (and justly) regarded as Stevenson's
masterpiece of literary composition, was first printed in the
_Cornhill Magazine_ for April 1878, Vol. XXXVII, pp. 432-437. In 1881
it was published in the volume _Virginibus Puerisque_. For the success
of this volume, as well as for its author's relations with the editor
of the _Cornhill_, see our note to _An Apology for Idlers_. It was
this article which was selected for reprinting in separate form by the
American Committee of the Robert Louis Stevenson Memorial Fund; to
every subscriber of ten dollars or more, was given a copy of this
essay, exquisitely printed at the De Vinne Press, 1898. Copies of this
edition are now eagerly sought by book-collectors; five of them were
taken by the Robert Louis Stevenson Club of Yale College, consisting
of a few undergraduates of the class of 1898, who subscribed fifty
dollars to the fund.

Stevenson's cheerful optimism was constantly shadowed by the thought
of Death, and in _Aes Triplex_ he gives free rein to his fancies on
this universal theme.

[Note 1: The title, _AEs Triplex_, is taken from Horace, _aes triplex
circa pectus_, "breast enclosed by triple brass," "aes" used by Horace
as a "symbol of indomitable courage."--Lewis's Latin Dictionary.]

[Note 2: _Thug_. This word, which sounds to-day so slangy, really
comes from the Hindoos (Hindustani _thaaa_, deceive). It is the name
of a religious order in India, ostensibly devoted to the worship of a
goddess, but really given to murder for the sake of booty. The
Englishmen in India called them _Thugs_, hence the name in its modern
general sense.]

[Note 3: _Pyramids ... dule trees_. For pyramids, see our note 25 of
chapter II above... _Dule trees_. More properly spelled "dool." A dool
was a stake or post used to mark boundaries.]

[Note 4: _The trumpets might sound_. "For if the trumpet give an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?" I _Cor_.
XIV, 8.]

[Note 5: _The blue-peter might-fly at the truck_. The blue-peter is a
term used in the British navy and widely elsewhere; it is a blue flag
with a white square employed often as a signal for sailing. The word
is corrupted from _Blue Repeater_, a signal flag. _Truck_ is a very
small platform at the top of a mast.]

[Note 6: _Balaclava_. A little port near Sebastopol, in the Crimea.
During the Crimean War, on the 25 October 1854, occurred the cavalry
charge of some six hundred Englishmen, celebrated by Tennyson's
universally known poem, _The Charge of the Light Brigade_. It has
recently been asserted that the number reported as actually killed in
this headlong charge referred to the horses, not to the men.]

[Note 7: _Curtius_. Referring to the story of the Roman youth, Metius
Curtius, who in 362 B.C. leaped into a chasm in the Forum, in order to
save his country. The chasm immediately closed over him, and Rome was
saved. Although the truth of the story has naturally failed to survive
the investigations of historical critics, its moral inspiration has
been effective in many historical instances.]

[Note 8: _Party for the Derby_. Derby Day, which is the occasion of
the most famous annual running race for horses in the world, takes
place in the south of England during the week preceding Whitsunday.
The race was founded by the Earl of Derby in 1780. It is now one of
the greatest holidays in England, and the whole city of London turns
out for the event. It is a great spectacle to see the crowd going from
London and returning. The most faithful description of the event, the
crowds, and the interest excited, may be found in George Moore's
novel, _Esther Waters_ (1894).]

[Note 9: _The deified Caligula_. Caius Caligula was Roman Emperor from
37 to 41 A. D. He was brought up among the soldiers, who gave him the
name Caligula, because he wore the soldier's leather shoe, or
half-boot, (Latin _caliga_). Caligula was deified, but that did not
prevent him from becoming a madman, which seems to be the best way to
account for his wanton cruelty and extraordinary caprices.]

[Note 10: _Baiae_ was a small town on the Campanian Coast, ten miles
from Naples. It was a favorite summer resort of the Roman
aristocracy.]

[Note 11: The _Praetorian Guard_ was the body-guard of the Roman
emperors. The incident Stevenson speaks of may be found in Tacitus.]

[Note 12: _Job_ ... _Walt Whitman_. The book of _Job_ is usually
regarded as the most poetical work in the Bible, even exceeding
_Psalms_ and _Isaiah_ in its splendid imaginative language and
extraordinary figures of speech. For a literary study of it, the
student is recommended to Professor Moulton's edition. Omar Khayyam
was a Persian poet of mediaeval times, who became known to English
readers through the beautiful paraphrase of some of his stanzas by
Edward Fitzgerald, in 1859. If any one will take the trouble to
compare a literal prose rendering of Omar (as in N.H. Dole's variorum
edition) with the version by Fitzgerald, he will speedily see that the
power and beauty of the poem is due far more to the skill of "Old
Fitz" than to the original. Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881) was perhaps the
foremost writer of English prose in the nineteenth century. Although a
consummate literary artist, he was even more influential as a moral
tonic. His philosophy and that of Omar represent as wide a contrast as
could easily be found. Walt Whitman, the strange American poet
(1819-1892), whose famous _Leaves_ _of Grass_ (1855) excited an uproar
in America, and gave the author a much more serious reputation in
Europe. Stevenson's interest in him was genuine, but not partisan, and
his essay, _The Gospel According to Walt Whitman (The New Quarterly
Magazine_, Oct. 1878), is perhaps the most judicious appreciation in
the English language of this singular poet. Job, Omar Khayyam, Carlyle
and Whitman, taken together, certainly give a curious collection of
what the Germans call _Weltanschauungen_.]

[Note 13: _A vapour, or a show, or made out of the same stuff with
dreams_. For constant comparisons of life with a vapour or a show, see
Quarles's _Emblems_ (1635), though these conventional figures may be
found thousands of times in general literature. The latter part of the
sentence refers to the _Tempest_, Act IV, Scene I.

              "We are such stuff
  As dreams are made on, and our little life
  Is rounded with a sleep."]

[Note 14: _Permanent Possibility of Sensation_. "Matter then, may be
defined, a Permanent Possibility of Sensation."--John Stuart Mill,
_Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_, Vol. I. Chap. XI.]

[Note 15: _Like the Commander's Statue_. In the familiar story of Don
Juan, where the audacious rake accepts the Commander's invitation to
supper. For treatments of this theme, see Molire's play _Don Juan_,
or Mozart's opera _Don Giovanni_; see also Bernard Shaw's paradoxical
play, _Man and Superman_.... _We have something else in hand, thank
God, and let him knock_. It is possible that Stevenson's words here
are an unconscious reminiscence of Colley Cibber's letter to the
novelist Richardson. This unabashed old profligate celebrated the
Christmas Day of his eightieth year by writing to the apostle of
domestic virtue in the following strain: "Though Death has been
cooling his heels at my door these three weeks, I have not had time to
see him. The daily conversation of my friends has kept me so agreeably
alive, that I have not passed my time better a great while. If you
have a mind to make one of us, I will order Death to come another
day."]

[Note 16: _All the world over, and every hour_. He might truthfully
have said, "every second."]

[Note 17: _A mere bag's end, as the French say. A cul de sac._]

[Note 18: _Our respected lexicographer ... Highland tour ... triple
brass ... twenty-seven individual cups of tea._ Dr. Samuel Johnson's
Dictionary appeared in 1755. For his horror of death, his fondness for
tea, and his Highland tour with Boswell, see the latter's _Life of
Johnson_; consult the late Dr. Hill's admirable index in his edition
of the _Life_.]

[Note 19: _Mim-mouthed friends_. See J. Wright's _English Dialect
Dictionary_. "Mim-mouthed" means "affectedly prim or proper in
speech."]

[Note 20: "_A peerage or Westminster Abbey!_" Horatio Nelson
(1758-1805), the most famous admiral in England's naval history, who
won the great battle of Trafalgar and lost his life in the moment of
victory. Nelson was as ambitious as he was brave, and his cry that
Stevenson quotes was characteristic.]

[Note 21: _Tread down the nettle danger_. Hotspur's words in _King
Henry IV_, Part I, Act II, Sc. 3. "Out of this nettle, danger, we
pluck this flower, safety."]

[Note 22: _After Thackeray and Dickens had each fallen in mid-course?_
Thackeray and Dickens, dying in 1863 and in 1870 respectively, left
unfinished _Denis Duval_ and _The Mystery of Edwin Drood_. Stevenson
himself left unfinished what would in all probability have been his
unquestioned masterpiece, _Weir of Hermiston_.]

[Note 23: _All who have meant good work with their whole hearts, have
done good work_. See Browning's inspiring poem, _Rabbi Ben Ezra_,
XXIII, XXIV, XXV:--

    "Not on the vulgar mass
    Called "work," must sentence pass,
  Things done, which took the eye and had the price;
    O'er which, from level stand,
    The low world laid its hand,
  Found straightway to its mind, could value in a trice:

    But all, the world's coarse thumb
    And finger failed to plumb,
  So passed in making up the main account;
    All instincts immature,
    All purposes unsure,
  That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man's amount:

    Thoughts hardly to be packed
    Into a narrow act,
  Fancies that broke through language and escaped;
    All I could never be,
    All, men ignored in me,
  This, I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher shaped."]

[Note 24: _Whom the Gods love die young._ "Quem di diligunt adolescens
moritur."--Plautus, _Bacchides_, Act IV, Sc. 7.]

[Note 25: _Trailing with him clouds of glory._ This passage, from
Wordsworth's _Ode on the Intimations of Immortality_ (1807), was a
favorite one with Stevenson, and he quotes it several times in various
essays.]


IV

TALK AND TALKERS

I

"Sir, we had a good talk."[1]--JOHNSON.

"As we must account[2] for every idle word, so we must for every idle
silence."--FRANKLIN.

There can be no fairer ambition than to excel in talk; to be affable,
gay, ready, clear and welcome; to have a fact, a thought, or an
illustration, pat to every subject; and not only to cheer the flight
of time among our intimates, but bear our part in that great
international congress, always sitting, where public wrongs are first
declared, public errors first corrected, and the course of public
opinion shaped, day by day, a little nearer to the right. No measure
comes before Parliament but it has been long ago prepared by the grand
jury of the talkers; no book is written that has not been largely
composed by their assistance. Literature in many of its branches is no
other than the shadow of good talk; but the imitation falls far short
of the original in life, freedom and effect. There are always two to a
talk, giving and taking, comparing experience and according
conclusions. Talk is fluid, tentative, continually "in further search
and progress;" while written words remain fixed, become idols even to
the writer, found wooden dogmatisms, and preserve flies of obvious
error in the amber[3] of the truth. Last and chief, while literature,
gagged with linsey-woolsey, can only deal with a fraction of the life
of man, talk goes fancy free[4] and may call a spade a spade.[5] It
cannot, even if it would, become merely aesthetic or merely classical
like literature. A jest intervenes, the solemn humbug is dissolved in
laughter, and speech runs forth out of the contemporary groove into
the open fields of nature, cheery and cheering, like schoolboys out of
school. And it is in talk alone that we can learn our period and
ourselves. In short, the first duty of a man is to speak; that is his
chief business in this world; and talk, which is the harmonious speech
of two or more, is by far the most accessible of pleasures. It costs
nothing in money; it is all profit; it completes our education, founds
and fosters our friendships, and can be enjoyed at any age and in
almost any state of health.

The spice of life is battle; the friendliest relations are still a
kind of contest; and if we would not forego all that is valuable in
our lot, we must continually face some other person, eye to eye, and
wrestle a fall whether in love or enmity. It is still by force of
body, or power of character or intellect; that we attain to worthy
pleasures. Men and women contend for each other in the lists of love,
like rival mesmerists; the active and adroit decide their challenges
in the sports of the body; and the sedentary sit down to chess or
conversation. All sluggish and pacific pleasures are, to the same
degree, solitary and selfish; and every durable bond between human
beings is founded in or heightened by some element of competition.
Now, the relation that has the least root in matter is undoubtedly
that airy one of friendship; and hence, I suppose, it is that good
talk most commonly arises among friends. Talk is, indeed, both the
scene and instrument of friendship. It is in talk alone that the
friends can measure strength, and enjoy that amicable
counter-assertion of personality which is the gauge of relations and
the sport of life.

A good talk is not to be had for the asking. Humours must first be
accorded in a kind of overture or prologue; hour, company and
circumstance be suited; and then, at a fit juncture, the subject, the
quarry of two heated minds, spring up like a deer out of the wood. Not
that the talker has any of the hunter's pride, though he has all and
more than all his ardour. The genuine artist follows the stream of
conversation as an angler follows the windings of a brook, not
dallying where he fails to "kill." He trusts implicitly to hazard; and
he is rewarded by continual variety, continual pleasure, and those
changing prospects of the truth that are the best of education. There
is nothing in a subject, so called, that we should regard it as an
idol, or follow it beyond the promptings of desire. Indeed, there are
few subjects; and so far as they are truly talkable, more than the
half of them may be reduced to three: that I am I, that you are you,
and that there are other people dimly understood to be not quite the
same as either. Wherever talk may range, it still runs half the time
on these eternal lines. The theme being set, each plays on himself as
on an instrument; asserts and justifies himself; ransacks his brain
for instances and opinions, and brings them forth new-minted, to his
own surprise and the admiration of his adversary. All natural talk is
a festival of ostentation; and by the laws of the game each accepts
and fans the vanity of the other. It is from that reason that we
venture to lay ourselves so open, that we dare to be so warmly
eloquent, and that we swell in each other's eyes to such a vast
proportion. For talkers, once launched, begin to overflow the limits
of their ordinary selves, tower up to the height of their secret
pretensions, and give themselves out for the heroes, brave, pious,
musical and wise, that in their most shining moments they aspire to
be. So they weave for themselves with words and for a while inhabit a
palace of delights, temple at once and theatre, where they fill the
round of the world's dignities, and feast with the gods, exulting in
Kudos. And when the talk is over, each goes his way, still flushed
with vanity and admiration, still trailing clouds of glory;[6] each
declines from the height of his ideal orgie, not in a moment, but by
slow declension. I remember, in the _entr'acte_ of an afternoon
performance, coming forth into the sunshine, in a beautiful green,
gardened corner of a romantic city; and as I sat and smoked, the music
moving in my blood, I seemed to sit there and evaporate _The Flying
Dutchman_[7] (for it was that I had been hearing) with a wonderful
sense of life, warmth, well-being and pride; and the noises of the
city, voices, bells and marching feet, fell together in my ears like a
symphonious orchestra. In the same way, the excitement of a good talk
lives for a long while after in the blood, the heart still hot within
you, the brain still simmering, and the physical earth swimming around
you with the colours of the sunset.

Natural talk, like ploughing, should turn up a large surface of life,
rather than dig mines into geological strata. Masses of experience,
anecdote, incident, cross-lights, quotation, historical instances, the
whole flotsam and jetsam of two minds forced in and in upon the matter
in hand from every point of the compass, and from every degree of
mental elevation and abasement--these are the material with which talk
is fortified, the food on which the talkers thrive. Such argument as
is proper to the exercise should still be brief and seizing. Talk
should proceed by instances; by the apposite, not the expository. It
should keep close along the lines of humanity, near the bosoms and
businesses of men, at the level where history, fiction and experience
intersect and illuminate each other. I am I, and You are You, with all
my heart; but conceive how these lean propositions change and brighten
when, instead of words, the actual you and I sit cheek by jowl, the
spirit housed in the live body, and the very clothes uttering voices
to corroborate the story in the face. Not less surprising is the
change when we leave off to speak of generalities--the bad, the good,
the miser, and all the characters of Theophrastus[8]--and call up
other men, by anecdote or instance, in their very trick and feature;
or trading on a common knowledge, toss each other famous names, still
glowing with the hues of life. Communication is no longer by words,
but by the instancing of whole biographies, epics, systems of
philosophy, and epochs of history, in bulk. That which is understood
excels that which is spoken in quantity and quality alike; ideas thus
figured and personified, change hands, as we may say, like coin; and
the speakers imply without effort the most obscure and intricate
thoughts. Strangers who have a large common ground of reading will,
for this reason, come the sooner to the grapple of genuine converse.
If they know Othello and Napoleon, Consuelo and Clarissa Harlowe,
Vautrin and Steenie Steenson,[9] they can leave generalities and begin
at once to speak by figures.

Conduct and art are the two subjects that arise most frequently and
that embrace the widest range of facts. A few pleasures bear
discussion for their own sake, but only those which are most social or
most radically human; and even these can only be discussed among their
devotees. A technicality is always welcome to the expert, whether in
athletics, art or law; I have heard the best kind of talk on
technicalities from such rare and happy persons as both know and love
their business. No human being[10] ever spoke of scenery for above two
minutes at a time, which makes me suspect we hear too much of it in
literature. The weather is regarded as the very nadir and scoff of
conversational topics. And yet the weather, the dramatic element in
scenery, is far more tractable in language, and far more human both in
import and suggestion than the stable features of the landscape.
Sailors and shepherds, and the people generally of coast and mountain,
talk well of it; and it is often excitingly presented in literature.
But the tendency of all living talk draws it back and back into the
common focus of humanity. Talk is a creature of the street and
market-place, feeding on gossip; and its last resort is still in a
discussion on morals. That is the heroic form of gossip; heroic in
virtue of its high pretensions; but still gossip, because it turns on
personalities. You can keep no men long, nor Scotchmen[11] at all, off
moral or theological discussion. These are to all the world what law
is to lawyers; they are everybody's technicalities; the medium through
which all consider life, and the dialect in which they express their
judgments. I knew three young men who walked together daily for some
two months in a solemn and beautiful forest and in cloudless summer
weather; daily they talked with unabated zest, and yet scarce wandered
that whole time beyond two subjects--theology and love. And perhaps
neither a court of love[12] nor an assembly of divines would have
granted their premises or welcomed their conclusions.

Conclusions, indeed, are not often reached by talk any more than by
private thinking. That is not the profit. The profit is in the
exercise, and above all in the experience; for when we reason at large
on any subject, we review our state and history in life. From time to
time, however, and specially, I think, in talking art, talk becomes
effective, conquering like war, widening the boundaries of knowledge
like an exploration. A point arises; the question takes a
problematical, a baffling, yet a likely air; the talkers begin to feel
lively presentiments of some conclusion near at hand; towards this
they strive with emulous ardour, each by his own path, and struggling
for first utterance; and then one leaps upon the summit of that matter
with a shout, and almost at the same moment the other is beside him;
and behold they are agreed. Like enough, the progress is illusory, a
mere cat's cradle having been wound and unwound out of words. But the
sense of joint discovery is none the less giddy and inspiring. And in
the life of the talker such triumphs, though imaginary, are neither
few nor far apart; they are attained with speed and pleasure, in the
hour of mirth; and by the nature of the process, they are always
worthily shared.

There is a certain attitude, combative at once and deferential, eager
to fight yet most averse to quarrel, which marks out at once the
talkable man. It is not eloquence, not fairness, not obstinacy, but a
certain proportion of all of these that I love to encounter in my
amicable adversaries. They must not be pontiffs holding doctrine, but
huntsmen questing after elements of truth. Neither must they be boys
to be instructed, but fellow-teachers with whom I may, wrangle and
agree on equal terms. We must reach some solution, some shadow of
consent; for without that, eager talk becomes a torture. But we do not
wish to reach it cheaply, or quickly, or without the tussle and effort
wherein pleasure lies.

The very best talker, with me, is one whom I shall call Spring-Heel'd
Jack.[13] I say so, because I never knew anyone who mingled so largely
the possible ingredients of converse. In the Spanish proverb, the
fourth man necessary to compound a salad, is a madman to mix it: Jack
is that madman. I know not what is more remarkable; the insane
lucidity of his conclusions, the humorous eloquence of his language,
or his power of method, bringing the whole of life into the focus of
the subject treated, mixing the conversational salad like a drunken
god. He doubles like the serpent, changes and flashes like the shaken
kaleidoscope, transmigrates bodily into the views of others, and so,
in the twinkling of an eye and with a heady rapture, turns questions
inside out and flings them empty before you on the ground, like a
triumphant conjuror. It is my common practice when a piece of conduct
puzzles me, to attack it in the presence of Jack with such grossness,
such partiality and such wearing iteration, as at length shall spur
him up in its defence. In a moment he transmigrates, dons the required
character, and with moonstruck philosophy justifies the act in
question. I can fancy nothing to compare with the _vim_ of these
impersonations, the strange scale of language, flying from Shakespeare
to Kant, and from Kant to Major Dyngwell[14]--

  "As fast as a musician scatters sounds
  Out of an instrument--"

the sudden, sweeping generalisations, the absurd irrelevant
particularities, the wit, wisdom, folly, humour, eloquence and bathos,
each startling in its kind, and yet all luminous in the admired
disorder of their combination. A talker of a different calibre, though
belonging to the same school, is Burly.[15] Burly is a man of great
presence; he commands a larger atmosphere, gives the impression of a
grosser mass of character than most men. It has been said of him that
his presence could be felt in a room you entered blindfold; and the
same, I think, has been said of other powerful constitutions condemned
to much physical inaction. There is something boisterous and piratic
in Burly's manner of talk which suits well enough with this
impression. He will roar you down, he will bury his face in his hands,
he will undergo passions of revolt and agony; and meanwhile his
attitude of mind is really both conciliatory and receptive; and after
Pistol has been out-Pistol'd,[16] and the welkin rung for hours, you
begin to perceive a certain subsidence in these spring torrents,
points of agreement issue, and you end arm-in-arm, and in a glow of
mutual admiration. The outcry only serves to make your final union the
more unexpected and precious. Throughout there has been perfect
sincerity, perfect intelligence, a desire to hear although not always
to listen, and an unaffected eagerness to meet concessions. You have,
with Burly, none of the dangers that attend debate with Spring-Heel'd
Jack; who may at any moment turn his powers of transmigration on
yourself, create for you a view you never held, and then furiously
fall on you for holding it. These, at least, are my two favourites,
and both are loud, copious intolerant talkers. This argues that I
myself am in the same category; for if we love talking at all, we love
a bright, fierce adversary, who will hold his ground, foot by foot, in
much our own manner, sell his attention dearly, and give us our full
measure of the dust and exertion of battle. Both these men can be beat
from a position, but it takes six hours to do it; a high and hard
adventure, worth attempting. With both you can pass days in an
enchanted country of the mind, with people, scenery and manners of its
own; live a life apart, more arduous, active and glowing than any real
existence; and come forth again when the talk is over, as out of a
theatre or a dream, to find the east wind still blowing and the
chimney-pots of the old battered city still around you. Jack has the
far finer mind, Burly the far more honest; Jack gives us the animated
poetry, Burly the romantic prose, of similar themes; the one glances
high like a meteor and makes a light in darkness; the other, with many
changing hues of fire, burns at the sea-level, like a conflagration;
but both have the same humour and artistic interests, the same
unquenched ardour in pursuit, the same gusts of talk and thunderclaps
of contradiction.

Cockshot[17] is a different article, but vastly entertaining, and has
been meat and drink to me for many a long evening. His manner is dry,
brisk and pertinacious, and the choice of words not much. The point
about him is his extraordinary readiness and spirit. You can propound
nothing but he has either a theory about it ready-made, or will have
one instantly on the stocks, and proceed to lay its timbers and launch
it in your presence. "Let me see," he will say. "Give me a moment. I
_should_ have some theory for that." A blither spectacle than the
vigour with which he sets about the task, it were hard to fancy. He is
possessed by a demoniac energy, welding the elements for his life, and
bending ideas, as an athlete bends a horseshoe, with a visible and
lively effort. He has, in theorising, a compass, an art; what I would
call the synthetic gusto; something of a Herbert Spencer,[18] who
should see the fun of the thing. You are not bound, and no more is he,
to place your faith in these brand-new opinions. But some of them are
right enough, durable even for life; and the poorest serve for a
cock-shy--as when idle people, after picnics, float a bottle on a pond
and have an hour's diversion ere it sinks. Whichever they are, serious
opinions or humours of the moment, he still defends his ventures with
indefatigable wit and spirit, hitting savagely himself, but taking
punishment like a man. He knows and never forgets that people talk,
first of all, for the sake of talking; conducts himself in the ring,
to use the old slang, like a thorough "glutton,"[19] and honestly
enjoys a telling facer from his adversary. Cockshot is bottled
effervescency, the sworn foe of sleep. Three-in-the-morning Cockshot,
says a victim. His talk is like the driest of all imaginable dry
champagnes. Sleight of hand and inimitable quickness are the qualities
by which he lives. Athelred,[20] on the other hand, presents you with
the spectacle of a sincere and somewhat slow nature thinking aloud. He
is the most unready man I ever knew to shine in conversation. You may
see him sometimes wrestle with a refractory jest for a minute or two
together, and perhaps fail to throw it in the end. And there is
something singularly engaging, often instructive, in the simplicity
with which he thus exposes the process as well as the result, the
works as well as the dial of the clock. Withal he has his hours of
inspiration. Apt words come to him as if by accident, and, coming from
deeper down, they smack the more personally, they have the more of
fine old crusted humanity, rich in sediment and humour. There are
sayings of his in which he has stamped himself into the very grain of
the language; you would think he must have worn the words next his
skin and slept with them. Yet it is not as a sayer of particular good
things that Athelred is most to be regarded, rather as the stalwart
woodman of thought. I have pulled on a light cord often enough, while
he has been wielding the broad-axe; and between us, on this unequal
division, many a specious fallacy has fallen. I have known him to
battle the same question night after night for years, keeping it in
the reign of talk, constantly applying it and re-applying it to life
with humorous or grave intention, and all the while, never hurrying,
nor flagging, nor taking an unfair advantage of the facts. Jack at a
given moment, when arising, as it were, from the tripod, can be more
radiantly just to those from whom he differs; but then the tenor of
his thoughts is even calumnious; while Athelred, slower to forge
excuses, is yet slower to condemn, and sits over the welter of the
world, vacillating but still judicial, and still faithfully contending
with his doubts.

Both the last talkers deal much in points of conduct and religion
studied in the "dry light"[21] of prose. Indirectly and as if against
his will the same elements from time to time appear in the troubled
and poetic talk of Opalstein.[22] His various and exotic knowledge,
complete although unready sympathies, and fine, full, discriminative
flow of language, fit him out to be the best of talkers; so perhaps he
is with some, not _quite_ with me--_proxime accessit_,[23] I should
say. He sings the praises of the earth and the arts, flowers and
jewels, wine and music, in a moonlight, serenading manner, as to the
light guitar; even wisdom comes from his tongue like singing; no one
is, indeed, more tuneful in the upper notes. But even while he sings
the song of the Sirens, he still hearkens to the barking of the
Sphinx. Jarring Byronic notes interrupt the flow of his Horatian
humours. His mirth has something of the tragedy of the world for its
perpetual background; and he feasts like Don Giovanni to a double
orchestra, one lightly sounding for the dance, one pealing
Beethoven[24] in the distance. He is not truly reconciled either with
life or with himself; and this instant war in his members sometimes
divides the man's attention. He does not always, perhaps not often,
frankly surrender himself in conversation. He brings into the talk
other thoughts than those which he expresses; you are conscious that
he keeps an eye on something else, that he does not shake off the
world, nor quite forget himself. Hence arise occasional
disappointments; even an occasional unfairness for his companions, who
find themselves one day giving too much, and the next, when they are
wary out of season, giving perhaps too little. Purcel[25] is in
another class from any I have mentioned. He is no debater, but appears
in conversation, as occasion rises, in two distinct characters, one of
which I admire and fear, and the other love. In the first, he is
radiantly civil and rather silent, sits on a high, courtly hilltop,
and from that vantage-ground drops you his remarks like favours. He
seems not to share in our sublunary contentions; he wears no sign of
interest; when on a sudden there falls in a crystal of wit, so
polished that the dull do not perceive it, but so right that the
sensitive are silenced. True talk should have more body and blood,
should be louder, vainer and more declaratory of the man; the true
talker should not hold so steady an advantage over whom he speaks
with; and that is one reason out of a score why I prefer my Purcel in
his second character, when he unbends into a strain of graceful
gossip, singing like the fireside kettle. In these moods he has an
elegant homeliness that rings of the true Queen Anne. I know another
person[26] who attains, in his moments, to the insolence of a
Restoration comedy, speaking, I declare, as Congreve[27] wrote; but
that is a sport of nature, and scarce falls under the rubric, for
there is none, alas! to give him answer.

One last remark occurs: It is the mark of genuine conversation that
the sayings can scarce be quoted with their full effect beyond the
circle of common friends. To have their proper weight they should
appear in a biography, and with the portrait of the speaker. Good talk
is dramatic; it is like an impromptu piece of acting where each should
represent himself to the greatest advantage; and that is the best kind
of talk where each speaker is most fully and candidly himself, and
where, if you were to shift the speeches round from one to another,
there would be the greatest loss in significance and perspicuity. It
is for this reason that talk depends so wholly on our company. We
should like to introduce Falstaff and Mercutio, or Falstaff and Sir
Toby; but Falstaff in talk with Cordelia seems even painful. Most of
us, by the Protean[28] quality of man, can talk to some degree with
all; but the true talk, that strikes out all the slumbering best of
us, comes only with the peculiar brethren of our spirits, is founded
as deep as love in the constitution of our being, and is a thing to
relish with all our energy, while, yet we have it, and to be grateful
for forever.


II[29]

In the last paper there was perhaps too much about mere debate; and
there was nothing said at all about that kind of talk which is merely
luminous and restful, a higher power of silence, the quiet of the
evening shared by ruminating friends. There is something, aside from
personal preference, to be alleged in support of this omission. Those
who are no chimney-cornerers, who rejoice in the social thunderstorm,
have a ground in reason for their choice. They get little rest indeed;
but restfulness is a quality for cattle; the virtues are all active,
life is alert, and it is in repose that men prepare themselves for
evil. On the other hand, they are bruised into a knowledge of
themselves and others; they have in a high degree the fencer's
pleasure in dexterity displayed and proved; what they get they get
upon life's terms, paying for it as they go; and once the talk is
launched, they are assured of honest dealing from an adversary eager
like themselves. The aboriginal man within us, the cave-dweller, still
lusty as when he fought tooth and nail for roots and berries, scents
this kind of equal battle from afar; it is like his old primaeval days
upon the crags, a return to the sincerity of savage life from the
comfortable fictions of the civilised. And if it be delightful to the
Old Man, it is none the less profitable to his younger brother, the
conscientious gentleman. I feel never quite sure of your urbane and
smiling coteries; I fear they indulge a man's vanities in silence,
suffer him to encroach, encourage him on to be an ass, and send him
forth again, not merely contemned for the moment, but radically more
contemptible than when he entered. But if I have a flushed, blustering
fellow for my opposite, bent on carrying a point, my vanity is sure to
have its ears rubbed, once at least, in the course of the debate. He
will not spare me when we differ; he will not fear to demonstrate my
folly to my face.

For many natures there is not much charm in the still, chambered
society, the circle of bland countenances, the digestive silence, the
admired remark, the flutter of affectionate approval. They demand more
atmosphere and exercise; "a gale upon their spirits," as our pious
ancestors would phrase it; to have their wits well breathed in an
uproarious Valhalla.[30] And I suspect that the choice, given their
character and faults, is one to be defended. The purely wise are
silenced by facts; they talk in a clear atmosphere, problems lying
around them like a view in nature; if they can be shown to be somewhat
in the wrong, they digest the reproof like a thrashing, and make
better intellectual blood. They stand corrected by a whisper; a word
or a glance reminds them of the great eternal law. But it is not so
with all. Others in conversation seek rather contact with their
fellow-men than increase of knowledge or clarity of thought. The
drama, not the philosophy, of life is the sphere of their intellectual
activity. Even when they pursue truth, they desire as much as possible
of what we may call human scenery along the road they follow. They
dwell in the heart of life; the blood sounding in their ears, their
eyes laying hold of what delights them with a brutal avidity that
makes them blind to all besides, their interest riveted on people,
living, loving, talking, tangible people. To a man of this
description, the sphere of argument seems very pale and ghostly. By a
strong expression, a perturbed countenance, floods of tears, an insult
which his conscience obliges him to swallow, he is brought round to
knowledge which no syllogism would have conveyed to him. His own
experience is so vivid, he is so superlatively conscious of himself,
that if, day after day, he is allowed to hector and hear nothing but
approving echoes, he will lose his hold on the soberness of things and
take himself in earnest for a god. Talk might be to such an one the
very way of moral ruin; the school where he might learn to be at once
intolerable and ridiculous.

This character is perhaps commoner than philosophers suppose. And for
persons of that stamp to learn much by conversation, they must speak
with their superiors, not in intellect, for that is a superiority that
must be proved, but in station. If they cannot find a friend to bully
them for their good, they must find either an old man, a woman, or
some one so far below them in the artificial order of society, that
courtesy may be particularly exercised.

The best teachers are the aged. To the old our mouths are always
partly closed; we must swallow our obvious retorts and listen. They
sit above our heads, on life's raised dais, and appeal at once to our
respect and pity. A flavour of the old school, a touch of something
different in their manner--which is freer and rounder, if they come of
what is called a good family, and often more timid and precise if they
are of the middle class--serves, in these days, to accentuate the
difference of age and add a distinction to gray hairs. But their
superiority is founded more deeply than by outward marks or gestures.
They are before us in the march of man; they have more or less solved
the irking problem; they have battled through the equinox of life; in
good and evil they have held their course; and now, without open
shame, they near the crown and harbour. It may be we have been struck
with one of fortune's darts; we can scarce be civil, so cruelly is our
spirit tossed. Yet long before we were so much as thought upon, the
like calamity befell the old man or woman that now, with pleasant
humour, rallies us upon our inattention, sitting composed in the holy
evening of man's life, in the clear shining after rain. We grow
ashamed of our distresses new and hot and coarse, like villainous
roadside brandy; we see life in aerial perspective, under the heavens
of faith; and out of the worst, in the mere presence of contented
elders, look forward and take patience. Fear shrinks before them "like
a thing reproved," not the flitting and ineffectual fear of death, but
the instant, dwelling terror of the responsibilities and revenges of
life. Their speech, indeed, is timid; they report lions in the path;
they counsel a meticulous[31] footing; but their serene, marred faces
are more eloquent and tell another story. Where they have gone, we
will go also, not very greatly fearing; what they have endured
unbroken, we also, God helping us, will make a shift to bear.

Not only is the presence of the aged in itself remedial, but their
minds are stored with antidotes, wisdom's simples, plain
considerations overlooked by youth. They have matter to communicate,
be they never so stupid. Their talk is not merely literature, it is
great literature; classic in virtue of the speaker's detachment,
studded, like a book of travel, with things we should not otherwise
have learnt. In virtue, I have said, of the speaker's detachment--and
this is why, of two old men, the one who is not your father speaks to
you with the more sensible authority; for in the paternal relation the
oldest have lively interests and remain still young. Thus I have known
two young men great friends; each swore by the other's father; the
father of each swore by the other lad; and yet each pair of parent and
child were perpetually by the ears. This is typical: it reads like the
germ of some kindly[32] comedy.

The old appear in conversation in two characters: the critically
silent and the garrulous anecdotic. The last is perhaps what we look
for; it is perhaps the more instructive. An old gentleman, well on in
years, sits handsomely and naturally in the bow-window of his age,
scanning experience with reverted eye; and chirping and smiling,
communicates the accidents and reads the lesson of his long career.
Opinions are strengthened, indeed, but they are also weeded out in the
course of years. What remains steadily present to the eye of the
retired veteran in his hermitage, what still ministers to his content,
what still quickens his old honest heart--these are "the real
long-lived things"[33] that Whitman tells us to prefer. Where youth
agrees with age, not where they differ, wisdom lies; and it is when
the young disciple finds his heart to beat in tune with his
grey-bearded teacher's that a lesson may be learned. I have known one
old gentleman, whom I may name, for he is now gathered to his
stock--Robert Hunter, Sheriff of Dumbarton,[34] and author of an
excellent law-book still re-edited and republished. Whether he was
originally big or little is more than I can guess. When I knew him he
was all fallen away and fallen in; crooked and shrunken; buckled into
a stiff waistcoat for support; troubled by ailments, which kept him
hobbling in and out of the room; one foot gouty; a wig for decency,
not for deception, on his head; close shaved, except under his
chin--and for that he never failed to apologise, for it went sore
against the traditions of his life. You can imagine how he would fare
in a novel by Miss Mather;[35] yet this rag of a Chelsea[36] veteran
lived to his last year in the plenitude of all that is best in man,
brimming with human kindness, and staunch as a Roman soldier under his
manifold infirmities. You could not say that he had lost his memory,
for he would repeat Shakespeare and Webster and Jeremy Taylor and
Burke[37] by the page together; but the parchment was filled up, there
was no room for fresh inscriptions, and he was capable of repeating
the same anecdote on many successive visits. His voice survived in its
full power, and he took a pride in using it. On his last voyage as
Commissioner of Lighthouses, he hailed a ship at sea and made himself
clearly audible without a speaking trumpet, ruffing the while with a
proper vanity in his achievement. He had a habit of eking out his
words with interrogative hems, which was puzzling and a little
wearisome, suited ill with his appearance, and seemed a survival from
some former stage of bodily portliness. Of yore, when he was a great
pedestrian and no enemy to good claret, he may have pointed with these
minute guns his allocutions to the bench. His humour was perfectly
equable, set beyond the reach of fate; gout, rheumatism, stone and
gravel might have combined their forces against that frail tabernacle,
but when I came round on Sunday evening, he would lay aside Jeremy
Taylor's _Life of Christ_ and greet me with the same open brow, the
same kind formality of manner. His opinions and sympathies dated the
man almost to a decade. He had begun life, under his mother's
influence, as an admirer of Junius,[38] but on maturer knowledge had
transferred his admiration to Burke. He cautioned me, with entire
gravity, to be punctilious in writing English; never to forget that I
was a Scotchman, that English was a foreign tongue, and that if I
attempted the colloquial, I should certainly be shamed: the remark was
apposite, I suppose, in the days of David Hume.[39] Scott was too new
for him; he had known the author--known him, too, for a Tory; and to
the genuine classic a contemporary is always something of a trouble.
He had the old, serious love of the play; had even, as he was proud to
tell, played a certain part in the history of Shakespearian revivals,
for he had successfully pressed on Murray, of the old Edinburgh
Theatre, the idea of producing Shakespeare's fairy pieces with great
scenic display.[40] A moderate in religion, he was much struck in the
last years of his life by a conversation with two young lads,
revivalists. "H'm," he would say--"new to me. I have had--h'm--no such
experience." It struck him, not with pain, rather with a solemn
philosophic interest, that he, a Christian as he hoped, and a
Christian of so old a standing, should hear these young fellows
talking of his own subject, his own weapons that he had fought the
battle of life with,--"and--h'm--not understand." In this wise and
grateful attitude he did justice to himself and others, reposed
unshaken in his old beliefs, and recognised their limits without anger
or alarm. His last recorded remark, on the last night of his life, was
after he had been arguing against Calvinism[41] with his minister and
was interrupted by an intolerable pang. "After all," he said, "of all
the 'isms, I know none so bad as rheumatism." My own last sight of him
was some time before, when we dined together at an inn; he had been on
circuit, for he stuck to his duties like a chief part of his
existence; and I remember it as the only occasion on which he ever
soiled his lips with slang--a thing he loathed. We were both Roberts;
and as we took our places at table, he addressed me with a twinkle:
"We are just what you would call two bob."[42] He offered me port, I
remember, as the proper milk of youth; spoke of "twenty-shilling
notes"; and throughout the meal was full of old-world pleasantry and
quaintness, like an ancient boy on a holiday. But what I recall
chiefly was his confession that he had never read _Othello_ to an
end.[43] Shakespeare was his continual study. He loved nothing better
than to display his knowledge and memory by adducing parallel passages
from Shakespeare, passages where the same word was employed, or the
same idea differently treated. But _Othello_ had beaten him. "That
noble gentleman and that noble lady--h'm--too painful for me." The
same night the boardings were covered with posters, "Burlesque of
_Othello_," and the contrast blazed up in my mind like a bonfire. An
unforgettable look it gave me into that kind man's soul. His
acquaintance was indeed a liberal and pious education.[44] All the
humanities were taught in that bare dining-room beside his gouty
footstool. He was a piece of good advice; he was himself the instance
that pointed and adorned his various talk. Nor could a young man have
found elsewhere a place so set apart from envy, fear, discontent, or
any of the passions that debase; a life so honest and composed; a soul
like an ancient violin, so subdued to harmony, responding to a touch
in music--as in that dining-room, with Mr. Hunter chatting at the
eleventh hour, under the shadow of eternity, fearless and gentle.

The second class of old people are not anecdotic; they are rather
hearers than talkers, listening to the young with an amused and
critical attention. To have this sort of intercourse to perfection, I
think we must go to old ladies. Women are better hearers than men, to
begin with; they learn, I fear in anguish, to bear with the tedious
and infantile vanity of the other sex; and we will take more from a
woman than even from the oldest man in the way of biting comment.
Biting comment is the chief part, whether for profit or amusement, in
this business. The old lady that I have in my eye is a very caustic
speaker, her tongue, after years of practice, in absolute command,
whether for silence or attack. If she chance to dislike you, you will
be tempted to curse the malignity of age. But if you chance to please
even slightly, you will be listened to with a particular laughing
grace of sympathy, and from time to time chastised, as if in play,
with a parasol as heavy as a pole-axe. It requires a singular art, as
well as the vantage-ground of age, to deal these stunning corrections
among the coxcombs of the young. The pill is disguised in sugar of
wit; it is administered as a compliment--if you had not pleased, you
would not have been censured; it is a personal affair--a hyphen, _a
trait d'union,_[45] between you and your censor; age's philandering,
for her pleasure and your good. Incontestably the young man feels very
much of a fool; but he must be a perfect Malvolio,[46] sick with
self-love, if he cannot take an open buffet and still smile. The
correction of silence is what kills; when you know you have
transgressed, and your friend says nothing and avoids your eye. If a
man were made of gutta-percha, his heart would quail at such a moment.
But when the word is out, the worst is over; and a fellow with any
good-humour at all may pass through a perfect hail of witty criticism,
every bare place on his soul hit to the quick with a shrewd missile,
and reappear, as if after a dive, tingling with a fine moral reaction,
and ready, with a shrinking readiness, one-third loath, for a
repetition of the discipline.

There are few women, not well sunned and ripened, and perhaps
toughened, who can thus stand apart from a man and say the true thing
with a kind of genial cruelty. Still there are some--and I doubt if
there be any man who can return the compliment.

The class of men represented by Vernon Whitford in _The Egoist_,[47]
says, indeed, the true thing, but he says it stockishly. Vernon is a
noble fellow, and makes, by the way, a noble and instructive contrast
to Daniel Deronda; his conduct is the conduct of a man of honour; but
we agree with him, against our consciences, when he remorsefully
considers "its astonishing dryness." He is the best of men, but the
best of women manage to combine all that and something more. Their
very faults assist them; they are helped even by the falseness of
their position in life. They can retire into the fortified camp of the
proprieties. They can touch a subject and suppress it. The most adroit
employ a somewhat elaborate reserve as a means to be frank, much as
they wear gloves when they shake hands. But a man has the full
responsibility of his freedom, cannot evade a question, can scarce be
silent without rudeness, must answer for his words upon the moment,
and is not seldom left face to face with a damning choice, between the
more or less dishonourable wriggling of Deronda and the downright
woodenness of Vernon Whitford.

But the superiority of women is perpetually menaced; they do not sit
throned on infirmities like the old; they are suitors as well as
sovereigns; their vanity is engaged, their affections are too apt to
follow; and hence much of the talk between the sexes degenerates into
something unworthy of the name. The desire to please, to shine with a
certain softness of lustre and to draw a fascinating picture of
oneself, banishes from conversation all that is sterling and most of
what is humorous. As soon as a strong current of mutual admiration
begins to flow, the human interest triumphs entirely over the
intellectual, and the commerce of words, consciously or not, becomes
secondary to the commercing of eyes. But even where this ridiculous
danger is avoided, and a man and woman converse equally and honestly,
something in their nature or their education falsifies the strain. An
instinct prompts them to agree; and where that is impossible, to agree
to differ. Should they neglect the warning, at the first suspicion of
an argument, they find themselves in different hemispheres. About any
point of business or conduct, any actual affair demanding settlement,
a woman will speak and listen, hear and answer arguments, not only
with natural wisdom, but with candour and logical honesty. But if the
subject of debate be something in the air, an abstraction, an excuse
for talk, a logical Aunt Sally, then may the male debater instantly
abandon hope; he may employ reason, adduce facts, be supple, be
smiling, be angry, all shall avail him nothing; what the woman said
first, that (unless she has forgotten it) she will repeat at the end.
Hence, at the very junctures when a talk between men grows brighter
and quicker and begins to promise to bear fruit, talk between the
sexes is menaced with dissolution. The point of difference, the point
of interest, is evaded by the brilliant woman, under a shower of
irrelevant conversational rockets; it is bridged by the discreet woman
with a rustle of silk, as she passes smoothly forward to the nearest
point of safety. And this sort of prestidigitation, juggling the
dangerous topic out of sight until it can be reintroduced with safety
in an altered shape, is a piece of tactics among the true drawing-room
queens.

The drawing-room is, indeed, an artificial place; it is so by our
choice and for our sins. The subjection of women; the ideal imposed
upon them from the cradle; and worn, like a hair-shirt, with so much
constancy; their motherly, superior tenderness to man's vanity and
self-importance; their managing arts--the arts of a civilised slave
among good-natured barbarians--are all painful ingredients and all
help to falsify relations. It is not till we get clear of that amusing
artificial scene that genuine relations are founded, or ideas honestly
compared. In the garden, on the road or the hillside, or _tte--tte_
and apart from interruptions, occasions arise when we may learn much
from any single woman; and nowhere more often than in, married life.
Marriage is one long conversation, chequered by disputes. The disputes
are valueless; they but ingrain the difference; the heroic heart of
woman prompting her at once to nail her colours to the mast. But in
the intervals, almost unconsciously and with no desire to shine, the
whole material of life is turned over and over, ideas are struck out
and shared, the two persons more and more adapt their notions one to
suit the other, and in process of time, without sound of trumpet, they
conduct each, other into new worlds of thought.


NOTES

The two papers on _Talk and Talkers_ first appeared in the _Cornhill
Magazine_, for April and for August, 1882, Vol. XLV, pp. 410-418, Vol.
XLVI, pp. 151-158. The second paper had the title, _Talk and Talkers_.
(_A Sequel_.) For Stevenson's relations with the Editor, see our note
to _An Apology for Idlers_. With the publication of the second part,
Stevenson's connection with the _Cornhill_ ceased, as the magazine in
1883 passed from the hands of Leslie Stephen into those of James Payn.
The two papers next appeared in the volume _Memories and Portraits_
(1887). The first was composed during the winter of 1881-2 at Davos in
the Alps, whither he had gone for his health, the second a few months
later. Writing to Charles Baxter, 22 Feb. 1882, he said, "In an
article which will appear sometime in the Cornhill, 'Talk and
Talkers,' and where I have full-lengthened the conversation of Bob,
Henley, Jenkin, Simpson, Symonds, and Gosse, I have at the end one
single word about yourself. It may amuse you to see it." (_Letters_,
I, 268.) Writing from Bournemouth, England, in February 1885 to Sidney
Colvin, he said, "See how my 'Talk and Talkers' went; every one liked
his own portrait, and shrieked about other people's; so it will be
with yours. If you are the least true to the essential, the sitter
will be pleased; very likely not his friends, and that from various
motives." (_Letters_, I, 413.) In a letter to his mother from Davos,
dated 9 April 1882, he gives the real names opposite each character in
the first paper, and adds, "But pray regard these as secrets."

The art of conversation, like the art of letter-writing, reached its
highest point in the eighteenth century; cheap postage destroyed the
latter, and the hurly-burly of modern life has been almost too strong
for the former. In the French Salons of the eighteenth century, and in
the coffeehouses and drawing-rooms of England, good conversation was
regarded as a most desirable accomplishment, and was practised by many
with extraordinary wit and skill. Swift's satire on _Polite
Conversation_ (1738) as well as the number of times he discusses the
art of conversation in other places, shows how seriously he actually
regarded it. Stevenson, like many persons who are forced away from
active life, loved a good talk. Good writers are perhaps now more
common than good talkers.


FIRST PAPER

[Note 1: _Sir, we had a good talk_. This remark was made by the Doctor
in 1768, the morning after a memorable meeting at the Crown and Anchor
tavern, where he had been engaged in conversation with seven or eight
notable literary men. "When I called upon Dr. Johnson next morning,"
says Boswell, "I found him highly satisfied with his colloquial
prowess the preceding evening. 'Well,' said he, 'we had good talk.'
BOSWELL: 'Yes, sir, you tossed and gored several persons.'"]

[Note 2: _As we must account_. This remark of Franklin's occurs in
_Poor Richard's Almanac_ for 1738.]

[Note 3: _Flies ... in the amber_. Bartlett gives Martial.]

  "The bee enclosed and through the amber shown,
  Seems buried in the juice which was his own."

Bacon, Donne, Herrick, Pope and many other authors speak of flies in
amber.]

[Note 4: _Fancy free_. See _Midsummer Night's Dream_, Act II, Sc. 2.

  "And the imperial votaress passed on,
  In maiden meditation, fancy-free."

This has been called the most graceful among all the countless
compliments received by Queen Elizabeth. The word "fancy" in the
Shaksperian quotation means simply "love."]

[Note 5: _A spade a spade_. The phrase really comes from Aristophanes,
and is quoted by Plutarch, as Philip's description of the rudeness of
the Macedonians. _Kudos_. Greek word for "pride", used as slang by
school-boys in England.]

[Note 6: _Trailing clouds of glory_. _Trailing with him clouds of
glory._ This passage, from Wordsworth's _Ode on the Intimations of
Immortality_ (1807), was a favorite one with Stevenson, and he quotes
it several times in various essays.]

[Note 7: _The Flying Dutchman_. Wagner's _Der Fliegende Hollnder_
(1843), one of his earliest, shortest, and most beautiful operas. Many
German performances are given in the afternoon, and many German
theatres have pretty gardens attached, where, during the long
intervals (_grosse Pause_) between the acts, one may refresh himself
with food, drink, tobacco, and the open air. Germany and German art,
however, did not have anything like the influence on Stevenson exerted
by the French country, language, and literature.]

[Note 8: _Theophrastus_. A Greek philosopher who died 287-B.C. His
most influential work was his _Characters_, which, subsequently
translated into many modern languages, produced a whole school of
literature known as the "Character Books," of which the best are
perhaps Sir Thomas Overbury's _Characters_ (1614), John Earle's
_Microcosmographie_ (1628), and the _Caractres_ (1688) of the great
French writer, La Bruyre.]

[Note 9: _Consuelo, Clarissa Harlowe, Vautrin, Steenie Steenson_.
_Consuelo_ is the title of one of the most notable novels by the
famous French authoress, George Sand, (1804-1876), whose real name was
Aurore Dupin. _Consuelo_ appeared in 1842.... _Clarissa_ (1747-8) was
the masterpiece of the novelist Samuel Richardson (1689-1761). This
great novel, in seven fat volumes, was a warm favorite with Stevenson,
as it has been with most English writers from Dr. Johnson to Macaulay.
Writing to a friend in December 1877, Stevenson said, "Please, if you
have not, and I don't suppose you have, already read it, institute a
search in all Melbourne for one of the rarest and certainly one of the
best of books--_Clarissa Harlowe._ For any man who takes an interest
in the problems of the two sexes, that book is a perfect mine of
documents. And it is written, sir, with the pen of an angel."
(_Letters_, I, 141.) Editions of _Clarissa_ are not so scarce now as
they were thirty years ago; several have appeared within the last few
years.... _Vautrin_ is one of the most remarkable characters in
several novels of Balzac; see especially _Pere Goriot_ (1834) ...
_Steenie Steenson_ in Scott's novel _Redgauntlet_ (1824).]

[Note 10: _No human being, etc_. Stevenson loved action in novels, and
was impatient, as many readers are, when long-drawn descriptions of
scenery were introduced. Furthermore, the love for wild scenery has
become as fashionable as the love for music; the result being a very
general hypocrisy in assumed ecstatic raptures.]

[Note 11: _You can keep no men long, nor Scotchmen at all_. Every
Scotchman is a born theologian. Franklin says in his _Autobiography_,
"I had caught this by reading my father's books of dispute on
Religion. Persons of good sense, I have since observed seldom fall
into it, except lawyers, university men, and generally men of all
sorts who have been bred at Edinburgh." (Chap. I.)]

[Note 12: _A court of love_. A mediaeval institution of chivalry,
where questions of knight-errantry, constancy in love, etc., were
discussed and for the time being, decided.]

[Note 13: _Spring-Heel'd Jack_. This is Stevenson's cousin "Bob,"
Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson (1847-1900), an artist and later
Professor of Fine Arts at University College, Liverpool. He was one of
the best conversationalists in England. Stevenson said of him,

  "My cousin Bob, ... is the man likest and most unlike to me that I
  have ever met.... What was specially his, and genuine, was his
  faculty for turning over a subject in conversation. There was an
  insane lucidity in his conclusions; a singular, humorous eloquence
  in his language, and a power of method, bringing the whole of life
  into the focus of the subject under hand; none of which I have ever
  heard equalled or even approached by any other talker." (Balfour's
  _Life of Stevenson_, I, 103. For further remarks on the cousin, see
  note to page 104 of the _Life_.)]

[Note 14: _From Shakespeare to Kant, from Kant to Major Dyngwell_.
Immanuel Kant, the foremost philosopher of the eighteenth century,
born at Knigsberg in 1724, died 1804. His greatest work, the
_Critique of Pure Reason_ (_Kritick der reinen Vernunft_, 1781),
produced about the same revolutionary effect on metaphysics as that
produced by Copernicus in astronomy, or by Darwin in natural
science.... _Major Dyngwell I know not_.]

[Note 15: _Burly_. Burly is Stevenson's friend, the poet William
Ernest Henley, who died in 1903. His sonnet on our author may be found
in the introduction to this book. Leslie Stephen introduced the two
men on 13 Feb. 1875, when Henley was in the hospital, and a very close
and intimate friendship began. Henley's personality was exceedingly
robust, in contrast with his health, and in his writings and talk he
delighted in shocking people. His philosophy of life is seen clearly
in his most characteristic poem:

  "Out of the night that covers me,
    Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
  I thank whatever Gods may be
    For my unconquerable soul.

  In the fell clutch of circumstance
    I have not winced nor cried aloud.
  Under the bludgeonings of chance
    My head is bloody, but unbowed.

  Beyond this place of wrath and tears
    Looms but the Horror of the shade,
  And yet the menace of the years
    Finds, and shall find, me unafraid.

  It matters not how strait the gate,
    How charged with punishments the scroll,
  I am the master of my fate:
    I am the Captain of my soul."

After the publication of Balfour's _Life of Stevenson_ (1901), Mr.
Henley contributed to the _Pall Mall Magazine_ in December of that
year an article called _R.L.S._, which made a tremendous sensation. It
was regarded by many of Stevenson's friends as a wanton assault on his
private character. Whether justified or not, it certainly damaged
Henley more than the dead author. For further accounts of the
relations between the two men, see index to Balfour's _Life_, under
the title _Henley_.]

[Note 16: _Pistol has been out-Pistol'd_. The burlesque character in
Shakspere's _King Henry IV_ and _V_.]

[Note 17: _Cockshot_. (The Late Fleeming Jenkin.) As the note says,
this was Professor Fleeming Jenkin, who died 12 June 1885. He
exercised a great influence over the younger man. Stevenson paid the
debt of gratitude he owed him by writing the _Memoir of Fleeming
Jenkin_, published first in America by Charles Scribner's Sons, in
1887.]

[Note 18: _Synthetic gusto; something of a Herbert Spencer_. The
English philosopher, Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), whose many volumes
in various fields of science and metaphysics were called by their
author the _Synthetic Philosophy_. His most popular book is _First
Principles_ (1862), which has exercised an enormous influence in the
direction of agnosticism. His _Autobiography_, two big volumes, was
published in 1904, and fell rather flat.]

[Note 19: _Like a thorough "glutton."_ This is still the slang of the
prize-ring. When a man is able to stand a great deal of punching
without losing consciousness or courage, he is called a "glutton for
punishment."]

[Note 20: _Athelred_. Sir Walter Simpson, who was Stevenson's
companion on the _Inland Voyage_. For a good account of him, see
Balfour's _Life of Stevenson_, I, 106.]

[Note 21: "_Dry light_." "The more perfect soul," says Heraclitus, "is
a dry light, which flies out of the body as lightning breaks from a
cloud." Plutarch, _Life of Romulus_.]

[Note 22: _Opalstein_. This was the writer and art critic, John
Addington Symonds (1840-1893). Like Stevenson, he was afflicted with
lung trouble, and spent much of his time at Davos, Switzerland, where
a good part of his literary work was done. "The great feature of the
place for Stevenson was the presence of John Addington Symonds, who,
having come there three years before on his way to Egypt, had taken up
his abode in Davos, and was now building himself a house. To him the
newcomer bore a letter of introduction from Mr. Gosse. On November 5th
(1880) Louis wrote to his mother: 'We got to Davos last evening; and I
feel sure we shall like it greatly. I saw Symonds this morning, and
already like him; it is such sport to have a literary man around....
Symonds is like a Tait to me; eternal interest in the same topics,
eternal cross-causewaying of special knowledge. That makes hours to
fly.' And a little later he wrote: 'Beyond its splendid climate, Davos
has but one advantage--the neighbourhood of J.A. Symonds. I dare say
you know his work, but the man is far more interesting.'" (Balfour's
_Life of Stevenson_, I, 214.) When Symonds first read the essay _Talk
and Talkers_, he pretended to be angry, and said, "Louis Stevenson,
what do you mean by describing me as a moonlight serenader?" (_Life_,
I, 233.)]

[Note 23: _Proxime accessit_. "He comes very near to it."]

[Note 24: _Sirens ... Sphinx Byronic ... Horatian ... Don Giovanni ...
Beethoven_. The Sirens were the famous women of Greek mythology, who
lured mariners to destruction by the overpowering sweetness of their
songs. How Ulysses outwitted them is well-known to all readers of the
_Odyssey_. One of Tennyson's earlier poems, _The Sea-Fairies_, deals
with the same theme, and indeed it has appeared constantly in the
literature of the world.... The _Sphinx_, a familiar subject in
Egyptian art, had a lion's body, the head of some other animal
(sometimes man) and wings. It was a symbolical figure. The most famous
example is of course the gigantic Sphinx near the Pyramids in Egypt,
which has proved to be an inexhaustible theme for speculation and for
poetry.... The theatrically tragic mood of _Byron_ is contrasted with
the easy-going, somewhat cynical epicureanism of Horace.... _Don
Giovanni_ (1787) the greatest opera of the great composer Mozart
(1756-1791), tells the same story told by Molire and so many others.
The French composer, Gounod, said that Mozart's _Don Giovanni_ was the
greatest musical composition that the world has ever seen....
_Beethoven_ (1770-1827) occupies in general estimation about the same
place in the history of music that Shakspere fills in the history of
literature.]

[Note 25: _Purcel_. This stands for Mr. Edmund Gosse (born 1849), a
poet and critic of some note, who writes pleasantly on many topics.
Many of Stevenson's letters were addressed to him. The two friends
first met in London in 1877, and the impression made by the novelist
on the critic may be seen in Mr. Gosse's book of essays, _Critical
Kitcats_ (1896).]

[Note 26: _I know another person_. This is undoubtedly Stevenson's
friend Charles Baxter. See the quotation from a letter to him in our
introductory note to this essay. Compare what Stevenson elsewhere said
of him: "I cannot characterise a personality so unusual in the little
space that I can here afford. I have never known one of so mingled a
strain.... He is the only man I ever heard of who could give and take
in conversation with the wit and polish of style that we find in
Congreve's comedies." (Balfour's _Life of Stevenson_, I, 105.)]

[Note 27: _Restoration comedy ... Congreve_. Restoration comedy is a
general name applied to the plays acted in England between 1660, the
year of the restoration of Charles II to the throne, and 1700, the
year of the death of Dryden. This comedy is as remarkable for the
brilliant wit of its dialogue as for its gross licentiousness. Perhaps
the wittiest dramatist of the whole group was William Congreve
(1670-1729).]

[Note 28: _Falstaff ... Mercutio ... Sir Toby ... Cordelia ...
Protean_. Sir John Falstaff, who appears in Shakspere's _King Henry
IV_, and again in the _Merry Wives of Windsor_, is generally regarded
as the greatest comic character in literature.... _Mercutio_, the
friend of Romeo; one of the most marvellous of all Shakspere's
gentlemen. He is the Hotspur of comedy, and his taking off by Tybalt
"eclipsed the gaiety of nations."... _Sir Toby Belch_ is the genial
character in _Twelfth Night_, fond of singing and drinking, but no
fool withal. A conversation between Falstaff, Mercutio, and Sir Toby
would have taxed even the resources of a Shakspere, and would have
been intolerably excellent.... _Cordelia_, the daughter of King Lear,
whose sincerity and tenderness combined make her one of the greatest
women in the history of poetry.... _Protean_, something that
constantly assumes different forms. In mythology, Proteus was the son
of Oceanus and Tethys, whose special power was his faculty for
lightning changes.

  "Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea."--Wordsworth.]

[Note 29: This sequel was called forth by an excellent article in _The
Spectator_, for 1 April 1882, and bore the title, _The Restfulness of
Talk_. The opening words of this article were as follows:--"The fine
paper on 'Talk,' by 'R.L.S.,' in the _Cornhill_ for April, a paper
which a century since would, by itself, have made a literary
reputation, does not cover the whole field."]

[Note 30: _Valhalla_. In Scandinavian mythology, this was the heaven
for the brave who fell in battle. Here they had an eternity of
fighting and drinking.]

[Note 31: _Meticulous_. Timid. From the Latin, _meticulosus_.]

[Note 32: _Kindly_. Here used in the old sense of "natural." Compare
the Litany, "the kindly fruits of the earth."]

[Note 33: "_The real long-lived things_." For Whitman, see our Note 12
of Chapter III above.]

[Note 34: _Robert Hunter, Sheriff of Dumbarton_. Hunter recognised the
genius in Stevenson long before the latter became known to the world,
and gave him much friendly encouragement. Dumbarton is a town about 16
miles north-west of Glasgow, in Scotland. It contains a castle famous
in history and in literature.]

[Note 35: _A novel by Miss Mather_. The name should be "Mathers."
Helen Mathers (Mrs. Henry Reeves), born in 1853, has written a long
series of novels, of which _My Lady Greensleeves, The Sin of Hagar_
and _Venus Victrix_ are perhaps as well-known as they deserve to be.]

[Note 36: _Chelsea_. Formerly a suburb, now a part of London, to the
S.W. It is famous for its literary associations. Swift, Thomas
Carlyle, Leigh Hunt, George Eliot, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and many
other distinguished writers lived in Chelsea at various times. It
contains a great hospital, to which Stevenson seems to refer here.]

[Note 37: _Webster, Jeremy Taylor, Burke_. John Webster was one of the
Elizabethan dramatists, who, in felicity of diction, approached more
nearly to Shakspere than most of his contemporaries. His greatest play
was _The Duchess of Malfi_ (acted in 1616). Jeremy Taylor (1613-1667),
often called the "Shakspere of Divines," was one of the greatest
pulpit orators in English history. His most famous work, still a
classic, is _Holy Living and Holy Dying_ (1650-1). Edmund Burke
(1729-1797) the parliamentary orator and author of the _Sublime and
Beautiful_ (1756), whose speeches on America are only too familiar to
American schoolboys.]

[Note 38: _Junius_. No one knows yet who "Junius" was. In the _Public
Advertiser_ from 21 Jan. 1769 to 21 Jan. 1772, appeared letters signed
by this name, which made a sensation. The identity of the author was a
favorite matter for dispute during many years.]

[Note 39: _David Hume_. The great Scotch skeptic and philosopher
(1711-1776).]

[Note 40: _Shakespeare's fairy pieces with great scenic display._ So
far from this being a novelty to-day, it has become rather nauseating,
and there are evidences of a reaction in favour of _hearing_ Shakspere
on the stage rather than _seeing_ him.]

[Note 41: _Calvinism_. If this word does not need a note yet, it
certainly will before long. The founder of the theological system
Calvinism was John Calvin, born in France in 1509. The chief doctrines
are Predestination, the Atonement (by which the blood of Christ
appeased the wrath of God toward those persons only who had been
previously chosen for salvation--on all others the sacrifice was
ineffectual), Original Sin, and the Perseverance of the Saints (once
saved, one could not fall from grace). These doctrines remained intact
in the creed of Presbyterian churches in America until a year or two
ago.]

[Note 42: _Two bob_. A pun, for "bob" is slang for "shilling."]

[Note 43: _Never read Othello to an end_. In _A Gossip on a Novel of
Dumas's,_ Stevenson confessed that there were four plays of Shakspere
he had never been able to read through, though for a different reason:
they were _Richard III, Henry VI, Titus Andronicus_, and _All's Well
that Ends Well_. It is still an open question as to whether or not
Shakspere wrote _Titus_.]

[Note 44: _A liberal and pious education_. It was Sir Richard Steele
who made the phrase, in _The Tatler_, No. 49: "to love her (Lady
Elizabeth Hastings) was a liberal education."]

[Note 45: _Trait d'union_. The French expression simply means
"hyphen": literally, "mark of connection."]

[Note 46: _Malvolio_. The conceited but not wholly contemptible
character in _Twelfth Night_.]

[Note 47: _The Egoist_. _The Egoist_ (1879) is one of the best-known
novels of Mr. George Meredith, born 1828. It had been published only a
very short time before Stevenson wrote this essay, so he is commenting
on one of the "newest" books. Stevenson's enthusiasm for Meredith knew
no bounds, and he regarded the _Egoist_ and _Richard Feverel_ (1859),
as among the masterpieces of English literature. _Daniel Deronda_, the
last and by no means the best novel of George Eliot (1820-1880), had
appeared in 1876.]


V

A GOSSIP ON ROMANCE

In anything fit to be called by the name of reading, the process
itself should be absorbing and voluptuous; we should gloat over a
book, be rapt clean out of ourselves, and rise from the perusal, our
mind filled with the busiest, kaleidoscopic dance of images, incapable
of sleep or of continuous thought. The words, if the book be eloquent,
should run thence-forward in our ears like the noise of breakers, and
the story, if it be a story, repeat itself in a thousand coloured
pictures to the eye. It was for this last pleasure that we read so
closely, and loved our books so dearly, in the bright, troubled period
of boyhood. Eloquence and thought, character and conversation, were
but obstacles to brush aside as we dug blithely after a certain sort
of incident, like a pig for truffles.[1] For my part, I liked a story
to begin with an old wayside inn where, "towards the close of the year
17--," several gentlemen in three-cocked hats were playing bowls. A
friend of mine preferred the Malabar coast[2] in a storm, with a ship
beating to windward, and a scowling fellow of Herculean proportions
striding along the beach; he, to be sure, was a pirate. This was
further afield than my home-keeping fancy loved to travel, and
designed altogether for a larger canvas than the tales that I
affected. Give me a highwayman and I was full to the brim; a
Jacobite[3] would do, but the highwayman was my favourite dish. I can
still hear that merry clatter of the hoofs along the moonlit lane;
night and the coming of day are still related in my mind with the
doings of John Rann or Jerry Abershaw;[4] and the words "postchaise,"
the "great North road,"[5] "ostler," and "nag" still sound in my ears
like poetry. One and all, at least, and each with his particular
fancy, we read story-books in childhood; not for eloquence or
character or thought, but for some quality of the brute incident. That
quality was not mere bloodshed or wonder. Although each of these was
welcome in its place, the charm for the sake of which we read depended
on something different from either. My elders used to read novels
aloud; and I can still remember four different passages which I heard,
before I was ten, with the same keen and lasting pleasure. One I
discovered long afterwards to be the admirable opening of _What will
he Do with It?_[6] It was no wonder I was pleased with that. The other
three still remain unidentified. One is a little vague; it was about a
dark, tall house at night, and people groping on the stairs by the
light that escaped from the open door of a sickroom. In another, a
lover left a ball, and went walking in a cool, dewy park, whence he
could watch the lighted windows and the figures of the dancers as they
moved. This was the most sentimental impression I think I had yet
received, for a child is somewhat deaf to the sentimental. In the
last, a poet, who had been tragically wrangling with his wife, walked
forth on the sea-beach on a tempestuous night and witnessed the
horrors of a wreck.[7] Different as they are, all these early
favourites have a common note--they have all a touch of the romantic.

Drama is the poetry of conduct, romance the poetry of circumstance.
The pleasure that we take in life is of two sorts--the active and the
passive. Now we are conscious of a great command over our destiny;
anon we are lifted up by circumstance, as by a breaking wave, and
dashed we know not how into the future. Now we are pleased by our
conduct, anon merely pleased by our surroundings. It would be hard to
say which of these modes of satisfaction is the more effective, but
the latter is surely the more constant. Conduct is three parts of
life,[8] they say; but I think they put it high. There is a vast deal
in life and letters both which is not immoral, but simply a-moral;
which either does not regard the human will at all, or deals with it
in obvious and healthy relations; where the interest turns, not upon
what a man shall choose to do, but on how he manages to do it; not on
the passionate slips and hesitations of the conscience, but on the
problems of the body and of the practical intelligence, in clean,
open-air adventure, the shock of arms or the diplomacy of life. With
such material as this it is impossible to build a play, for the
serious theatre exists solely on moral grounds, and is a standing
proof of the dissemination of the human conscience. But it is possible
to build, upon this ground, the most joyous of verses, and the most
lively, beautiful and buoyant tales.

One thing in life calls for another; there is a fitness in events and
places. The sight of a pleasant arbour[9] puts it in our minds to sit
there. One place suggests work, another idleness, a third early rising
and long rambles in the dew. The effect of night, of any flowing
water, of lighted cities, of the peep of day, of ships, of the open
ocean, calls up in the mind an army of anonymous desires and
pleasures. Something, we feel, should happen; we know not what, yet we
proceed in quest of it. And many of the happiest hours of life fleet
by us in this vain attendance on the genius of the place and moment.
It is thus that tracts of young fir, and low rocks that reach into
deep soundings, particularly torture and delight me. Something must
have happened in such places, and perhaps ages back, to members of my
race; when I was a child I tried in vain to invent appropriate games
for them, as I still try, just as vainly, to fit them with the proper
story. Some places speak distinctly. Certain dank gardens cry aloud
for a murder; certain old houses demand to be haunted; certain coasts
are set apart for ship-wreck. Other spots again seem to abide their
destiny, suggestive and impenetrable, "miching mallecho."[10] The inn
at Burford Bridge,[11] with its arbours and green garden and silent,
eddying river--though it is known already as the place where Keats
wrote some of his _Endymion_ and Nelson parted from his Emma--still
seems to wait the coming of the appropriate legend. Within these ivied
walls, behind these old green shutters, some further business
smoulders, waiting for its hour. The old Hawes Inn at the Queen's
Ferry makes a similar call upon my fancy. There it stands, apart from
the town, beside the pier, in a climate of its own, half inland, half
marine--in front, the ferry bubbling with the tide and the guard-ship
swinging to her anchor; behind, the old garden with the trees.
Americans seek it already for the sake of Lovel and Oldbuck, who dined
there at the beginning of the _Antiquary_. But you need not tell
me--that is not all; there is some story, unrecorded or not yet
complete, which must express the meaning of that inn more fully. So it
is with names and faces; so it is with incidents that are idle and
inconclusive in themselves, and yet seem like the beginning of some
quaint romance, which the all-careless author leaves untold. How many
of these romances have we not seen determine at their birth; how many
people have met us with a look of meaning in their eye, and sunk at
once into trivial acquaintances; to how many places have we not drawn
near, with express intimations--"here my destiny awaits me"--and we
have but dined there and passed on! I have lived both at the Hawes and
Burford in a perpetual flutter, on the heels, as it seemed, of some
adventure that should justify the place; but though the feeling had me
to bed at night and called me again at morning in one unbroken round
of pleasure and suspense, nothing befell me in either worth remark.
The man or the hour had not yet come; but some day, I think, a boat
shall put off from the Queen's Ferry, fraught with a dear cargo, and
some frosty night a horseman, on a tragic errand, rattle with his whip
upon the green shutters of the inn at Burford.[12]

Now, this is one of the natural appetites with which any lively
literature has to count. The desire for knowledge, I had almost added
the desire for meat, is not more deeply seated than this demand for
fit and striking incident. The dullest of clowns tells, or tries to
tell, himself a story, as the feeblest of children uses invention in
his play; and even as the imaginative grown person, joining in the
game, at once enriches it with many delightful circumstances, the
great creative writer shows us the realisation and the apotheosis of
the day-dreams of common men. His stories may be nourished with the
realities of life, but their true mark is to satisfy the nameless
longings of the reader, and to obey the ideal laws of the day-dream.
The right kind of thing should fall out in the right kind of place;
the right kind of thing should follow; and not only the characters
talk aptly and think naturally, but all the circumstances in a tale
answer one to another like notes in music. The threads of a story come
from time to time together and make a picture in the web; the
characters fall from time to time into some attitude to each other or
to nature, which stamps the story home like an illustration.
Crusoe[13] recoiling from the footprint, Achilles shouting over
against the Trojans, Ulysses bending the great bow, Christian running
with his fingers in his ears, these are each culminating moments in
the legend, and each has been printed on the mind's eye forever. Other
things we may forget; we may forget the words, although they are
beautiful; we may forget the author's comment, although perhaps it was
ingenious and true; but these epoch-making scenes, which put the last
mark of truth upon a story and fill up, at one blow, our capacity for
sympathetic pleasure, we so adopt into the very bosom of our mind that
neither time nor tide can efface or weaken the impression. This, then,
is the plastic part of literature: to embody character, thought, or
emotion in some act or attitude that shall be remarkably striking to
the mind's eye. This is the highest and hardest thing to do in words;
the thing which, once accomplished, equally delights the schoolboy and
the sage, and makes, in its own right, the quality of epics. Compared
with this, all other purposes in literature, except the purely lyrical
or the purely philosophic, are bastard in nature, facile of execution,
and feeble in result. It is one thing to write about the inn at
Burford, or to describe scenery with the word-painters; it is quite
another to seize on the heart of the suggestion and make a country
famous with a legend. It is one thing to remark and to dissect, with
the most cutting logic, the complications of life, and of the human
spirit; it is quite another to give them body and blood in the story
of Ajax[14] or of Hamlet. The first is literature, but the second is
something besides, for it is likewise art.

English people of the present day[15] are apt, I know not why, to look
somewhat down on incident, and reserve their admiration for the clink
of teaspoons and the accents of the curate. It is thought clever to
write a novel with no story at all, or at least with a very dull one.
Reduced even to the lowest terms, a certain interest can be
communicated by the art of narrative; a sense of human kinship
stirred; and a kind of monotonous fitness, comparable to the words and
air of _Sandy's Mull_, preserved among the infinitesimal occurrences
recorded. Some people work, in this manner, with even a strong touch.
Mr. Trollope's inimitable clergymen naturally arise to the mind in
this connection. But even Mr. Trollope[16] does not confine himself to
chronicling small beer. Mr. Crawley's collision with the Bishop's
wife, Mr. Melnette dallying in the deserted banquet-room, are typical
incidents, epically conceived, fitly embodying a crisis. Or again look
at Thackeray. If Rawdon Crawley's blow were not delivered, _Vanity
Fair_ would cease to be a work of art. That scene is the chief
ganglion of the tale; and the discharge of energy from Rawdon's fist
is the reward and consolation of the reader. The end of _Esmond_ is a
yet wider excursion from the author's customary fields; the scene at
Castlewood is pure Dumas;[17] the great and wily English borrower has
here borrowed from the great, unblushing French thief; as usual, he
has borrowed admirably well, and the breaking of the sword rounds off
the best of all his books with a manly, martial note. But perhaps
nothing can more strongly illustrate the necessity for marking
incident than to compare the living fame of _Robinson Crusoe_ with the
discredit of _Clarissa Harlowe_.[18] _Clarissa_ is a book of a far
more startling import, worked out, on a great canvas, with inimitable
courage and unflagging art. It contains wit, character, passion, plot,
conversations full of spirit and insight, letters sparkling with
unstrained humanity; and if the death of the heroine be somewhat
frigid and artificial, the last days of the hero strike the only note
of what we now call Byronism,[19] between the Elizabethans and Byron
himself. And yet a little story of a ship-wrecked sailor, with not a
tenth part of the style nor a thousandth part of the wisdom, exploring
none of the arcana of humanity and deprived of the perennial interest
of love, goes on from edition to edition, ever young, while _Clarissa_
lies upon the shelves unread. A friend of mine, a Welsh blacksmith,
was twenty-five years old and could neither read nor write, when he
heard a chapter of _Robinson_ read aloud in a farm kitchen. Up to that
moment he had sat content, huddled in his ignorance, but he left that
farm another man. There were day-dreams, it appeared, divine
day-dreams, written and printed and bound, and to be bought for money
and enjoyed at pleasure. Down he sat that day, painfully learned to
read Welsh, and returned to borrow the book. It had been lost, nor
could he find another copy but one that was in English. Down he sat
once more, learned English, and at length, and with entire delight,
read _Robinson_. It is like the story of a love-chase. If he had heard
a letter from _Clarissa_, would he have been fired with the same
chivalrous ardour? I wonder. Yet _Clarissa_ has every quality that can
be shown in prose, one alone excepted--pictorial or picture-making
romance. While _Robinson_ depends, for the most part and with the
overwhelming majority of its readers, on the charm of circumstance.

In the highest achievements of the art of words, the dramatic and the
pictorial, the moral and romantic interest, rise and fall together by
a common and organic law. Situation is animated with passion, passion
clothed upon with situation. Neither exists for itself, but each
inheres indissolubly with the other. This is high art; and not only
the highest art possible in words, but the highest art of all, since
it combines the greatest mass and diversity of the elements of truth
and pleasure. Such are epics, and the few prose tales that have the
epic weight. But as from a school of works, aping the creative,
incident and romance are ruthlessly discarded, so may character and
drama be omitted or subordinated to romance. There is one book, for
example, more generally loved than Shakespeare, that captivates in
childhood, and still delights in age--I mean the _Arabian
Nights_--where you shall look in vain for moral or for intellectual
interest. No human face or voice greets us among that wooden crowd of
kings and genies, sorcerers and beggarmen. Adventure, on the most
naked terms, furnishes forth the entertainment and is found enough.
Dumas approaches perhaps nearest of any modern to these Arabian
authors in the purely material charm of some of his romances. The
early part of _Monte Cristo_, down to the finding of the treasure, is
a piece of perfect story-telling; the man never breathed who shared
these moving incidents without a tremor; and yet Faria is a thing of
packthread and Dants[20] little more than a name. The sequel is one
long-drawn error, gloomy, bloody, unnatural and dull; but as for these
early chapters, I do not believe there is another volume extant where
you can breathe the same unmingled atmosphere of romance. It is very
thin and light, to be sure, as on a high mountain; but it is brisk and
clear and sunny in proportion. I saw the other day, with envy, an old
and a very clever lady setting forth on a second or third voyage into
_Monte Cristo_. Here are stories which powerfully affect the reader,
which can be reperused at any age, and where the characters are no
more than puppets. The bony fist of the showman visibly propels them;
their springs are an open secret; their faces are of wood, their
bellies filled with bran; and yet we thrillingly partake of their
adventures. And the point may be illustrated still further. The last
interview between Lucy and Richard Feveril[21] is pure drama; more
than that, it is the strongest scene, since Shakespeare, in the
English tongue. Their first meeting by the river, on the other hand,
is pure romance; it has nothing to do with character; it might happen
to any other boy and maiden, and be none the less delightful for the
change. And yet I think he would be a bold man who should choose
between these passages. Thus, in the same book, we may have two
scenes, each capital in its order: in the one, human passion, deep
calling unto deep, shall utter its genuine voice; in the second,
according circumstances, like instruments in tune, shall build up a
trivial but desirable incident, such as we love to prefigure for
ourselves; and in the end, in spite of the critics, we may hesitate to
give the preference to either. The one may ask more genius--I do not
say it does; but at least the other dwells as clearly in the memory.

True romantic art, again, makes a romance of all things. It reaches
into the highest abstraction of the ideal; it does not refuse the most
pedestrian realism. _Robinson Crusoe_ is as realistic as it is
romantic:[22] both qualities are pushed to an extreme, and neither
suffers. Nor does romance depend upon the material importance of the
incidents. To deal with strong and deadly elements, banditti, pirates,
war and murder, is to conjure with great names, and, in the event of
failure, to double the disgrace. The arrival of Haydn[23] and Consuelo
at the Canon's villa is a very trifling incident; yet we may read a
dozen boisterous stories from beginning to end, and not receive so
fresh and stirring an impression of adventure. It was the scene of
Crusoe at the wreck, if I remember rightly, that so bewitched my
blacksmith. Nor is the fact surprising. Every single article the
castaway recovers from the hulk is "a joy for ever"[24] to the man who
reads of them. They are the things that should be found, and the bare
enumeration stirs the blood. I found a glimmer of the same interest
the other day in a new book, _The Sailor's Sweetheart_,[25] by Mr.
Clark Russell. The whole business of the brig _Morning Star_ is very
rightly felt and spiritedly written; but the clothes, the books and
the money satisfy the reader's mind like things to eat. We are dealing
here with the old cut-and-dry legitimate interest of treasure trove.
But even treasure trove can be made dull. There are few people who
have not groaned under the plethora of goods that fell to the lot of
the _Swiss Family Robinson_,[26] that dreary family. They found
article after article, creature after creature, from milk kine to
pieces of ordnance, a whole consignment; but no informing taste had
presided over the selection, there was no smack or relish in the
invoice; and these riches left the fancy cold. The box of goods in
Verne's _Mysterious Island_[27] is another case in point: there was no
gusto and no glamour about that; it might have come from a shop. But
the two hundred and seventy-eight Australian sovereigns on board the
_Morning Star_ fell upon me like a surprise that I had expected; whole
vistas of secondary stories, besides the one in hand, radiated forth
from that discovery, as they radiate from a striking particular in
life; and I was made for the moment as happy as a reader has the right
to be.

To come at all at the nature of this quality of romance, we must bear
in mind the peculiarity of our attitude to any art. No art produces
illusion; in the theatre we never forget that we are in the theatre;
and while we read a story, we sit wavering between two minds, now
merely clapping our hands at the merit of the performance, now
condescending to take an active part in fancy with the characters.
This last is the triumph of romantic story-telling: when the reader
consciously plays at being the hero, the scene is a good scene. Now in
character-studies the pleasure that we take is critical; we watch, we
approve, we smile at incongruities, we are moved to sudden heats of
sympathy with courage, suffering or virtue. But the characters are
still themselves, they are not us; the more clearly they are depicted,
the more widely do they stand away from us, the more imperiously do
they thrust us back into our place as a spectator. I cannot identify
myself with Rawdon Crawley or with Eugne de Rastignac,[28] for I have
scarce a hope or fear in common with them. It is not character but
incident that woos us out of our reserve. Something happens as we
desire to have it happen to ourselves; some situation, that we have
long dallied with in fancy, is realised in the story with enticing and
appropriate details. Then we forget the characters; then we push the
hero aside; then we plunge into the tale in our own person and bathe
in fresh experience; and then, and then only, do we say we have been
reading a romance. It is not only pleasurable things that we imagine
in our day-dreams; there are lights in which we are willing to
contemplate even the idea of our own death; ways in which it seems as
if it would amuse us to be cheated, wounded or calumniated. It is thus
possible to construct a story, even of tragic import, in which every
incident, detail and trick of circumstance shall be welcome to the
reader's thoughts. Fiction is to the grown man what play is to the
child; it is there that he changes the atmosphere and tenor of his
life; and when the game so chimes with his fancy that he can join in
it with all his heart, when it pleases him with every turn, when he
loves to recall it and dwells upon its recollection with entire
delight, fiction is called romance.

Walter Scott is out and away the king of the romantics. _The Lady of
the Lake_ has no indisputable claim to be a poem beyond the inherent
fitness and desirability of the tale. It is just such a story as a man
would make up for himself, walking, in the best health and temper,
through just such scenes as it is laid in. Hence it is that a charm
dwells undefinable among these slovenly verses, as the unseen cuckoo
fills the mountains with his note; hence, even after we have flung the
book aside, the scenery and adventures remain present to the mind, a
new and green possession, not unworthy of that beautiful name, _The
Lady of the Lake_,[29] or that direct, romantic opening,--one of the
most spirited and poetical in literature,--"The stag at eve had drunk
his fill." The same strength and the same weaknesses adorn and
disfigure the novels. In that ill-written, ragged book, _The
Pirate_,[30] the figure of Cleveland--cast up by the sea on the
resounding foreland of Dunrossness--moving, with the blood on his
hands and the Spanish words on his tongue, among the simple
islanders--singing a serenade under the window of his Shetland
mistress--is conceived in the very highest manner of romantic
invention. The words of his song, "Through groves of palm," sung in
such a scene and by such a lover, clench, as in a nutshell, the
emphatic contrast upon which the tale is built. In _Guy
Mannering_,[31] again, every incident is delightful to the
imagination; and the scene when Harry Bertram lands at Ellangowan is a
model instance of romantic method.

"'I remember the tune well,' he says, 'though I cannot guess what
should at present so strongly recall it to my memory.' He took his
flageolet from his pocket and played a simple melody. Apparently the
tune awoke the corresponding associations of a damsel.... She
immediately took up the song--

  "'Are these the links of Forth, she said;
      Or are they the crooks of Dee,
  Or the bonny woods of Warroch Head
      That I so fain would see?'

"'By heaven!' said Bertram, 'it is the very ballad.'"

On this quotation two remarks fall to be made. First, as an instance
of modern feeling for romance, this famous touch of the flageolet and
the old song is selected by Miss Braddon for omission. Miss Braddon's
idea[32] of a story, like Mrs. Todgers's idea of a wooden leg,[33]
were something strange to have expounded. As a matter of personal
experience, Meg's appearance to old Mr. Bertram on the road, the ruins
of Derncleugh, the scene of the flageolet, and the Dominie's
recognition of Harry, are the four strong notes that continue to ring
in the mind after the book is laid aside. The second point is still
more curious. The reader will observe a mark of excision in the
passage as quoted by me. Well, here is how it runs in the original: "a
damsel, who, close behind a fine spring about half-way down the
descent, and which had once supplied the castle with water, was
engaged in bleaching linen." A man who gave in such copy would be
discharged from the staff of a daily paper. Scott has forgotten to
prepare the reader for the presence of the "damsel"; he has forgotten
to mention the spring and its relation to the ruin; and now, face to
face with his omission, instead of trying back and starting fair,
crams all this matter, tail foremost, into a single shambling
sentence. It is not merely bad English, or bad style; it is abominably
bad narrative besides.

Certainly the contrast is remarkable; and it is one that throws a
strong light upon the subject of this paper. For here we have a man of
the finest creative instinct touching with perfect certainty and charm
the romantic junctures of his story; and we find him utterly careless,
almost, it would seem, incapable, in the technical matter of style,
and not only frequently weak, but frequently wrong in points of drama.
In character parts, indeed, and particularly in the Scotch, he was
delicate, strong and truthful; but the trite, obliterated features of
too many of his heroes have already wearied two generations of
readers. At times his characters will speak with something far beyond
propriety with a true heroic note; but on the next page they will be
wading wearily forward with an ungrammatical and undramatic rigmarole
of words. The man who could conceive and write the character of
Elspeth of the Craigburnfoot,[34] as Scott has conceived and written
it, had not only splendid romantic, but splendid tragic gifts. How
comes it, then, that he could so often fob us off with languid,
inarticulate twaddle?

It seems to me that the explanation is to be found in the very quality
of his surprising merits. As his books are play to the reader, so
were, they play to him. He conjured up the romantic with delight, but
he had hardly patience to describe it. He was a great day-dreamer, a
seer of fit and beautiful and humorous visions, but hardly a great
artist; hardly, in the manful sense, an artist at all. He pleased
himself, and so he pleases us. Of the pleasures of his art he tasted
fully; but of its toils and vigils and distresses never man knew less.
A great romantic--an idle child.


NOTES

This essay first appeared in _Longman's Magazine_ for November 1882,
Vol. I, pp. 69-79. Five years later it was published in the volume
_Memories and Portraits_ (1887), followed by an article called _A
Humble Remonstrance_, which should really be read in connection with
this essay, as it is a continuation of the same line of thought. In
the eternal conflict between Romanticism and Realism, Stevenson was
heart and soul with the former, and fortunately he lived long enough
to see the practical effects of his own precepts and influence. When
he began to write, Realism in fiction seemed to have absolute control;
when he died, a tremendous reaction in favor of the historical romance
had already set in, that reached its climax with the death of the
century. Stevenson's share in this Romantic revival was greater than
that of any other English writer, and as an English review remarked,
if it had not been for him most of the new authors would have been
Howells and James young men.

This paper was written at Davos in the winter of 1881-2, and in
February, writing to Henley, the author said, "I have just finished a
paper, 'A Gossip on Romance,' in which I have tried to do, very
popularly, about one-half of the matter you wanted me to try. In a
way, I have found an answer to the question. But the subject was
hardly fit for so chatty a paper, and it is all loose ends. If ever I
do my book on the Art of Literature, I shall gather them together and
be clear." (_Letters_, I, 269). On Dec. 8, 1884--the same month in
which _A Humble Remonstrance_ was printed, Stevenson wrote an
interesting letter to Henry James, whose views on the art of fiction
were naturally contrary to those of his friend. See _Letters_, I, 402.

[Note 1: _Like a pig for truffles_. See the _Epilogue_ to Browning's
_Pacchiarotto etc_., Stanza XVIII:--"Your product is--truffles, you
hunt with a pig!"]

[Note 2: _The Malabar coast_. A part of India.]

[Note 3: _Jacobite_. After James II was driven from the throne in
1688, his supporters and those of his descendants were called
Jacobites. Jacobus is the Latin for James.]

[Note 4: _John Rann or Jerry Abershaw_. John Rann I cannot find. Louis
Jeremiah (or Jerry) Abershaw was a highway robber, who infested the
roads near London; he was hung in 1795, when scarcely over twenty-one
years old.]

[Note 5: "_Great North road_." The road that runs on the east of
England up to Edinburgh. Stevenson yielded to the charm that these
words had for him, for he began a romance with the title, _The Great
North Road_, which however, he never finished. It was published as a
fragment in _The Illustrated London News_, in 1895.]

[Note 6: _What will he Do with It_? One of Bulwer-Lytton's novels,
published in 1858.]

[Note 7: Since traced by many obliging correspondents to the gallery
of Charles Kingsley.]

[Note 8: _Conduct is three parts of life_. In _Literature and Dogma_
(1873) Matthew Arnold asserted with great emphasis, that conduct was
three-fourths of life.]

[Note 9: _The sight of a pleasant arbour_. Possibly a reminiscence of
the arbour in _Pilgrim's Progress_, where Christian fell asleep, and
lost his roll. "Now about the midway to the top of the hill was a
pleasant arbour."]

[Note 10: "_Miching mallecho." Hamlet's_ description of the meaning of
the Dumb Show in the play-scene, Act III, Sc. 2. "Hidden
treachery"--see any annotated edition of _Hamlet_.]

[Note 11: _Burford Bridge ... Keats ... Endymion ... Nelson ... Emma
... the old Hawes Inn at the Queen's Ferry_. Burford Bridge is close
to Dorking in Surrey, England: in the old inn, Keats wrote a part of
his poem _Endymion_ (published 1818). The room where he composed is
still on exhibition. Two letters by Keats, which are exceedingly
important to the student of his art as a poet, were written from
Burford Bridge in November 1817. See Colvin's edition of Keats's
Letters, pp. 40-46.... "Emma" is Lady Hamilton, whom Admiral Nelson
loved.... Queen's Ferry (properly _Queensferry_) is on the Firth of
Forth, Scotland. See a few lines below in the text, where Stevenson
gives the reference to the opening pages of Scott's novel the
_Antiquary_, which begins in the old inn at this place. See also page
105 of the text, and Stevenson's foot note, where he declares that he
did make use of Queensferry in his novel _Kidnapped_ (1886)(Chapter
XXVI).]

[Note 12: Since the above was written I have tried to launch the boat
with my own hands in _Kidnapped_. Some day, perhaps, I may try a
rattle at the shutters.]

[Note 13: _Crusoe ... Achilles ... Ulysses ... Christian_. When
Robinson Crusoe saw the footprint on the sand, and realised he was not
alone.... To a reader of to-day the great hero Achilles seems to be
all bluster and selfish childishness; the true gentleman of the Iliad
is _Hector_.... When Ulysses returned home in the _Odyssey_, he bent
with ease the bow that had proved too much for all the suitors of his
lonely and faithful wife Penelope.... Christian "had not run far from
his own door when his wife and children, perceiving it, began to cry
after him to return; but the man put his fingers in his ears and ran
on crying, 'Life! Life! eternal Life!'"_--Pilgrim's Progress_.]

[Note 14: _]_. The Greek heavy-weight in Homer's _Iliad_.

[Note 15: _English people of the present day_. This was absolutely
true in 1882. But in 1892 a complete revolution in taste had set in,
and many of the most hardened realists were forced to write wild
romances, or lose their grip on the public. At this time, Stevenson
naturally had no idea how powerfully his as yet unwritten romances
were to affect the literary market.]

[Note 16: _Mr. Trollope's ... chronicling small beer ... Rawdon
Crawley's blow_. Anthony Trollope (1815-1882) wrote an immense number
of mildly entertaining novels concerned with the lives and ambitions
of English clergymen and their satellites. His best-known book is
probably _Barchester Towers_ (1857).... _Chronicling small beer_ is
the "lame and impotent conclusion" with which Iago finishes his poem
(_Othello_, Act II, Sc. I).... _Rawdon Crawley's blow_ refers to the
most memorable scene in Thackeray's great novel, _Vanity Fair_
(1847-8), where Rawdon Crawley, the husband of Becky Sharp, strikes
Lord Steyne in the face (Chap. LIII). After writing this powerful
scene, Thackeray was in a state of tremendous excitement, and slapping
his knee, said, "That's Genius!"]

[Note 17: _The end of Esmond ... pure Dumas_. Thackeray's romance
_Henry Esmond_ (1852) is regarded by many critics as the greatest work
of fiction in the English language; Stevenson here calls it "the best
of all his books." The scene Stevenson refers to is where Henry is
finally cured of his love for Beatrix, and theatrically breaks his
sword in the presence of the royal admirer (Book III, Chap. 13).
Alexander Dumas (1803-1370), author of _Monte Cristo_ and _Les Trois
Mousquetaires_. Stevenson playfully calls him "the great, unblushing
French thief"; all he means is that Dumas never hesitated to
appropriate material wherever he found it, and work it into his
romances.]

[Note 18: _The living fame of Robinson Crusoe with the discredit of
Clarissa Harlowe_. A strong contrast between the romance of incident
and the analytical novel. For remarks on _Clarissa_, see our Note 9 of
Chapter IV above.]

[Note 19: _Byronism_. About the time Lord Byron was publishing _Childe
Harold_ (1812-1818) a tremendous wave of romantic melancholy swept
over all the countries of Europe. Innumerable poems and romances
dealing with mysteriously-sad heroes were written in imitation of
Byron; and young authors wore low, rolling collars, and tried to look
depressed. See Gautier's _Histoire du Romantisme._ Now the death of
Lovelace (in a duel) in Richardson's _Clarissa_, was pitched in
exactly the Byronic key, though at that time Byron had not been
born.... The Elizabethans were of course thoroughly romantic.]

[Note 20: _Faria_..._Dants_. Characters in Dumas's _Monte Cristo_
(1841-5).]

[Note 21: _Lucy and Richard Feveril_. Usually spelled "Feverel."
Stevenson strangely enough, was always a bad speller. The reference
here is to one of Stevenson's favorite novels _The Ordeal of Richard
Feverel_ (1859) by George Meredith. Stevenson's idolatrous praise of
this particular scene in the novel is curious, for no greater contrast
in English literary style can be found than that between Meredith's
and his own. For another reference by Stevenson to the older novelist,
see our Note 47 of Chapter IV above.]

[Note 22: _Robinson Crusoe is as realistic as it is romantic_. Therein
lies precisely the charm of this book for boyish minds; the details
are given with such candour that it seems as if they must all be true.
At heart, Defoe was an intense realist, as well as the first English
novelist.]

[Note 23: _The arrival of Haydn_. For a note on George Sand's novel
_Consuelo_ see Note 9 of Chapter IV above.]

[Note 24: _A joy for ever_. The first line of Keats's poem _Endymion_
is "A thing of beauty is a joy forever."]

[Note 25: _The Sailor's Sweetheart_. Mr. W. Clark Russell, born in New
York in 1844, has written many popular tales of the sea. His first
success was _The Wreck of the Grosvenor_ (1876); _The Sailor's
Sweetheart_, more properly, _A Sailor's Sweetheart_, was published in
1877.]

[Note 26: _Swiss Family Robinson_. A German story, _Der schweizerische
Robinson_ (1812) by J.D. Wyss (1743-1818). This story is not so
popular as it used to be.]

[Note 27: _Verne's Mysterious Island_. Jules Verne, who died at
Amiens, France, in 1904, wrote an immense number of romances, which,
translated into many languages, have delighted young readers all over
the world. _The Mysterious Island_ is a sequel to _Twenty Thousand
Leagues under the Sea_.]

[Note 28: _Eugne de Rastignac_. A character in Balzac's novel, Pre
Goriot.]

[Note 29: _The Lady of the Lake_. This poem, published in 1810, is as
Stevenson implies, not so much a poem as a rattling good story told in
rime.]

[Note 30: _The Pirate_. A novel by Scott, published in 1821. It was
the cause of Cooper's writing _The Pilot_. See Cooper's preface to the
latter novel.]

[Note 31: _Guy Mannering_. Also by Scott. Published 1815.]

[Note 32: _Miss Braddon's idea_. Mary Elizabeth Braddon (Maxwell),
born in 1837, published her first novel, _The Trail of the Serpent_,
in 1860. She has written a large number of sensational works of
fiction, very popular with an uncritical class of readers. Perhaps her
best-known book is _Lady Audley's Secret_ (1862). It would be well for
the student to refer to the scenes in _Guy Mannering_ which Stevenson
calls the "_Four strong notes_."]

[Note 33: _Mrs. Todgers's idea of a wooden leg_. Mrs. Todgers is a
character in Dickens's novel, _Martin Chuzzlewit_ (1843-4).]

[Note 34: _Elspeth of the Craigburnfoot_. A character in the
_Antiquary_ (1816).]


VI

THE CHARACTER OF DOGS

The civilisation, the manners, and the morals of dog-kind[1] are to a
great extent subordinated to those of his ancestral master, man. This
animal, in many ways so superior, has accepted a position of
inferiority, shares the domestic life, and humours the caprices of the
tyrant. But the potentate, like the British in India, pays small
regard to the character of his willing client, judges him with
listless glances, and condemns him in a byword. Listless have been the
looks of his admirers, who have exhausted idle terms of praise, and
buried the poor soul below exaggerations. And yet more idle and, if
possible, more unintelligent has been the attitude of his express
detractors; those who are very fond of dogs "but in their proper
place"; who say "poo' fellow, poo' fellow," and are themselves far
poorer; who whet the knife of the vivisectionist or heat his oven;[2]
who are not ashamed to admire "the creature's instinct"; and flying
far beyond folly, have dared to resuscitate the theory of animal
machines. The "dog's instinct" and the "automaton-dog," in this age of
psychology and science, sound like strange anachronisms. An automaton
he certainly is; a machine working independently of his control, the
heart like the mill-wheel, keeping all in motion, and the
consciousness, like a person shut in the mill garret, enjoying the
view out of the window and shaken by the thunder of the stones; an
automaton in one corner of which a living spirit is confined: an
automaton like man. Instinct again he certainly possesses. Inherited
aptitudes are his, inherited frailties. Some things he at once views
and understands, as though he were awakened from a sleep, as though he
came "trailing clouds of glory."[3] But with him, as with man, the
field of instinct is limited; its utterances are obscure and
occasional; and about the far larger part of life both the dog and his
master must conduct their steps by deduction and observation.

The leading distinction[4] between dog and man, after and perhaps
before the different duration of their lives, is that the one can
speak and that the other cannot. The absence of the power of speech
confines the dog in the development of his intellect. It hinders him
from many speculations, for words are the beginning of metaphysic. At
the same blow it saves him from many superstitions, and his silence
has won for him a higher name for virtue than his conduct justifies.
The faults of the dog[5] are many. He is vainer than man, singularly
greedy of notice, singularly intolerant of ridicule, suspicious like
the deaf, jealous to the degree of frenzy, and radically devoid of
truth. The day of an intelligent small dog is passed in the
manufacture and the laborious communication of falsehood; he lies with
his tail, he lies with his eye, he lies with his protesting paw; and
when he rattles his dish or scratches at the door his purpose is other
than appears. But he has some apology to offer for the vice. Many of
the signs which form his dialect have come to bear an arbitrary
meaning, clearly understood both by his master and himself; yet when a
new want arises he must either invent a new vehicle of meaning or
wrest an old one to a different purpose; and this necessity frequently
recurring must tend to lessen his idea of the sanctity of symbols.
Meanwhile the dog is clear in his own conscience, and draws, with a
human nicety, the distinction between formal and essential truth. Of
his punning perversions, his legitimate dexterity with symbols, he is
even vain; but when he has told and been detected in a lie, there is
not a hair upon his body but confesses guilt. To a dog of gentlemanly
feeling theft and falsehood are disgraceful vices. The canine, like
the human, gentleman demands in his misdemeanours Montaigne's "_je ne
sais quoi de genrux_."[6] He is never more than half ashamed of
having barked or bitten; and for those faults into which he has been
led by the desire to shine before a lady of his race, he retains, even
under physical correction, a share of pride. But to be caught lying,
if he understands it, instantly uncurls his fleece.

Just as among dull observers he preserves a name for truth, the dog
has been credited with modesty. It is amazing how the use of language
blunts the faculties of man---that because vainglory finds no vent in
words, creatures supplied with eyes have been unable to detect a fault
so gross and obvious. If a small spoiled dog were suddenly to be
endowed with speech, he would prate interminably, and still about
himself; when we had friends, we should be forced to lock him in a
garret; and what with his whining jealousies and his foible for
falsehood, in a year's time he would have gone far to weary out our
love. I was about to compare him to Sir Willoughby Patterne,[7] but
the Patternes have a manlier sense of their own merits; and the
parallel, besides, is ready. Hans Christian Andersen,[8] as we behold
him in his startling memoirs, thrilling from top to toe with an
excruciating vanity, and scouting even along the street for shadows of
offence--here was the talking dog.

It is just this rage for consideration that has betrayed the dog into
his satellite position as the friend of man. The cat, an animal of
franker appetites, preserves his independence. But the dog, with one
eye ever on the audience, has been wheedled into slavery, and praised
and patted into the renunciation of his nature. Once he ceased
hunting[9] and became man's plate-licker, the Rubicon was crossed.
Thenceforth he was a gentleman of leisure; and except the few whom we
keep working, the whole race grew more and more self-conscious,
mannered and affected. The number of things that a small dog does
naturally is strangely small. Enjoying better spirits and not crushed
under material cares, he is far more theatrical than average man. His
whole life, if he be a dog of any pretension to gallantry, is spent in
a vain show, and in the hot pursuit of admiration. Take out your puppy
for a walk, and you will find the little ball of fur clumsy, stupid,
bewildered, but natural. Let but a few months pass, and when you
repeat the process you will find nature buried in convention. He will
do nothing plainly; but the simplest processes of our material life
will all be bent into the forms of an elaborate and mysterious
etiquette. Instinct, says the fool, has awakened. But it is not so.
Some dogs--some, at the very least--if they be kept separate from
others, remain quite natural; and these, when at length they meet with
a companion of experience, and have the game explained to them,
distinguish themselves by the severity of their devotion to its rules.
I wish I were allowed to tell a story which would radiantly illuminate
the point; but men, like dogs, have an elaborate and mysterious
etiquette. It is their bond of sympathy that both are the children of
convention.

The person, man or dog, who has a conscience is eternally condemned to
some degree of humbug; the sense of the law in their members[10]
fatally precipitates either towards a frozen and affected bearing. And
the converse is true; and in the elaborate and conscious manners of
the dog, moral opinions and the love of the ideal stand confessed. To
follow for ten minutes in the street some swaggering, canine cavalier,
is to receive a lesson in dramatic art and the cultured conduct of the
body; in every act and gesture you see him true to a refined
conception; and the dullest cur, beholding him, pricks up his ear and
proceeds to imitate and parody that charming ease. For to be a
high-mannered and high-minded gentleman, careless, affable, and gay,
is the inborn pretension of the dog. The large dog, so much lazier, so
much more weighed upon with matter, so majestic in repose, so
beautiful in effort, is born with the dramatic means to wholly
represent the part. And it is more pathetic and perhaps more
instructive to consider the small dog in his conscientious and
imperfect efforts to outdo Sir Philip Sidney.[11] For the ideal of the
dog is feudal and religious;[12] the ever-present polytheism, the
whip-bearing Olympus of mankind, rules them on the one hand; on the
other, their singular difference of size and strength among themselves
effectually prevents the appearance of the democratic notion. Or we
might more exactly compare their society to the curious spectacle
presented by a school--ushers, monitors, and big and little
boys--qualified by one circumstance, the introduction of the other
sex. In each, we should observe a somewhat similar tension of manner,
and somewhat similar points of honour. In each the larger animal keeps
a contemptuous good humour; in each the smaller annoys him with
wasp-like impudence, certain of practical immunity; in each we shall
find a double life producing double characters, and an excursive and
noisy heroism combined with a fair amount of practical timidity. I
have known dogs, and I have known school heroes that, set aside the
fur, could hardly have been told apart; and if we desire to understand
the chivalry of old, we must turn to the school playfields or the
dungheap where the dogs are trooping.

Woman, with the dog, has been long enfranchised. Incessant massacre of
female innocents has changed the proportions of the sexes and
perverted their relations. Thus, when we regard the manners of the
dog, we see a romantic and monogamous animal, once perhaps as delicate
as the cat, at war with impossible conditions. Man has much to answer
for; and the part he plays is yet more damnable and parlous[13] than
Corin's in the eyes of Touchstone. But his intervention has at least
created an imperial situation for the rare surviving ladies. In that
society they reign without a rival: conscious queens; and in the only
instance of a canine wife-beater that has ever fallen under my notice,
the criminal was somewhat excused by the circumstances of his story.
He is a little, very alert, well-bred, intelligent Skye, as black as a
hat, with a wet bramble for a nose and two cairn-gorms[14] for eyes.
To the human observer, he is decidedly well-looking; but to the ladies
of his race he seems abhorrent. A thorough elaborate gentleman, of the
plume and sword-knot order, he was born with the nice sense of
gallantry to women. He took at their hands the most outrageous
treatment; I have heard him bleating like a sheep, I have seen him
streaming blood, and his ear tattered like a regimental banner; and
yet he would scorn to make reprisals. Nay more, when a human lady
upraised the contumelious whip against the very dame who had been so
cruelly misusing him, my little great-heart gave but one hoarse cry
and fell upon the tyrant tooth and nail. This is the tale of a soul's
tragedy.[15] After three years of unavailing chivalry, he suddenly, in
one hour, threw off the yoke of obligation; had he been Shakespeare he
would then have written _Troilus and Cressida_[16] to brand the
offending sex; but being only a little dog, he began to bite them. The
surprise of the ladies whom he attacked indicated the monstrosity of
his offence; but he had fairly beaten off his better angel, fairly
committed moral suicide; for almost in the same hour, throwing aside
the last rags of decency, he proceeded to attack the aged also. The
fact is worth remark, showing as it does, that ethical laws are common
both to dogs and men; and that with both a single deliberate violation
of the conscience loosens all. "But while the lamp holds on to burn,"
says the paraphrase, "the greatest sinner may return."[17] I have been
cheered to see symptoms of effectual penitence in my sweet ruffian;
and by the handling that he accepted uncomplainingly the other day
from an indignant fair one, I begin to hope the period of _Sturm und
Drang_[18] is closed.

All these little gentlemen are subtle casuists. The duty to the female
dog is plain; but where competing duties rise, down they will sit and
study them out like Jesuit confessors.[19] I knew another little Skye,
somewhat plain in manner and appearance, but a creature compact of
amiability and solid wisdom. His family going abroad for a winter, he
was received for that period by an uncle in the same city. The winter
over, his own family home again, and his own house (of which he was
very proud) reopened, he found himself in a dilemma between two
conflicting duties of loyalty and gratitude. His old friends were not
to be neglected, but it seemed hardly decent to desert the new. This
was how he solved the problem. Every morning, as soon as the door was
opened, off posted Coolin to his uncle's, visited the children in the
nursery, saluted the whole family, and was back at home in time for
breakfast and his bit of fish. Nor was this done without a sacrifice
on his part, sharply felt; for he had to forego the particular honour
and jewel of his day--his morning's walk with my father. And perhaps,
from this cause, he gradually wearied of and relaxed the practice, and
at length returned entirely to his ancient habits. But the same
decision served him in another and more distressing case of divided
duty, which happened not long after. He was not at all a kitchen dog,
but the cook had nursed him with unusual kindness during the
distemper; and though he did not adore her as he adored my
father--although (born snob) he was critically conscious of her
position as "only a servant"--he still cherished for her a special
gratitude. Well, the cook left, and retired some streets away to
lodgings of her own; and there was Coolin in precisely the same
situation with any young gentleman who has had the inestimable benefit
of a faithful nurse. The canine conscience did not solve the problem
with a pound of tea at Christmas. No longer content to pay a flying
visit, it was the whole forenoon that he dedicated to his solitary
friend. And so, day by day, he continued to comfort her solitude until
(for some reason which I could never understand and cannot approve) he
was kept locked up to break him of the graceful habit. Here, it is not
the similarity, it is the difference, that is worthy of remark; the
clearly marked degrees of gratitude and the proportional duration of
his visits. Anything further removed from instinct it were hard to
fancy; and one is even stirred to a certain impatience with a
character so destitute of spontaneity, so passionless in justice, and
so priggishly obedient to the voice of reason.

There are not many dogs like this good Coolin. and not many people.
But the type is one well marked, both in the human and the canine
family. Gallantry was not his aim, but a solid and somewhat oppressive
respectability. He was a sworn foe to the unusual and the conspicuous,
a praiser of the golden mean, a kind of city uncle modified by
Cheeryble.[20] And as he was precise and conscientious in all the
steps of his own blameless course, he looked for the same precision
and an even greater gravity in the bearing of his deity, my father. It
was no sinecure to be Coolin's idol; he was exacting like a rigid
parent; and at every sign of levity in the man whom he respected, he
announced loudly the death of virtue and the proximate fall of the
pillars of the earth.

I have called him a snob; but all dogs are so, though in varying
degrees. It is hard to follow their snobbery among themselves; for
though I think we can perceive distinctions of rank, we cannot grasp
what is the criterion. Thus in Edinburgh, in a good part of the town,
there were several distinct societies or clubs that met in the morning
to--the phrase is technical--to "rake the backets"[21] in a troop. A
friend of mine, the master of three dogs, was one day surprised to
observe that they had left one club and joined another; but whether it
was a rise or a fall, and the result of an invitation or an expulsion,
was more than he could guess. And this illustrates pointedly our
ignorance of the real life of dogs, their social ambitions and their
social hierarchies. At least, in their dealings with men they are not
only conscious of sex, but of the difference of station. And that in
the most snobbish manner; for the poor man's dog is not offended by
the notice of the rich, and keeps all his ugly feeling for those
poorer or more ragged than his master. And again, for every station
they have an ideal of behaviour, to which the master, under pain of
derogation, will do wisely to conform. How often has not a cold glance
of an eye informed me that my dog was disappointed; and how much more
gladly would he not have taken a beating than to be thus wounded in
the seat of piety!

I knew one disrespectable dog. He was far liker a cat; cared little or
nothing for men, with whom he merely coexisted as we do with cattle,
and was entirely devoted to the art of poaching. A house would not
hold him, and to live in a town was what he refused. He led, I
believe, a life of troubled but genuine pleasure, and perished beyond
all question in a trap. But this was an exception, a marked reversion
to the ancestral type; like the hairy human infant. The true dog of
the nineteenth century, to judge by the remainder of my fairly large
acquaintance, is in love with respectability. A street-dog was once
adopted by a lady. While still an Arab, he had done as Arabs do,
gambolling in the mud, charging into butchers' stalls, a cat-hunter, a
sturdy beggar, a common rogue and vagabond; but with his rise into
society he laid aside these inconsistent pleasures. He stole no more,
he hunted no more cats; and conscious of his collar he ignored his old
companions. Yet the canine upper class was never brought to recognize
the upstart, and from that hour, except for human countenance, he was
alone. Friendless, shorn of his sports and the habits of a lifetime,
he still lived in a glory of happiness, content with his acquired
respectability, and with no care but to support it solemnly. Are we to
condemn or praise this self-made dog! We praise his human brother. And
thus to conquer vicious habits is as rare with dogs as with men. With
the more part, for all their scruple-mongering and moral thought, the
vices that are born with them remain invincible throughout; and they
live all their years, glorying in their virtues, but still the slaves
of their defects. Thus the sage Coolin was a thief to the last; among
a thousand peccadilloes, a whole goose and a whole cold leg of mutton
lay upon his conscience; but Woggs,[22] whose soul's shipwreck in the
matter of gallantry I have recounted above, has only twice been known
to steal, and has often nobly conquered the temptation. The eighth is
his favourite commandment. There is something painfully human in these
unequal virtues and mortal frailties of the best. Still more painful
is the bearing of those "stammering professors"[23] in the house of
sickness and under the terror of death. It is beyond a doubt to me
that, somehow or other, the dog connects together, or confounds, the
uneasiness of sickness and the consciousness of guilt. To the pains of
the body he often adds the tortures of the conscience; and at these
times his haggard protestations form, in regard to the human deathbed,
a dreadful parody or parallel.

I once supposed that I had found an inverse relation between the
double etiquette which dogs obey; and that those who were most
addicted to the showy street life among other dogs were less careful
in the practice of home virtues for the tyrant man. But the female
dog, that mass of carneying[24] affectations, shines equally in either
sphere; rules her rough posse of attendant swains with unwearying tact
and gusto; and with her master and mistress pushes the arts of
insinuation to their crowning point. The attention of man and the
regard of other dogs flatter (it would thus appear) the same
sensibility; but perhaps, if we could read the canine heart, they
would be found to flatter it in very marked degrees. Dogs live with
man as courtiers round a monarch, steeped in the flattery of his
notice and enriched with sinecures. To push their favour in this world
of pickings and caresses is, perhaps, the business of their lives; and
their joys may lie outside. I am in despair at our persistent
ignorance. I read in the lives of our companions the same processes of
reason, the same antique and fatal conflicts of the right against the
wrong, and of unbitted nature with too rigid custom; I see them with
our weaknesses, vain, false, inconstant against appetite, and with our
one stalk of virtue, devoted to the dream of an ideal; and yet, as
they hurry by me on the street with tail in air, or come singly to
solicit my regard, I must own the secret purport of their lives is
still inscrutable to man. Is man the friend, or is he the patron only?
Have they indeed forgotten nature's voice? or are those moments
snatched from courtiership when they touch noses with the tinker's
mongrel, the brief reward and pleasure of their artificial lives?
Doubtless, when man shares with his dog the toils of a profession and
the pleasures of an art, as with the shepherd or the poacher, the
affection warms and strengthens till it fills the soul. But doubtless,
also, the masters are, in many cases, the object of a merely
interested cultus, sitting aloft like Louis Quatorze,[25] giving and
receiving flattery and favour; and the dogs, like the majority of men,
have but forgotten their true existence and become the dupes of their
ambition.


NOTES

This article originally appeared in _The English Illustrated Magazine_
for May 1883, Vol. I, pp. 300-305. It was accompanied with
illustrations by Randolph Caldecott. The essay was later included in
the volume _Memories and Portraits_ (1887).

The astonishing fidelity and devotion of the dog to his master have
certainly been in part repaid by men of letters in all times. A
valuable essay might be written on the Dog's Place in Literature; in
the poetry of the East, hundreds of years before Christ, the dog's
faithfulness was more than once celebrated. One of the most marvellous
passages in Homer's _Odyssey_ is the recognition of the ragged Ulysses
by the noble old dog, who dies of joy. In recent years, since the
publication of Dr. John Brown's _Rab and his Friends_ (1858), the dog
has approached an apotheosis. Among innumerable sketches and stories
with canine heroes may be mentioned Bret Harte's extraordinary
portrait of _Boonder_: M. Maeterlinck's essay on dogs: Richard Harding
Davis's _The Bar Sinister_: Jack London's _The Call of the Wild_: and
best of all, Alfred Ollivant's splendid story _Bob, Son of Battle_
(1898) which has every indication of becoming an English classic. It
is a pity that dogs cannot read.

[Note 1: _The morals of dog-kind_. Stevenson discusses this subject
again in his essay _Pulvis et Umbra_ (1888).]

[Note 2: _Who whet the knife of the vivisectionist or heat his oven_.
Stevenson was so sympathetic by nature that once, seeing a man beating
a dog, he interfered, crying, "It's not your dog, it's God's dog." On
the subject of vivisection, however his biographer says: "It must be
laid to the credit of his reason and the firm balance of his judgment
that although vivisection was a subject he could not endure even to
have mentioned, yet, with all his imagination and sensibility, he
never ranged himself among the opponents of this method of inquiry,
provided, of course, it was limited, as in England, with the utmost
rigour possible."--Balfour's _Life_, II, 217. The two most powerful
opponents of vivisection among Stevenson's contemporaries were Ruskin
and Browning. The former resigned the Professorship of Poetry at
Oxford because vivisection was permitted at the University: and the
latter in two poems _Tray_ and _Arcades Ambo_ treated the
vivisectionists with contempt, implying that they were cowards. In
Bernard Shaw's clever novel _Cashel Byron's Profession_, The
prize-fighter maintains that his profession is more honorable than
that of a man who bakes dogs in an oven. This novel, by the way, which
he read in the winter of 1887-88, made an extraordinary impression on
Stevenson; he recognised its author's originality and cleverness
immediately, and was filled with curiosity as to what kind of person
this Shaw might be. "Tell me more of the inimitable author," he cried.
It is a pity that Stevenson did not live to see the vogue of Shaw as a
dramatist, for the latter's early novels produced practically no
impression on the public. See Stevenson's highly entertaining letter
to William Archer, _Letters_, II, 107.]

[Note 3: "_Trailing clouds of glory_." _Trailing with him clouds of
glory._ This passage, from Wordsworth's _Ode on the Intimations of
Immortality_ (1807), was a favorite one with Stevenson, and he quotes
it several times in various essays.]

[Note 4: _The leading distinction_. Those who know dogs will fully
agree with Stevenson here.]

[Note 5: _The faults of the dog_. All lovers of dogs will by no means
agree with Stevenson in his enumeration of canine sins.]

[Note 6: _Montaigne's "je ne sais quoi de gnreux_." A bit of
generosity. Montaigne's _Essays_ (1580) had an enormous influence on
Stevenson, as they have had on nearly all literary men for three
hundred years. See his article in this volume, _Books Which Save
Influenced Me_, and the discussion of the "personal essay" in our
general Introduction.]

[Note 7: _Sir Willoughby Patterne_. Again a character in Meredith's
_Egoist_. See our Note 47 of Chapter IV above.]

[Note 8: _Hans Christian Andersen_. A Danish writer of prodigious
popularity: born 1805, died 1875. His books were translated into many
languages. The "memoirs" Stevenson refers to, were called _The Story
of My Life_, in which the author brought the narrative only so far as
1847: it was, however, finished by another hand. He is well known to
juvenile readers by his _Stories for Children_.]

[Note 9: _Once he ceased hunting and became man's plate-licker, the
Rubicon was crossed_. For a reversion to type, where the plate-licker
goes back to hunting, see Mr. London's powerful story, _The Call of
the Wild_. ... The "Rubicon" was a small stream separating Cisalpine
Gaul from Italy. Caesar crossed it in 49 B. C, thus taking a decisive
step in deliberately advancing into Italy. "Plutarch, in his life of
Caesar, makes quite a dramatic scene out of the crossing of the
Rubicon. Caesar does not even mention it."--B. Perrin's ed. of
_Caesar's Civil War_, p. 142.]

[Note 10: _The law in their members. Romans_, VII, 23. "But I see
another law in my members."]

[Note 11: _Sir Philip Sidney_. The stainless Knight of Elizabeth's
Court, born 1554, died 1586. The pages of history afford no better
illustration of the "gentleman and the scholar." Poet, romancer,
critic, courtier, soldier, his beautiful life was crowned by a noble
death.]

[Note 12: _The ideal of the dog is feudal and religious_. Maeterlinck
says the dog is the only being who has found and is absolutely sure of
his God.]

[Note 13: _Damnable and parlous than Corin's in the eyes of
Touchstone_. See _As You Like It_, Act III, Sc. 2. "Sin is damnation:
Thou art in a parlous state, shepherd."]

[Note 14: _Cairn-gorms_. Brown or yellow quartz, found in the mountain
of Cairngorm, Scotland, over 4000 feet high. Stevenson's own dog,
"Woggs" or "Bogue," was a black Skye terrier, whom the author seems
here to have in mind. See Note 20 of this Chapter, below, "Woggs."]

[Note 15: _A Soul's Tragedy_. The title of a tragedy by Browning,
published in 1846.]

[Note 16: _Troilus and Cressida_. One of the most bitter and cynical
plays ever written; practically never seen on the English stage, it
was successfully revived at Berlin, in September 1904.]

[Note 17: "_While the lamp holds on to burn ... the greatest sinner
may return_." From a hymn by Isaac Watts (1674-1748), beginning

  "Life is the time to serve the Lord,
  The time to insure the great reward;
  And while the lamp holds out to burn,
  The vilest sinner may return."

Although this stanza has no remarkable merit, many of Watts's hymns
are genuine poetry.]

[Note 18: _Sturm und Drang_. This German expression has been well
translated "Storm and Stress." It was applied to the literature in
Germany (and in Europe) the latter part of the XVIIIth century, which
was characterised by emotional excess of all kinds. A typical book of
the period was Goethe's _Sorrows of Werther_ (_Die Leiden des jungen
Werthers_, 1774). The expression is also often applied to the period
of adolescence in the life of the individual.]

[Note 19: _Jesuit confessors_. The Jesuits, or Society of Jesus, one
of the most famous religious orders of the Roman Catholic Church, was
founded in 1534 by Ignatius of Loyola and a few others.]

[Note 20: _Modified by Cheeryble_. The Cheeryble Brothers are
characters in Dickens's _Nicholas Nickleby_ (1838-9). Dickens said in
his Preface, "Those who take an interest in this tale, will be glad to
learn that the BROTHERS CHEERYBLE live: that their liberal charity,
their singleness of heart, their noble nature ... are no creations of
the Author's brain."]

[Note 21: "_Rake the backets_." The "backet" is a small, square,
wooden trough generally used for ashes and waste.]

[Note 22: _Woggs_ (_and Note: Walter, Watty, Woggy, Woggs, Wog, and
lastly Bogue; under which last name he fell in battle some twelve
months ago. Glory was his aim and he attained it; for his icon, by the
hand of Caldecott, now lies among the treasures of the nation.)
Stevenson's well-beloved black Skye terrier. See Balfour's _Life_, I,
212, 223. Stevenson was so deeply affected by Woggs's death that he
could not bear ever to own another dog. A Latin inscription was placed
on his tombstone.... This Note was added in 1887, when the essay
appeared in _Memories and Portraits_. "Icon" means image (cf.
_iconoclast_); the word has lately become familiar through the
religious use of icons by the Russians in the war with Japan. Randolph
Caldecott (1846-1886) was a well-known artist and prominent
contributor of sketches to illustrated magazines.]

[Note 23: "_Stammering Professors_." A "professor" here means simply a
professing Christian. Stevenson alludes to the fact that dogs howl
fearfully if some one in the house is dying.]

[Note 24: "_Carneying_." This means coaxing, wheedling.]

[Note 25: _Louis Quatorze_. Louis XIV of France, who died in 1715,
after a reign of 72 years, the longest reign of any monarch in
history. His absolutism and complete disregard of the people
unconsciously prepared the way for the French Revolution in 1789.]


VII

A COLLEGE MAGAZINE

I

All through my boyhood and youth, I was known and pointed out for the
pattern of an idler;[1] and yet I was always busy on my own private
end, which was to learn to write. I kept always two books in my
pocket, one to read, one to write in. As I walked, my mind was busy
fitting what I saw with appropriate words; when I sat by the roadside,
I would either read, or a pencil and a penny version-book would be in
my hand, to note down the features of the scene or commemorate some
halting stanzas. Thus I lived with words. And what I thus wrote was
for no ulterior use, it was written consciously for practice. It was
not so much that I wished to be an author (though I wished that too)
as that I had vowed that I would learn to write. That was a
proficiency that tempted me; and I practised to acquire it, as men
learn to whittle, in a wager with myself. Description was the
principal field of my exercise; for to any one with senses there is
always something worth describing, and town and country are but one
continuous subject. But I worked in other ways also; often accompanied
my walks with dramatic dialogues, in which I played many parts; and
often exercised myself in writing down conversations from memory.

This was all excellent, no doubt; so were the diaries I sometimes
tried to keep, but always and very speedily discarded, finding them a
school of posturing[2] and melancholy self-deception. And yet this was
not the most efficient part of my training. Good though it was, it
only taught me (so far as I have learned them at all) the lower and
less intellectual elements of the art, the choice of the essential
note and the right word: things that to a happier constitution had
perhaps come by nature. And regarded as training, it had one grave
defect; for it set me no standard of achievement. So that there was
perhaps more profit, as there was certainly more effort, in my secret
labours at home. Whenever I read a book or a passage that particularly
pleased me, in which a thing was said or an effect rendered with
propriety, in which there was either some conspicuous force or some
happy distinction in the style, I must sit down at once and set myself
to ape that quality. I was unsuccessful, and I knew it; and tried
again, and was again unsuccessful and always unsuccessful; but at
least in these vain bouts, I got some practice in rhythm, in harmony,
in construction and the co-ordination of parts. I have thus played the
sedulous ape to Hazlitt, to Lamb, to Wordsworth, to Sir Thomas Browne,
to Defoe, to Hawthorne, to Montaigne, to Baudelaire and to
Obermann.[3] I remember one of these monkey tricks, which was called
_The Vanity of Morals_: it was to have had a second part, _The Vanity
of Knowledge_; and as I had neither morality nor scholarship, the
names were apt; but the second part was never attempted, and the first
part was written (which is my reason for recalling it, ghostlike, from
its ashes) no less than three times: first in the manner of Hazlitt,
second in the manner of Ruskin,[4] who had cast on me a passing spell,
and third, in a laborious pasticcio of Sir Thomas Browne. So with my
other works: _Cain_, an epic, was (save the mark!) an imitation of
_Sordello: Robin Hood_, a tale in verse, took an eclectic middle
course among the fields of Keats, Chaucer and Morris: in _Monmouth,_ a
tragedy, I reclined on the bosom of Mr. Swinburne; in my innumerable
gouty-footed lyrics, I followed many masters; in the first draft of
_The King's Pardon_, a tragedy, I was on the trail of no lesser man
than John Webster; in the second draft of the same piece, with
staggering versatility, I had shifted my allegiance to Congreve, and
of course conceived my fable in a less serious vein--for it was not
Congreve's verse, it was his exquisite prose, that I admired and
sought to copy. Even at the age of thirteen I had tried to do justice
to the inhabitants of the famous city of Peebles[5] in the style of
the _Book of Snobs_. So I might go on for ever, through all my
abortive novels, and down to my later plays,[6] of which I think more
tenderly, for they were not only conceived at first under the bracing
influence of old Dumas, but have met with, resurrections: one,
strangely bettered by another hand, came on the stage itself and was
played by bodily actors; the other, originally known as _Semiramis: a
Tragedy_, I have observed on bookstalls under the _alias_ of _Prince
Otto_. But enough has been said to show by what arts of impersonation,
and in what purely ventriloquial efforts I first saw my words on
paper.

That, like it or not, is the way to learn to write; whether I have
profited or not, that is the way. It was so Keats learned,[7] and
there was never a finer temperament for literature than Keats's; it
was so, if we could trace it out, that all men have learned; and that
is why a revival of letters is always accompanied or heralded by a
cast back to earlier and fresher models. Perhaps I hear someone cry
out: But this is not the way to be original! It is not; nor is there
any way but to be born so. Nor yet, if you are born original, is there
anything in this training that shall clip the wings of your
originality. There can be none more original than Montaigne,[8]
neither could any be more unlike Cicero; yet no craftsman can fail to
see how much the one must have tried in his time to imitate the other.
Burns[9] is the very type of a prime force in letters: he was of all
men the most imitative. Shakespeare himself, the imperial, proceeds
directly from a school. It is only from a school that we can expect to
have good writers; it is almost invariably from a school that great
writers, these lawless exceptions, issue. Nor is there anything here
that should astonish the considerate. Before he can tell what cadences
he truly prefers, the student should have tried all that are possible;
before he can choose and preserve a fitting key of words, he should
long have practised the literary scales;[10] and it is only after
years of such gymnastic that he can sit down at last, legions of words
swarming to his call, dozens of turns of phrase simultaneously bidding
for his choice, and he himself knowing what he wants to do and (within
the narrow limit of a man's ability) able to do it.

And it is the great point of these imitations that there still shines
beyond the student's reach his inimitable model. Let him try as he
please, he is still sure of failure; and it is a very old and a very
true saying that failure is the only highroad to success. I must have
had some disposition to learn; for I clear-sightedly condemned my own
performances. I liked doing them indeed; but when they were done, I
could see they were rubbish. In consequence, I very rarely showed them
even to my friends; and such friends as I chose to be my confidants I
must have chosen well, for they had the friendliness to be quite plain
with me. "Padding," said one. Another wrote: "I cannot understand why
you do lyrics so badly." No more could I! Thrice I put myself in the
way of a more authoritative rebuff, by sending a paper to a magazine.
These were returned; and I was not surprised nor even pained. If they
had not been looked at, as (like all amateurs) I suspected was the
case, there was no good in repeating the experiment; if they had been
looked at--well, then I had not yet learned to write, and I must keep
on learning and living. Lastly, I had a piece of good fortune which is
the occasion of this paper, and by which I was able to see my
literature in print, and to measure experimentally how far I stood
from the favour of the public.


II

The Speculative Society is a body of some antiquity, and has counted
among its members Scott, Brougham, Jeffrey, Horner, Benjamin Constant,
Robert Emmet, and many a legal and local celebrity besides. By an
accident, variously explained, it has its rooms in the very buildings
of the University of Edinburgh: a hall, Turkey-carpeted, hung with
pictures, looking, when lighted up at night with fire and candle, like
some goodly dining-room; a passage-like library, walled with books in
their wire cages; and a corridor with a fireplace, benches, a table,
many prints of famous members, and a mural tablet to the virtues of a
former secretary. Here a member can warm himself and loaf and read;
here, in defiance of Senatus-consults, he can smoke. The Senatus looks
askance at these privileges; looks even with a somewhat vinegar aspect
on the whole society; which argues a lack of proportion in the learned
mind, for the world, we may be sure, will prize far higher this haunt
of dead lions than all the living dogs of the professorate.

I sat one December morning in the library of the Speculative; a very
humble-minded youth, though it was a virtue I never had much credit
for; yet proud of my privileges as a member of the Spec.; proud of the
pipe I was smoking in the teeth of the Senatus; and in particular,
proud of being in the next room to three very distinguished students,
who were then conversing beside the corridor fire. One of these has
now his name on the back of several volumes, and his voice, I learn,
is influential in the law courts. Of the death of the second, you have
just been reading what I had to say. And the third also has escaped
out of that battle of life in which be fought so hard, it may be so
unwisely. They were all three, as I have said, notable students; but
this was the most conspicuous. Wealthy, handsome, ambitious,
adventurous, diplomatic, a reader of Balzac, and of all men that I
have known, the most like to one of Balzac's characters, he led a
life, and was attended by an ill fortune, that could be properly set
forth only in the _Comdie Humaine_. He had then his eye on
Parliament; and soon after the time of which I write, he made a showy
speech at a political dinner, was cried up to heaven next day in the
_Courant_, and the day after was dashed lower than earth with a charge
of plagiarism in the _Scotsman_. Report would have it (I daresay, very
wrongly) that he was betrayed by one in whom he particularly trusted,
and that the author of the charge had learned its truth from his own
lips. Thus, at least, he was up one day on a pinnacle, admired and
envied by all; and the next, though still but a boy, he was publicly
disgraced. The blow would have broken a less finely tempered spirit;
and even him I suppose it rendered reckless; for he took flight to
London, and there, in a fast club, disposed of the bulk of his
considerable patrimony in the space of one winter. For years
thereafter he lived I know not how; always well dressed, always in
good hotels and good society, always with empty pockets. The charm of
his manner may have stood him in good stead; but though my own manners
are very agreeable, I have never found in them a source of livelihood;
and to explain the miracle of his continued existence, I must fall
back upon the theory of the philosopher, that in his case, as in all
of the same kind, "there was a suffering relative in the background."
From this genteel eclipse he reappeared upon the scene, and presently
sought me out in the character of a generous editor. It is in this
part that I best remember him; tall, slender, with a not ungraceful
stoop; looking quite like a refined gentleman, and quite like an
urbane adventurer; smiling with an engaging ambiguity; cocking at you
one peaked eyebrow with a great appearance of finesse; speaking low
and sweet and thick, with a touch of burr; telling strange tales with
singular deliberation and, to a patient listener, excellent effect.
After all these ups and downs, he seemed still, like the rich student
that he was of yore, to breathe of money; seemed still perfectly sure
of himself and certain of his end. Yet he was then upon the brink of
his last overthrow. He had set himself to found the strangest thing in
our society: one of those periodical sheets from which men suppose
themselves to learn opinions; in which young gentlemen from the
universities are encouraged, at so much a line, to garble facts,
insult foreign nations and calumniate private individuals; and which
are now the source of glory, so that if a man's name be often enough
printed there, he becomes a kind of demigod; and people will pardon
him when he talks back and forth, as they do for Mr. Gladstone; and
crowd him to suffocation on railway platforms, as they did the other
day to General Boulanger; and buy his literary works, as I hope you
have just done for me. Our fathers, when they were upon some great
enterprise, would sacrifice a life; building, it may be, a favourite
slave into the foundations of their palace. It was with his own life
that my companion disarmed the envy of the gods. He fought his paper
single-handed; trusting no one, for he was something of a cynic; up
early and down late, for he was nothing of a sluggard; daily
earwigging influential men, for he was a master of ingratiation. In
that slender and silken fellow there must have been a rare vein of
courage, that he should thus have died at his employment; and
doubtless ambition spoke loudly in his ear, and doubtless love also,
for it seems there was a marriage in his view had he succeeded. But he
died, and his paper died after him; and of all this grace, and tact,
and courage, it must seem to our blind eyes as if there had come
literally nothing.

These three students sat, as I was saying, in the corridor, under the
mural tablet that records the virtues of Machean, the former
secretary. We would often smile at that ineloquent memorial, and
thought it a poor thing to come into the world at all and leave no
more behind one than Machean. And yet of these three, two are gone and
have left less; and this book, perhaps, when it is old and foxy, and
some one picks it up in a corner of a book-shop, and glances through
it, smiling at the old, graceless turns of speech, and perhaps for the
love of _Alma Mater_ (which may be still extant and flourishing) buys
it, not without haggling, for some pence--this book may alone preserve
a memory of James Walter Ferrier and Robert Glasgow Brown.

Their thoughts ran very differently on that December morning; they
were all on fire with ambition; and when they had called me in to
them, and made me a sharer in their design, I too became drunken with
pride and hope. We were to found a University magazine. A pair of
little, active brothers--Livingstone by name, great skippers on the
foot, great rubbers of the hands, who kept a book-shop over against
the University building--had been debauched to play the part of
publishers. We four were to be conjunct editors, and, what was the
main point of the concern, to print our own works; while, by every
rule of arithmetic--that flatterer of credulity--the adventure must
succeed and bring great profit. Well, well: it was a bright vision. I
went home that morning walking upon air. To have been chosen by these
three distinguished students was to me the most unspeakable advance;
it was my first draught of consideration; it reconciled me to myself
and to my fellow-men; and as I steered round the railings at the Tron,
I could not withhold my lips from smiling publicly. Yet, in the bottom
of my heart, I knew that magazine would be a grim fiasco; I knew it
would not be worth reading; I knew, even if it were, that nobody would
read it; and I kept wondering, how I should be able, upon my compact
income of twelve pounds per annum, payable monthly, to meet my share
in the expense. It was a comfortable thought to me that I had a
father.

The magazine appeared, in a yellow cover which was the best part of
it, for at least it was unassuming; it ran four months in undisturbed
obscurity, and died without a gasp. The first number was edited by all
four of us with prodigious bustle; the second fell principally into
the hands of Ferrier and me; the third I edited alone; and it has long
been a solemn question who it was that edited the fourth. It would
perhaps be still more difficult to say who read it. Poor yellow sheet,
that looked so hopefully in the Livingstones' window! Poor, harmless
paper, that might have gone to print a _Shakespeare_ on, and was
instead so clumsily defaced with nonsense! And, shall I say, Poor
Editors? I cannot pity myself, to whom it was all pure gain. It was no
news to me, but only the wholesome confirmation of my judgment, when
the magazine struggled into half-birth, and instantly sickened and
subsided into night. I had sent a copy to the lady with whom my heart
was at that time somewhat engaged, and who did all that in her lay to
break it; and she, with some tact, passed over the gift and my
cherished contributions in silence. I will not say that I was pleased
at this; but I will tell her now, if by any chance she takes up the
work of her former servant, that I thought the better of her taste. I
cleared the decks after this lost engagement; had the necessary
interview with my father, which passed off not amiss; paid over my
share of the expense to the two little, active brothers, who rubbed
their hands as much, but methought skipped rather less than formerly,
having perhaps, these two also, embarked upon the enterprise with some
graceful illusions; and then, reviewing the whole episode, I told
myself that the time was not yet ripe, nor the man ready; and to work
I went again with my penny version-books, having fallen back in one
day from the printed author to the manuscript student.


III

From this defunct periodical I am going to reprint one of my own
papers. The poor little piece is all tail-foremost. I have done my
best to straighten its array, I have pruned it fearlessly, and it
remains invertebrate and wordy. No self-respecting magazine would
print the thing; and here you behold it in a bound volume, not for any
worth of its own, but for the sake of the man whom it purports dimly
to represent and some of whose sayings it preserves; so that in this
volume of Memories and Portraits, Robert Young, the Swanston gardener,
may stand alongside of John Todd, the Swanston shepherd. Not that John
and Robert drew very close together in their lives; for John was
rough, he smelt of the windy brae; and Robert was gentle, and smacked
of the garden in the hollow. Perhaps it is to my shame that I liked
John the better of the two; he had grit and dash, and that salt of the
Old Adam that pleases men with any savage inheritance of blood; and he
was a wayfarer besides, and took my gipsy fancy. But however that may
be, and however Robert's profile may be blurred in the boyish sketch
that follows, he was a man of a most quaint and beautiful nature,
whom, if it were possible to recast a piece of work so old, I should
like well to draw again with a maturer touch. And as I think of him
and of John, I wonder in what other country two such men would be
found dwelling together, in a hamlet of some twenty cottages, in the
woody fold of a green hill.


NOTES

This article made its first appearance in the volume _Memories and
Portraits_ (1887). It was divided into three parts. The interest of
this essay is almost wholly autobiographical, telling us, with more or
less seriousness, how its author "learned to write." After Stevenson
became famous, this confession attracted universal attention, and is
now one of the best-known of all his compositions. Many youthful
aspirants for literary fame have been moved by its perusal to adopt a
similar method; but while Stevenson's system, if faithfully followed,
would doubtless correct many faults, it would not of itself enable a
man to write another _Aes Triplex_ or _Treasure Island_. It was
genius, not industry, that placed Stevenson in English literature.

[Note 1: _Pattern of an Idler_. See his essay in this volume, _An
Apology for Idlers_.]

[Note 2: _A school of posturing_. It is a nice psychological question
whether or not it is possible for one to write a diary with absolutely
no thought of its being read by some one else.]

[Note 3: _Hazlitt, to Lamb, to Wordsworth, to Sir Thomas Browne, to
Defoe, to Hawthorne, to Montaigne, to Beaudelaire, and to Obermann_.
For Hazlitt, see Note 19 of Chapter II above. Charles Lamb
(1775-1834), author of the delightful _Essays of Elia_ (1822-24), the
_tone_ of which book is often echoed in Stevenson's essays.... Sir
Thomas Browne (1605-1682), regarded by many as the greatest prose
writer of the seventeenth century; his best books are _Religio Medici_
(the religion of a physician), 1642, and _Urn Burial_ (1658). The
300th anniversary of his birth was widely celebrated on 19 October
1905.... Daniel Defoe (1661-1731), an enormously prolific writer; his
first important novel, _Robinson Crusoe_ (followed by many others) was
written when he was 58 years old.... Nathaniel Hawthorne, the greatest
literary artist that America has ever produced was born 4 July 1804,
and died in 1864. His best novel (the finest in American Literature)
was _The Scarlet Letter_ (1850).... Montaigne. Stevenson was heavily
indebted to this wonderful genius. See Note 4 of Chapter VI above. ...
Charles Baudelaire (1821-1867) wrote the brilliant and decadent
_Fleurs du Mai_ (1857-61). He translated Poe into French, and was
partly responsible for Poe's immense vogue in France. Had Baudelaire's
French followers possessed the power of their master, we should be
able to forgive them for writing.... Obermann. _bermann_ is the title
of a story by the French writer Etienne Pivert de Snancour
(1770-1846). The book, which appeared in 1804, is full of vague
melancholy, in the Werther fashion, and is more of a psychological
study than a novel. In recent years, _Amiel's Journal_ and
Sienkiewicz's _Without Dogma_ belong to the same school of literature.
Matthew Arnold was fond of quoting from Snancour's _Obermann_.]

[Note 4: _Ruskin ... Pasticcio ... Bordello ... Morris ... Swinburne
... John Webster ... Congreve_. These names exhibit the astonishing
variety of Stevenson's youthful attempts, for they represent nearly
every possible style of composition. John Ruskin (1819-1900) exercised
a greater influence thirty years ago than he does to-day Stevenson in
the words "a passing spell," seems to apologise for having been
influenced by him at all.... Pasticcio, an Italian word, meaning
"pie": Swinburne uses it in the sense of "medley," which is about the
same as its significance here. _Sordello_: Stevenson naturally
accompanies this statement with a parenthetical exclamation.
_Sordello_, published in 1840, is the most obscure of all Browning's
poems, and for many years blinded critics to the poet's genius.
Innumerable are the witticisms aimed at this opaque work. See, for
example, W. Sharp's _Life of Browning_ ... William Morris (1834-96),
author of the _Earthly Paradise_ (1868-70): for his position and
influence in XIXth century literature see H.A. Beers, _History of
English Romanticism_, Vol. II.... Algernon Charles Swinburne, born
1837, generally regarded (1906) as England's foremost living poet, is
famous chiefly for the melodies of his verse. His influence seems to
be steadily declining and he is certainly not so much read as
formerly.... For John Webster and Congreve, see Notes 37 and 26 of
Chapter IV above.]

[Note 5: _City of Peebles in the style of the Book of Snobs._
Thackeray's _Book of Snobs_ was published in 1848. Peebles is the
county town of Peebles County in the South of Scotland.]

[Note 6: _My later plays_, etc. Stevenson's four plays were not
successful. They were all written in collaboration with W.E. Henley.
_Deacon Brodie_ was printed in 1880: _Admiral Guinea_ and _Beau
Austin_ in 1884: _Macaire_ in 1885. In 1892, the first three were
published in one volume, under the title _Three Plays_: In 1896 all
four appeared in a volume called _Four Plays_. At the time the essay
_A College Magazine_ was published, only one of these plays had been
acted, _Deacon Brodie_, to which Stevenson refers in our text. This
"came on the stage itself and was played by bodily actors" at Pullan's
_Theatre of Varieties_, Bradford, England, 28 December 1882, and in
March 1883 at Her Majesty's Theatre, Aberdeen, "when it was styled a
'New Scotch National Drama.'"--Prideaux, _Bibliography_, p. 10. It was
later produced at Prince's Theatre, London, 2 July 1884, and in
Montreal, 26 September 1887. _Beau Austin_ was played at the Haymarket
Theatre, London, 3 Nov. 1890. _Admiral Guinea_ was played at the
_Avenue Theatre_, on the afternoon of 29 Nov. 1897, and, like the
others, was not successful. _The Athenaeum_ for 4 Dec. 1897 contains
an interesting criticism of this drama.... _Semiramis_ was the
original plan of a "tragedy," which Stevenson afterwards rewrote as a
novel, _Prince Otto_, and published in 1885.]

[Note 7: _It was so Keats learned_. This must be swallowed with a
grain of salt. The best criticism of the poetry of Keats is contained
in his own _Letters_, which have been edited by Colvin and by Forman.]

[Note 8: _Montaigne ... Cicero_. Montaigne, as a child, spoke Latin
before he could French: see his _Essays_. Montaigne is always
original, frank, sincere: Cicero (in his orations) is always a
_Poseur_.]

[Note 9: _Burns ... Shakespeare_. Some reflection on, and
investigation of these statements by Stevenson, will be highly
beneficial to the student.]

[Note 10: The literary scales. It is very interesting to note that
Thomas Carlyle had completely mastered the technique of ordinary prose
composition, before he deliberately began to write in his own
picturesque style, which has been called "Carlylese"; note the
enormous difference in style between his _Life of Schiller_ (1825) and
his _Sartor Resartus_ (1833-4). Carlyle would be a shining
illustration of the point Stevenson is trying to make.]

No notes have been added to the second and third parts of this essay,
as these portions are unimportant, and may be omitted by the student;
they are really introductory to something quite different, and are
printed in our edition only to make this essay complete.


VIII

BOOKS WHICH HAVE INFLUENCED ME[1]


The Editor[2] has somewhat insidiously laid a trap for his
correspondents, the question put appearing at first so innocent, truly
cutting so deep. It is not, indeed, until after some reconnaissance
and review that the writer awakes to find himself engaged upon
something in the nature of autobiography, or, perhaps worse, upon a
chapter in the life of that little, beautiful brother whom we once all
had, and whom we have all lost and mourned, the man we ought to have
been, the man we hoped to be. But when word has been passed (even to
an editor), it should, if possible, be kept; and if sometimes I am
wise and say too little, and sometimes weak and say too much, the
blame must lie at the door of the person who entrapped me.

The most influential books,[3] and the truest in their influence, are
works of fiction. They do not pin the reader to a dogma, which he must
afterwards discover to be inexact; they do not teach him a lesson,
which he must afterwards unlearn. They repeat, they rearrange, they
clarify the lessons of life; they disengage us from ourselves, they
constrain us to the acquaintance of others; and they show us the web
of experience, not as we can see it for ourselves, but with a singular
change--that monstrous, consuming _ego_ of ours being, for the nonce,
struck out. To be so, they must be reasonably true to the human
comedy; and any work that is so serves the turn of instruction. But
the course of our education is answered best by those poems and
romances where we breathe a magnanimous atmosphere of thought and meet
generous and pious characters. Shakespeare has served me best. Few
living friends have had upon me an influence so strong for good as
Hamlet or Rosalind. The last character, already well beloved in the
reading, I had the good fortune to see, I must think, in an
impressionable hour, played by Mrs. Scott Siddons.[4] Nothing has ever
more moved, more delighted, more refreshed me; nor has the influence
quite passed away. Kent's brief speech[5] over the dying Lear had a
great effect upon my mind, and was the burthen of my reflections for
long, so profoundly, so touchingly generous did it appear in sense, so
overpowering in expression. Perhaps my dearest and best friend outside
of Shakespeare is D'Artagnan--the elderly D'Artagnan of the _Vicomte
de Bragelonne_.[6] I know not a more human soul, nor, in his way, a
finer; I shall be very sorry for the man who is so much of a pedant in
morals that he cannot learn from the Captain of Musketeers. Lastly, I
must name the _Pilgrim's Progress_,[7] a book that breathes of every
beautiful and valuable emotion.

But of works of art little can be said; their influence is profound
and silent, like the influence of nature; they mould by contact; we
drink them up like water, and are bettered, yet know not how. It is in
books more specifically didactic that we can follow out the effect,
and distinguish and weigh and compare. A book which has been very
influential upon me fell early into my hands, and so may stand first,
though I think its influence was only sensible later on, and perhaps
still keeps growing, for it is a book not easily outlived: the
_Essais_ of Montaigne.[8] That temperate and genial picture of life is
a great gift to place in the hands of persons of to-day; they will
find in these smiling pages a magazine of heroism and wisdom, all of
an antique strain; they will have their "linen decencies"[9] and
excited orthodoxies fluttered, and will (if they have any gift of
reading) perceive that these have not been fluttered without some
excuse and ground of reason; and (again if they have any gift of
reading) they will end by seeing that this old gentleman was in a
dozen ways a finer fellow, and held in a dozen ways a nobler view of
life, than they or their contemporaries.

The next book, in order of time, to influence me, was the New
Testament, and in particular the Gospel according to St. Matthew. I
believe it would startle and move any one if they could make a certain
effort of imagination and read it freshly like a book, not droningly
and dully like a portion of the Bible. Any one would then be able to
see in it those truths which we are all courteously supposed to know
and all modestly refrain from applying. But upon this subject it is
perhaps better to be silent.

I come next to Whitman's _Leaves of Grass_,[10] a book of singular
service, a book which tumbled the world upside down for me, blew into
space a thousand cobwebs of genteel and ethical illusion, and, having
thus shaken my tabernacle of lies, set me back again upon a strong
foundation of all the original and manly virtues. But it is, once
more, only a book for those who have the gift of reading.[11] I will
be very frank--I believe it is so with all good books except, perhaps,
fiction. The average man lives, and must live, so wholly in
convention, that gun-powder charges of the truth are more apt to
discompose than to invigorate his creed. Either he cries out upon
blasphemy and indecency, and crouches the closer round that little
idol of part-truths and part-conveniences which is the contemporary
deity, or he is convinced by what is new, forgets what is old, and
becomes truly blasphemous and indecent himself. New truth is only
useful to supplement the old; rough truth is only wanted to expand,
not to destroy, our civil and often elegant conventions. He who cannot
judge had better stick to fiction and the daily papers. There he will
get little harm, and, in the first at least, some good.

Close upon the back of my discovery of Whitman, I came under the
influence of Herbert Spencer.[12] No more persuasive rabbi exists. How
much of his vast structure will bear the touch of time, how much is
clay and how much brass, it were too curious to inquire. But his
words, if dry, are always manly and honest; there dwells in his pages
a spirit of highly abstract joy, plucked naked like an algebraic
symbol but still joyful; and the reader will find there a _caput
mortuum_[13] of piety, with little indeed of its loveliness, but with
most of its essentials; and these two qualities make him a wholesome,
as his intellectual vigour makes him a bracing, writer. I should be
much of a hound if I lost my gratitude to Herbert Spencer.

_Goethe's Life_, by Lewes,[14] had a great importance for me when it
first fell into my hands--a strange instance of the partiality of
man's good and man's evil. I know no one whom I less admire than
Goethe; he seems a very epitome of the sins of genius, breaking open
the doors of private life, and wantonly wounding friends, in that
crowning offence of _Werther_, and in his own character a mere
pen-and-ink Napoleon, conscious of the rights and duties of superior
talents as a Spanish inquisitor was conscious of the rights and duties
of his office. And yet in his fine devotion to his art, in his honest
and serviceable friendship for Schiller, what lessons are contained!
Biography, usually so false to its office, does here for once perform
for us some of the work of fiction, reminding us, that is, of the
truly mingled tissue of man's nature, and how huge faults and shining
virtues cohabit and persevere in the same character. History serves us
well to this effect, but in the originals, not in the pages of the
popular epitomiser, who is bound, by the very nature of his task, to
make us feel the difference of epochs instead of the essential
identity of man, and even in the originals only to those who can
recognise their own human virtues and defects in strange forms, often
inverted and under strange names, often interchanged. Martial[15] is a
poet of no good repute, and it gives a man new thoughts to read his
works dispassionately, and find in this unseemly jester's serious
passages the image of a kind, wise, and self-respecting gentleman. It
is customary, I suppose, in reading Martial, to leave out these
pleasant verses; I never heard of them, at least, until I found them
for myself; and this partiality is one among a thousand things that
help to build up our distorted and hysterical conception of the great
Roman Empire.

This brings us by a natural transition to a very noble book--the
_Meditations_ of Marcus Aurelius.[16] The dispassionate gravity, the
noble forgetfulness of self, the tenderness of others, that are there
expressed and were practised on so great a scale in the life of its
writer, make this book a book quite by itself. No one can read it and
not be moved. Yet it scarcely or rarely appeals to the feelings--those
very mobile, those not very trusty parts of man. Its address lies
further back: its lesson comes more deeply home; when you have read,
you carry away with you a memory of the man himself; it is as though
you had touched a loyal hand, looked into brave eyes, and made a noble
friend; there is another bond on you thenceforward, binding you to
life and to the love of virtue.

Wordsworth[17] should perhaps come next. Every one has been influenced
by Wordsworth, and it is hard to tell precisely how. A certain
innocence, a rugged austerity of joy, a night of the stars, "the
silence that is in the lonely hills," something of the cold thrill of
dawn, cling to his work and give it a particular address to what is
best in us. I do not know that you learn a lesson; you need not--Mill
did not--agree with any one of his beliefs; and yet the spell is cast.
Such are the best teachers: a dogma learned is only a new error--the
old one was perhaps as good; but a spirit communicated is a perpetual
possession. These best teachers climb beyond teaching to the plane of
art; it is themselves, and what is best in themselves, that they
communicate.

I should never forgive myself if I forgot _The Egoist_. It is art, if
you like, but it belongs purely to didactic art, and from all the
novels I have read (and I have read thousands) stands in a place by
itself. Here is a Nathan for the modern David;[18] here is a book to
send the blood into men's faces. Satire, the angry picture of human
faults, is not great art; we can all be angry with our neighbour; what
we want is to be shown, not his defects, of which we are too
conscious, but his merits, to which we are too blind. And _The
Egoist_[19] is a satire; so much must be allowed; but it is a satire
of a singular quality, which tells you nothing of that obvious mote,
which is engaged from first to last with that invisible beam. It is
yourself that is hunted down; these are your own faults that are
dragged into the day and numbered, with lingering relish, with cruel
cunning and precision. A young friend of Mr. Meredith's (as I have the
story) came to him in an agony. "This is too bad of you," he cried.
"Willoughby is me!" "No, my dear fellow," said the author; "he is all
of us." I have read _The Egoist_ five or six times myself, and I mean
to read it again; for I am like the young friend of the anecdote--I
think Willoughby an unmanly but a very serviceable exposure of myself.

I suppose, when I am done, I shall find that I have forgotten much
that was most influential, as I see already I have forgotten
Thoreau,[20] and Hazlitt, whose paper "On the Spirit of Obligations"
was a turning-point in my life, and Penn, whose little book of
aphorisms had a brief but strong effect on me, and Mitford's
_Tales[21] of Old Japan_, wherein I learned for the first time the
proper attitude of any rational man to his country's laws--a secret
found, and kept, in the Asiatic islands. That I should commemorate all
is more than I can hope or the Editor could ask. It will be more to
the point, after having said so much upon improving books, to say a
word or two about the improvable reader. The gift of reading, as I
have called it, is not very common, nor very generally understood. It
consists, first of all, in a vast intellectual endowment--a free
grace, I find I must call it--by which a man rises to understand that
he is not punctually right, nor those from whom he differs absolutely
wrong. He may hold dogmas; he may hold them passionately; and he may
know that others hold them but coldly, or hold them differently, or
hold them not at all. Well, if he has the gift of reading, these
others will be full of meat for him. They will see the other side of
propositions and the other side of virtues. He need not change his
dogma for that, but he may change his reading of that dogma, and he
must supplement and correct his deductions from it. A human truth,
which is always very much a lie, hides as much of life as it displays.
It is men who hold another truth, or, as it seems to us, perhaps, a
dangerous lie, who can extend our restricted field of knowledge, and
rouse our drowsy consciences. Something that seems quite new, or that
seems insolently false or very dangerous, is the test of a reader. If
he tries to see what it means, what truth excuses it, he has the gift,
and let him read. If he is merely hurt, or offended, or exclaims upon
his author's folly, he had better take to the daily papers; he will
never be a reader.

And here, with the aptest illustrative force, after I have laid down
my part-truth, I must step in with its opposite. For, after all, we
are vessels of a very limited content. Not all men can read all books;
it is only in a chosen few that any man will find his appointed food;
and the fittest lessons are the most palatable, and make themselves
welcome to the mind. A writer learns this early, and it is his chief
support; he goes on unafraid, laying down the law; and he is sure at
heart that most of what he says is demonstrably false, and much of a
mingled strain, and some hurtful, and very little good for service;
but he is sure besides that when his words fall into the hands of any
genuine reader, they will be weighed and winnowed, and only that which
suits will be assimilated; and when they fall into the hands of one
who cannot intelligently read, they come there quite silent and
inarticulate, falling upon deaf ears, and his secret is kept as if he
had not written.


NOTES

This article first appeared in the _British Weekly_ for 13 May 1887,
forming Stevenson's contribution to a symposium on this subject by
some of the celebrated writers of the day, including Gladstone,
Ruskin, Hamerton; and others as widely different as Archdeacon Farrar
and Rider Haggard. In the same year (1887) the papers were all
collected and published by the _Weekly_ in a volume, with the title
_Books Which Have Influenced Me_. This essay was later included in the
complete editions of Stevenson's _Works_ (Edinburgh ed., Vol. XI,
Thistle ed., Vol. XXII).

[Note 1: First published in the _British Weekly_, May 13, 1887.]

[Note 2: Of the _British Weekly_.]

[Note 3: _The most influential books ... are works of fiction_. This
statement is undoubtedly true, if we use the word "fiction" in the
sense understood here by Stevenson. It is curious, however, to note
the rise in dignity of "works of fiction," and of "novels"; people
used to read them with apologies, and did not like to be caught at it.
The cheerful audacity of Stevenson's declaration would have seemed
like blasphemy fifty years earlier.]

[Note 4: _Mrs. Scott Siddons_. Not for a moment to be confounded with
the great actress Sarah Siddons, who died in 1831. Mrs. Scott Siddons,
in spite of Stevenson's enthusiasm, was not an actress of remarkable
power.]

[Note 5: _Kent's brief speech_. Toward the end of _King Lear_.]

  "Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him
  That would upon the rack of this tough world
  Stretch him out longer."]

[Note 6: _D'Artagnan ... Vicomte de Bragelonne_. See Stevenson's
essay, _A Gossip on a Novel of Dumas's_ (1887), in _Memories and
Portraits_. See also Note 3 of Chapter II above and Note 43 of Chapter
IV above. _Vicomte de Bragelonne_ is the title of the sequel to
_Twenty Years After_, which is the sequel to the _Musketeers_. Dumas
wrote 257 volumes of romance, plays, travels etc.]

[Note 7: _Pilgrim's Progress_. See Note 13 of Chapter V above.]

[Note 8: _Essais of Montaigne_. See Note 6 of Chapter VI above. The
best translation in English of the _Essais_ is that by the
Elizabethan, John Florio (1550-1625), a contemporary of Montaigne. His
translation appeared in 1603, and may now be obtained complete in the
handy "Temple" classics. There is a copy of Florio's _Montaigne_ with
Ben Jonson's autograph, and also one that has what many believe to be
a genuine autograph of Shakspere.]

[Note 9: "_Linen decencies_." "The ghost of a linen decency yet haunts
us."--Milton, _Areopagitica_.]

[Note 10: _Whitman's Leaves of Grass_. See Stevenson's admirable essay
on _Walt Whitman_ (1878), also Note 12 of Chapter III above.]

[Note 11: _Have the gift of reading_. "Books are written to be read by
those who can understand them. Their possible effect on those who
cannot, is a matter of medical rather than of literary interest."
--Prof. W. Raleigh, _The English Novel_, remarks on _Tom Jones_,
Chap. VI.]

[Note 12: _Herbert_. See Note 18 of Chapter IV above.]

[Note 13: _Caput mortuum_. Dry kernel. Literary, "dead head."]

[Note 14: _Goethe's Life, by Lewes_. The standard Life of Goethe (in
English) is still that by George Henry Lewes (1817-1878), the husband
of George Eliot. His _Life of Goethe_ appeared in 1855; he later made
a simpler, abridged edition, called _The Story of Goethe's Life_.
Goethe, the greatest literary genius since Shakspere, and now
generally ranked among the four supreme writers of the world, Homer,
Dante, Shakspere, Goethe, was born in 1749, and died in 1832.
Stevenson, like most British critics, is rather severe on Goethe's
character. The student should read Eckermann's _Conversations with
Goethe_, a book full of wisdom and perennial delight. For _Werther_,
see Note 18 of Chapter VI above. The friendship between Goethe and
Schiller (1759-1805), "his honest and serviceable friendship," as
Stevenson puts it, is among the most beautiful things to contemplate
in literary history. Before the theatre in Weimar, Germany, where the
two men lived, stands a remarkable statue of the pair: and their
coffins lie side by side in a crypt in the same town.]

[Note 15: _Martial_. Poet, wit and epigrammatist, born in Spain 43 A.
D., died 104. He lived in Rome from 66 to 100, enjoying a high
reputation as a writer.]

[Note 16: _Meditations of Marcus Aurelius_. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus,
often called "the noblest of Pagans" was born 121 A. D., and died 180.
His _Meditations_ have been translated into the chief modern
languages, and though their author was hostile to Christianity, the
ethics of the book are much the same as those of the New Testament.]

[Note 17: _Wordsworth ... Mill_. William Wordsworth (1770-1850),
poet-laureate (1843-1850), is by many regarded as the third poet in
English literature, after Shakspere and Milton, whose places are
unassailable. Other candidates for the third place are Chaucer and
Spenser. "The silence that is in the lonely hills" is loosely quoted
from Wordsworth's _Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle, Upon the
Restoration of Lord Clifford_, published in 1807. The passage reads:

  "The silence that is in the starry sky,
  The sleep that is among the lonely hills."

... In the _Autobiography_ (1873) of John Stuart Mill (1806-1873),
there is a remarkable passage where he testifies to the influence
exerted upon him by Wordsworth.]

[Note 18: _A Nathan for the modern David_. The famous accusation of
the prophet to the king, "Thou art the man." See II _Sam_. 12.]

[Note 19: _The Egoist_. See Note 47 of Chapter IV above. Stevenson
never tired of singing the praises of this novel.]

[Note 20: _Thoreau ... Hazlitt ... Penn ... Mitford's Tales.._. Henry
David Thoreau (1817-1862), the American naturalist and writer, whose
works impressed Stevenson deeply. See the latter's excellent essay on
Thoreau (1880), in _Familiar Studies of Men and Books_.... Hazlitt,
See Note 19 of Chapter II above. His paper, _On the Spirit of
Obligations_, appeared in _The Plain Speaker_, 2 Vols., 1826. _Penn,
whose little book of aphorisms_. This refers to William Penn's famous
book, _Some Fruits of Solitude: in Reflections and Maxims relating to
the Conduct of Human Life_ (1693). Edmund Gosse says, in his
Introduction to a charming little edition of this book in 1900,
"Stevenson had intended to make this book and its author the subject
of one of his critical essays. In February 1880 he was preparing to
begin it... He never found the opportunity... But it has left an
indelible stamp on the tenor of his moral writings. The philosophy of
B. L. S. ... is tinctured through and through with the honest, shrewd,
and genial maxims of Penn." Stevenson himself, in his _Letters_ (Vol.
I, pp. 232, 233), spoke of this little book in the highest terms of
praise.]

[Note 21: _Mitford's Tales_. Mary Russell Mitford (1787-1855), a
novelist and dramatist who enjoyed an immense vogue. "Her inimitable
series of country sketches, drawn from her own experiences at Three
Mile Cross, entitled 'Our Village,' began to appear in 1819 in the
'Lady's Magazine,' a little-known periodical, whose sale was thereby
increased from 250 to 2,000. ... The sketches had an enormous success,
and were collected in five volumes, published respectively in 1824,
1826, 1828, 1830, and 1832. ... The book may be said to have laid the
foundation of a branch of literature hitherto untried. The sketches
resemble Dutch paintings in their fidelity of detail."--_Dic. Nat.
Biog_.]


IX

PULVIS ET UMBRA

We look for some reward of our endeavors and are disappointed; not
success, not happiness, not even peace of conscience, crowns our
ineffectual efforts to do well. Our frailties are invincible, are
virtues barren; the battle goes sore against us to the going down of
the sun. The canting moralist tells us of right and wrong; and we look
abroad, even on the face of our small earth, and find them change with
every climate,[1] and no country where some action is not honoured for
a virtue and none where it is not branded for a vice; and we look in
our experience, and find no vital congruity in the wisest rules, but
at the best a municipal fitness. It is not strange if we are tempted
to despair of good. We ask too much. Our religions and moralities have
been trimmed to flatter us, till they are all emasculate and
sentimentalised, and only please and weaken. Truth is of a rougher
strain. In the harsh face of life, faith can read a bracing gospel.
The human race is a thing more ancient than the ten commandments; and
the bones and revolutions of the Kosmos, in whose joints we are but
moss and fungus, more ancient still.


I

Of the Kosmos in the last resort, science reports many doubtful things
and all of them appalling. There seems no substance to this solid
globe on which we stamp: nothing but symbols and ratios. Symbols and
ratios carry us and bring us forth and beat us down; gravity that
swings the incommensurable suns and worlds through space, is but a
figment varying inversely as the squares of distances; and the suns
and worlds themselves, imponderable figures of abstraction, NH3 and
H2O.[2] Consideration dares not dwell upon this view; that way madness
lies;[3] science carries us into zones of speculation, where there is
no habitable city for the mind of man.

But take the Kosmos with a grosser faith, as our senses give it to us.
We behold space sown with rotatory islands; suns and worlds and the
shards and wrecks of systems: some, like the sun, still blazing; some
rotting, like the earth; others, like the moon, stable in desolation.
All of these we take to be made of something we call matter: a thing
which no analysis can help us to conceive; to whose incredible
properties no familiarity can reconcile our minds. This stuff, when
not purified by the lustration of fire, rots uncleanly into something
we call life; seized through all its atoms with a pediculous malady;
swelling in tumours that become independent, sometimes even (by an
abhorrent prodigy) locomotory;[4] one splitting into millions,
millions cohering into one, as the malady proceeds through varying
stages. This vital putrescence of the dust, used as we are to it, yet
strikes us with occasional disgust, and the profusion of worms in a
piece of ancient turf, or the air of a marsh darkened with insects,
will sometimes check our breathing so that we aspire for cleaner
places. But none is clean: the moving sand is infected with lice; the
pure spring, where it bursts out of the mountain, is a mere issue of
worms; even in the hard rock the crystal is forming.

In two main shapes this eruption covers the countenance of the earth:
the animal and the vegetable: one in some degree the inversion of the
other: the second rooted to the spot; the first coming detached out of
its natal mud, and scurrying abroad with the myriad feet of insects or
towering into the heavens on the wings of birds: a thing so
inconceivable that, if it be well considered, the heart stops. To what
passes with the anchored vermin, we have little clue: doubtless they
have their joys and sorrows, their delights and killing agonies: it
appears not how. But of the locomotory, to which we ourselves belong,
we can tell more. These share with us a thousand miracles: the
miracles of sight, of hearing, of the projection of sound, things that
bridge space; the miracles of memory and reason, by which the present
is conceived, and when it is gone, its image kept living in the brains
of man and brute; the miracle of reproduction, with its imperious
desires and staggering consequences. And to put the last touch upon
this mountain mass of the revolting and the inconceivable, all these
prey upon each other, lives tearing other lives in pieces, cramming
them inside themselves, and by that summary process, growing fat: the
vegetarian, the whale, perhaps the tree, not less than the lion of the
desert; for the vegetarian is only the eater of the dumb.

Meanwhile our rotary island loaded with predatory life, and more
drenched with blood, both animal and vegetable, than ever mutinied
ship, scuds through space with unimaginable speed, and turns alternate
cheeks to the reverberation of a blazing world, ninety million miles
away.


II

What a monstrous spectre is this man, the disease of the agglutinated
dust, lifting alternate feet or lying drugged with slumber; killing,
feeding, growing, bringing forth small copies of himself; grown upon
with hair like grass, fitted with eyes that move and glitter in his
face; a thing to set children screaming;--and yet looked at nearlier,
known as his fellows know him, how surprising are his attributes! Poor
soul, here for so little, cast among so many hardships, filled with
desires so incommensurate and so inconsistent, savagely surrounded,
savagely descended, irremediably condemned to prey upon his fellow
lives: who should have blamed him had he been of a piece with his
destiny and a being merely barbarous? And we look and behold him
instead filled with imperfect virtues: infinitely childish, often
admirably valiant, often touchingly kind; sitting down, amidst his
momentary life, to debate of right and wrong and the attributes of the
deity; rising up to do battle for an egg or die for an idea; singling
out his friends and his mate with cordial affection; bringing forth in
pain, rearing with long-suffering solicitude, his young. To touch the
heart of his mystery,[5] we find in him one thought, strange to the
point of lunacy: the thought of duty;[6] the thought of something
owing to himself, to his neighbour, to his God: an ideal of decency,
to which he would rise if it were possible; a limit of shame, below
which, if it be possible, he will not stoop. The design in most men is
one of conformity; here and there, in picked natures, it transcends
itself and soars on the other side, arming martyrs with independence;
but in all, in their degrees, it is a bosom thought:--Not in man
alone, for we trace it in dogs and cats whom we know fairly well, and
doubtless some similar point of honour sways the elephant, the oyster,
and the louse, of whom we know so little:--But in man, at least, it
sways with so complete an empire that merely selfish things come
second, even with the selfish: that appetites are starved, fears are
conquered, pains supported; that almost the dullest shrinks from the
reproof of a glance, although it were a child's; and all but the most
cowardly stand amid the risks of war; and the more noble, having
strongly conceived an act as due to their ideal, affront and embrace
death. Strange enough if, with their singular origin and perverted
practice, they think they are to be rewarded in some future life:
stranger still, if they are persuaded of the contrary, and think this
blow, which they solicit, will strike them senseless for eternity. I
shall be reminded what a tragedy of misconception and misconduct man
at large presents: of organised injustice, cowardly violence and
treacherous crime; and of the damning imperfections of the best. They
cannot be too darkly drawn. Man is indeed marked for failure in his
efforts to do right. But where the best consistently miscarry, how
tenfold more remarkable that all should continue to strive; and surely
we should find it both touching and inspiriting, that in a field from
which success is banished, our race should not cease to labour.

If the first view of this creature, stalking in his rotatory isle, be
a thing to shake the courage of the stoutest, on this nearer sight, he
startles us with an admiring wonder. It matters not where we look,
under what climate we observe him, in what stage of society, in what
depth of ignorance, burthened with what erroneous morality; by
camp-fires in Assiniboia,[7] the snow powdering his shoulders, the
wind plucking his blanket, as he sits, passing the ceremonial calumet
and uttering his grave opinions like a Roman senator; in ships at sea,
a man inured to hardship and vile pleasures, his brightest hope a
fiddle in a tavern and a bedizened trull who sells herself to rob him,
and he for all that simple, innocent, cheerful, kindly like a child,
constant to toil, brave to drown, for others; in the slums of cities,
moving among indifferent millions to mechanical employments, without
hope of change in the future, with scarce a pleasure in the present,
and yet true to his virtues, honest up to his lights, kind to his
neighbours, tempted perhaps in vain by the bright gin-palace, perhaps
long-suffering with the drunken wife that ruins him; in India (a woman
this time) kneeling with broken cries and streaming tears, as she
drowns her child in the sacred river;[8] in the brothel, the discard
of society, living mainly on strong drink, fed with affronts, a fool,
a thief, the comrade of thieves, and even here keeping the point of
honour and the touch of pity,[9] often repaying the world's scorn with
service, often standing firm upon a scruple, and at a certain cost,
rejecting riches:--everywhere some virtue cherished or affected,
everywhere some decency of thought and carriage, everywhere the ensign
of man's ineffectual goodness:--ah! if I could show you this! if I
could show you these men and women, all the world over, in every stage
of history, under every abuse of error, under every circumstance of
failure, without hope, without help, without thanks, still obscurely
fighting the lost fight of virtue, still clinging, in the brothel or
on the scaffold, to some rag of honour, the poor jewel of their souls!
They may seek to escape, and yet they cannot; it is not alone their
privilege and glory, but their doom; they are condemned to some
nobility; all their lives long, the desire of good is at their heels,
the implacable hunter.

Of all earth's meteors, here at least is the most strange and
consoling: that this ennobled lemur, this hair-crowned bubble of the
dust, this inheritor of a few years and sorrows, should yet deny
himself his rare delights, and add to his frequent pains, and live for
an ideal, however misconceived. Nor can we stop with man. A new
doctrine,[10] received with screams a little while ago by canting
moralists, and still not properly worked into the body of our
thoughts, lights us a step farther into the heart of this rough but
noble universe. For nowadays the pride of man denies in vain his
kinship with the original dust. He stands no longer like a thing
apart. Close at his heels we see the dog, prince of another genius:
and in him too, we see dumbly testified the same cultus[11] of an
unattainable ideal, the same constancy in failure. Does it stop with
the dog? We look at our feet where the ground is blackened with the
swarming ant: a creature so small, so far from us in the hierarchy of
brutes, that we can scarce trace and scarce comprehend his doings; and
here also, in his ordered polities and rigorous justice, we see
confessed the law of duty and the fact of individual sin. Does it
stop, then, with the ant? Rather this desire of well-doing and this
doom of frailty run through all the grades of life: rather is this
earth, from the frosty top of Everest[12] to the next margin of the
internal fire, one stage of ineffectual virtues and one temple of
pious tears and perseverance. The whole creation groaneth[13] and
travaileth together. It is the common and the god-like law of life.
The browsers, the biters, the barkers, the hairy coats of field and
forest, the squirrel in the oak, the thousand-footed creeper in the
dust, as they share with us the gift of life, share with us the love
of an ideal: strive like us--like us are tempted to grow weary of the
struggle--to do well; like us receive at times unmerited refreshment,
visitings of support, returns of courage; and are condemned like us to
be crucified between that double law[14] of the members and the will.
Are they like us, I wonder in the timid hope of some reward, some
sugar with the drug? do they, too, stand aghast at unrewarded virtues,
at the sufferings of those whom, in our partiality, we take to be
just, and the prosperity of such as, in our blindness, we call wicked?
It may be, and yet God knows what they should look for. Even while
they look, even while they repent, the foot of man treads them by
thousands in the dust, the yelping hounds burst upon their trail, the
bullet speeds, the knives are heating in the den of the
vivisectionist;[15] or the dew falls, and the generation of a day is
blotted out. For these are creatures, compared with whom our weakness
is strength, our ignorance wisdom, our brief span eternity.

And as we dwell, we living things, in our isle of terror[16] and under
the imminent hand of death, God forbid it should be man the erected,
the reasoner, the wise in his own eyes--God forbid it should be man
that wearies in well-doing,[17] that despairs of unrewarded effort, or
utters the language of complaint. Let it be enough for faith, that the
whole creation groans in mortal frailty, strives with unconquerable
constancy: Surely not all in vain.[18]


NOTES

During the year 1888, part of which was spent by Stevenson at Saranac
Lake in the Adirondacks he published one article every month in
_Scribner's Magazine_. _Pulvis et Umbra_ appeared in the April number,
and was later included in the volume _Across the Plains_ (1892). He
wrote this particular essay with intense feeling. Writing to Sidney
Colvin in December 1887, he said, "I get along with my papers for
_Scribner_ not fast, nor so far specially well; only this last, the
fourth one.... I do believe is pulled off after a fashion. It is a
mere sermon: ... but it is true, and I find it touching and
beneficial, to me at least; and I think there is some fine writing in
it, some very apt and pregnant phrases. _Pulvis et Umbra_, I call it;
I might have called it a _Darwinian Sermon_, if I had wanted. Its
sentiments, although parsonic, will not offend even you, I believe."
(_Letters_, II, 100.) Writing to Miss Adelaide Boodle in April 1888,
he said, "I wrote a paper the other day--_Pulvis et Umbra_;--I wrote
it with great feeling and conviction: to me it seemed bracing and
healthful, it is in such a world (so seen by me), that I am very glad
to fight out my battle, and see some fine sunsets, and hear some
excellent jests between whiles round the camp fire. But I find that to
some people this vision of mine is a nightmare, and extinguishes all
ground of faith in God or pleasure in man. Truth I think not so much
of; for I do not know it. And I could wish in my heart that I had not
published this paper, if it troubles folk too much: all have not the
same digestion nor the same sight of things.... Well, I cannot take
back what I have said; but yet I may add this. If my view be
everything but the nonsense that it may be--to me it seems
self-evident and blinding truth--surely of all things it makes this
world holier. There is nothing in it but the moral side--but the great
battle and the breathing times with their refreshments. I see no more
and no less. And if you look again, it is not ugly, and it is filled
with promise." (_Letters_, II, 123.) The words _Pulvis et Umbra_ mean
literally "dust and shadow": the phrase, however, is quoted from
Horace "pulvis et umbra sumus"--_we are dust and ashes_. It forms the
text of one of Stevenson's familiar discourses on Death, like _Aes
Triplex_.




